---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 01 July 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JULY
month_slug: Jul
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-07-01
---

WEDNESDAY, 1 JULY 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 13 - Education:

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, members, guests, the
different MECs that are here, the leadership of different political
organisations, ladies and gentlemen, I’ll be speaking on behalf of Basic
Education and Higher Education and Training. Chair, I would like to thank
you again for giving us an opportunity as the Education department to come
here to give our budget speech today. The Minister of Higher Education and
Training and I have agreed to share our Budget Votes because he is
remaining in Cabinet to represent us.

Today, I speak to present to you, hon members, the collective thoughts and
ideas on how we intend to reposition the education sector to meet our
desired mandate of providing quality education for all. Over the weekend an
intensive two-day review process of the education landscape was held
jointly with MECs from provinces and the senior leadership of the
department, as part of our broad strategic positioning of the department as
we prepare to embark on a new road as the Ministry of Basic Education. We
also had an opportunity to review, critique and analyse our
responsibilities. I can report that we all jointly agree that our point of
departure is that indeed our sector requires us to work differently to
achieve different outcomes. We agree that we cannot continue working the
same way and expect different outcomes.

I don’t think there is doubt in anyone’s mind that indeed our education
system has achieved much. We can report - and proudly report - that much
progress has been made in moving the system away from the precepts of
apartheid education. Under this government, more children attend school and
more attend without the burden of school fees. More children participate in
school nutrition programmes and in an expanded curriculum. More teachers
and principals are exposed to in-service development than ever before. And
more provision has been made to improve the infrastructure of schooling,
especially in rural and poor areas.

But we also are convinced that massive challenges still remain for those
who are very committed. The theme of my speech today is: “Together -
achieving quality education and access for all”. In presenting this budget
I therefore draw on the manifesto of the ruling party, as informed by its
resolutions from its Polokwane conference, the Medium-Term Strategic
Framework and the President’s state of the nation address.

In the past 15 years of democratic rule there have been significant
challenges and these are even testified to by independent analysts. A
recent report by the South African Child Gauge has noted that we have
achieved universal primary education in line with the medium-term
development goal. We have also achieved gender parity in education. More
children, as I have said, are staying in school until matric. It is
estimated that about 85% of children now receive 12 years of education. We
are, therefore, taking steps informed by this very basic and sound
foundation.

But, again, if we are to make true the instructions of the President that
teachers are to be in class and on time, and learners are to be in class
studying, a number of things have to be put right. The approach that we are
taking this year is informed also by the belief that together we can do
more and that we need to make education a societal matter.

One of the professors who was commissioned by my predecessor to look at the
challenges of education found that throughout the country, in every
province in which the committee had been, from government officials to
unionists and teachers, there were the strongest expressions of concern,
often in very passionate terms, about an indisputable challenge in
education and that it needed to be resolved. But this does not mean that
there are no pockets of excellence in the system. The problem is that you
cannot improve a whole system on the basis of exceptions. Exceptions or
normality or functionality should be a major part of your education system
and not an exception. Some of the challenges that confront us relate to
issues like accountability.

We also noted with concern over the weekend that one of the weakest factors
affecting our system is that accountability in the system is very limited
in scope and very uneven. The accountability system is weak because of a
pervasive culture of resistance to strong measures of accountability within
schools, and not only amongst teachers, but throughout the entire system.

So, we are convinced that if we have to change our education system, there
must be consequences for every action in the system. Everybody has to
account for the work that they do - teachers have to be on time, learners
have to be studying. Everyone has to make sure that when the teacher is in
class on time, everything is in place for that teacher to work effectively.

We are also committing ourselves to addressing issues like the curriculum.
We are getting lots of reports that there are challenges with regard to our
curriculum. I have set up a committee which, starting from July until
September, will be looking at all the issues which have been raised about
our curriculum, making sure that, come 2010, we have addressed all the
issues that have been raised by communities.

There are issues regarding resources which we hope that our budget will
address. Historically, there are well-resourced schools and provinces that
are better able to support the education system and produce better
educational outcomes. This is a major challenge. Despite the fact that we
say this government has invested acceptable levels of resources in
education, their proper utilisation sometimes continues to be a challenge
and we need to find a way of ensuring that there is value for money in
terms of all the resources invested by government.

I have referred to the curriculum and have also committed our government to
looking at all the different challenges which have been raised with us
around the curriculum. We have also identified issues of systematic
challenges in our system where, in addition to accountability, there is a
general culture of dysfunctionality which also plagues our schools: books
not arriving on time, desks not being available, and overcrowding in
classrooms. And, again, we are committed to confronting that with our
colleagues.

I quickly want to run through the figures before my time runs out because
yesterday I had a very bad experience when I ran out of time and couldn’t
finish. So, I want to deal with the figures now to make sure that I don’t
run out of time and can focus on the figures that we have indeed been
given.

As regards the budget allocations for the financial year 2009-10, I can
record with appreciation that the overall budget has increased by R2,4
billion, rising from R18,5 billion last year to R21,2 billion. Additional
funds have been received this year for the following priorities. For higher
education – as I said, I am speaking for both basic education and higher
education – we have been given about R480 million.

For school nutrition we have received R577 million and, again, we are
excited about this, because it will enable us to extend our school
nutrition programme to the poorest of the poor at high school level. In the
past we could provide food to primary schools only, but now with this
increase in budget we are able to start introducing a school nutrition
programme at high school level.

As the department is working on separating further education and training,
FET, colleges from basic schools, we have been given R5 million to start a
process of capitalising our technical schools to compensate for the loss of
the FET colleges or the training that would have been done through the FET
colleges. So, we have been given R5 million.

Again, the department has also been given an additional R6 million this
year to prepare for the establishment of the National Education Evaluation
and Development Unit, Needu. We are very excited about this because, again,
the unit will enable us to detect or to monitor and evaluate our system on
an ongoing basis. Earlier in my speech I said that we were also aware that
there were systemic collapses or problems in the system, and through Needu
we are confident that, at an early stage, we will be alerted to challenges
and confront them. So, we have been given R6 million this year, which will
increase in the outer years, to enable us to start with the work.

The department has been allocated an additional R63 million for the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS. I know the Minister of Higher
Education and Training is very excited about this. He is very passionate
that poor children not be excluded from higher education because they
cannot afford it. So, again, we have been given this money to increase this
budget.

We have been given R443 million for the mass literacy campaign. This will
assist us in what we have always committed ourselves to as the education
sector: that when we come into government we want to break the back of
illiteracy, which we have inherited from the past. This money is going to
enable us to address our mass literacy programmes.

We have been given R5 million for systemic evaluation programmes and for
the further development of information management systems. Again, Chair,
you would agree with me that it is very important in education to have a
very sound information system which will help us not only to track our
learners, but also to have the necessary information at hand.

Some of the existing programmes in the budget deserve special mention. One
of these is, as I said, the National School Nutrition Programme, which in
addition to feeding 7,4 million children, will be able to feed more
children in high school. Our budget for the National School Nutrition
Programme has increased to R2,3 billion through which we give conditional
grants to provinces. We monitor these quite tightly and work very closely
with provinces to make sure that every child who deserves to eat at school
is able to eat on a daily basis.

We have been given R177 million, which will be used by provinces to provide
relevant life-skills programmes in all schools. We are of the view that the
decline in infections amongst young people, reported by the Department of
Health, has been made possible by this life-skills programme. We are very
excited about receiving this money and are committed to working with our
children on questions of lifestyles, sexuality, and HIV and Aids. We are,
though, quite concerned about the increasing numbers of teenage pregnancies
in our schools, and we hope that through this fund we will begin to develop
a programme to address this.

There is also the threat that as a country we are losing a number of
teachers. So, we are quite excited that, again this year, we have been
given R700 million to support 9 000 young people who are training to be
teachers. This bursary has helped a lot in making sure that we can
stabilise our demand for recruits in education.

I am pleased to record that, together with the teacher unions and other
stakeholders, we have launched what we call the Quality Learning and
Teaching Campaign, of which a major part relates to the non-negotiables for
different components of the system. For teachers, this involves being in
class, on time and teaching, while learners have committed to focusing on
learning, to respecting their teachers, and to doing their work.

Departmental officials have been made to make commitments, and they have
promised to visit schools regularly and to provide them with support. We
have also received pledges from parents who have volunteered to ensure that
they play their part and make sure that there is oversight and monitoring
of everybody in doing their work.

We believe that these non-negotiables require two pillars of support. The
first of these is Needu, which we have spoken about, that will help us to
evaluate and develop the system on an ongoing basis. This also relates to
effective leadership in our schools. I don’t want to go into examples of
different forms ...

Your time thing is intimidating me. It was better in the House because
there was no clock facing you. [Laughter.] So, let me go back, Chair,
because this watch is really intimidating me.

These non-negotiables require two pillars of support. The first of these is
Needu, which will evaluate all parts of the system to unearth constraints
and problems in ensuring quality education. The other pillar is that of
effective school leadership, a key component of the system.

All the evidence, locally and internationally, shows that a good school has
a good principal. You will have heard that the President has committed
himself to meeting school principals. The message is a crucial one in the
transformation and development of education, and the department will do all
it can to support this meeting. The meeting has been scheduled for 7 August
2009 in KwaZulu-Natal.

One key area of focus will be the rural schools and poor schools in our
country. We will be working not just on infrastructure but on all different
support mechanisms we think necessary. Infrastructure in rural and poor
areas remains a challenge, and we will be looking at innovative funding
approaches to ensure that we deliver decent schools in the shortest
possible time.

We have seen how the country, with the 2010 preparations, has been able to
deliver stadiums. We are going to persuade the government to do the same
thing with school infrastructure: to use the same approach, look for fresh
money – wherever they got the money from for the stadiums – and put it into
education if we are all to say that indeed education is a priority.

All these examples of priorities and the rest are elaborated on in the
strategic plan. We urge members to note the work we will be doing in regard
to the recapitalisation of our technical schools and different work ...

I can see that my time is up. So, let me stop myself, Chair. Thanks.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Do you want to finish up?

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: I do.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You have 10 minutes at the end. I am going to
take a few minutes from that to allow you to finish. You can finish up now.
We will subtract time from the 10 minutes at the end.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Oh, but you’ve already said it would be
subtracted, so maybe replace it.

Infrastructure remains a challenge and we are looking at innovative ways of
making sure that we can develop it, and these are examples of the work that
we are doing.

In closing, let me say these are just a few areas of our priorities and the
rest of the areas are elaborated on in our strategic plan. I urge members
to note the work we are doing in regard to the recapitalisation of
technical schools following a successful – similar – process with regard to
FET colleges.

I must conclude by assuring the House that I will be keeping an eye on the
provision of education for learners with special needs. I am concerned that
we still have too many children out of school, especially from poor
families, owing to some or other disability or special need. We are
compelled to respond to this. I recall that my theme for the day emphasises
access for all, and until the last child has been brought into school, we
shall not rest.

I want to take this opportunity to thank my head of department – I guess
he’s here - my members of staff, my colleagues and in particular Deputy
Minister Surty, and I also want to indicate that we are losing one of the
most valuable members of staff in the department, Mr Philip Benade, who is
retiring. He was the chief financial officer. He has, I am told, for years
enabled the department to get very clean audits. I want the House to join
us in wishing him a very restful period. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Agb Voorsitter, dit is my nooienstoespraak en ek sal
so ver as moontlik onkontroversieel bly. [Hon Chairperson, this is my
maiden speech and as far as possible I will remain uncontroversial.]

Hon Chairperson, Minister Motshekga and members of the NCOP, education is
the backbone of the strength, wealth, growth and sustainability of a
country. If this sector, in a country, is well structured, with the promise
of a quality outcome for learners and students in all of our learning
institutions, certainly we can have a competitive response and outcome with
regard to skills and employment opportunities in South Africa and elsewhere
in the world.

The Basic Education department has framed five principles in the 2009
budget, and they are as follows: protecting the poor; sustaining employment
growth and expanding training opportunities; building capacity for long-
term growth through investment in infrastructure; promoting
competitiveness; and maintaining a sustainable debt level. The DA can agree
with these principles.

However, we must bear in mind that value for money in the context of the
economic meltdown is the most important factor. The answer to this is
efficiency in all our deliverables in education, which play an important
role in our success and achieving our goals. Education must be our single
largest investment in government. But we must make sure, from the start,
that an effective delivery outcome is reached.

The following things are planned: 3 500 practitioners in early childhood
development with a level 4 education; the increase of no-fee schools to 60%
of the total number of schools; the expansion of the nutrition feeding
scheme to secondary schools; and the increase of Grade Rs in public
schools. This is all well and good, but the question remains ...

... sal die kwantiteit van dienslewering die gewenste uitkoms lewer, of
moet ons nie liewer seker maak dat die hulpbronne en fasiliteite tot ons
beskikking eerder tot maksimale effektiwiteit ontwikkel word nie? Ons het
reeds die afgelope vier jaar ‘n teleurstellende verslag ontvang dat die
prestasie vir lees— en syfervaardighede van leerders in graad 1 tot 3 onder
die 40%-standaard is. Daar is definitief ‘n probleem met ons
onderwysstelsel wat ook ons opleidingskolleges en universiteite nadelig
beïnvloed.
Die effektiwiteit van onderwys en opleiding bring dus die volgende vrae na
vore: Eerstens, hoe verseker ons dat die ruggraat van ons land versterk
word? Tweedens, waar staan die voorskoolse kind se ontwikkeling binne die
basiese onderwys en opleiding? Derdens, wat is die kwaliteit van die
grondslagfase ten opsigte van die primêre, sekondêre en tersiêre
ontwikkeling van die stelsel? Vierdens, watter rol speel die
geengeldskolestelsel in gehalte onderwys? Vyfdens, om watter redes lewer
die voormalige model C-skole beter resultate as die publieke skole?

Sesdens, watter rol speel die morele waardes en standaarde van gemeenskappe
ten opsigte van die gehalte van leerders en hul dissipline in skole,
ensovoorts?

Die antwoord hierop is dat die gemeenskap, ouers, kinders en die skool, ‘n
holistiese benadering moet volg om beter gehalte te kan lewer. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[... will the quantity of service delivery have the desired outcome or
should we not rather ensure that the resources and facilities at our
disposal are developed to maximal effectiveness? For the past four years we
have already received a disappointing report that Grades 1 to 3 perform
under the 40% standard in reading and numeracy tests. There is definitely a
problem with our education system, which also has a detrimental effect on
our training colleges and universities.
The effectiveness of education and training, therefore, begs the following
questions: Firstly, how do we ensure that the backbone of our country will
be strengthened? Secondly, where does this leave the development of the pre-
school child in relation to basic education and training? Thirdly, what
quality does the foundation phase contribute to the primary, secondary and
tertiary development of the system? Fourthly, what role does the no-fee
school system play in quality education? Fifthly, what are the reasons for
former model C schools producing better results than public schools?

Sixthly, what role does the moral values and standards of communities play
with regard to the calibre of learners and their discipline at school, and
so forth?

The answer to these questions is that the community, parents, children and
the school should follow a holistic approach in order to improve the
quality.]

The report says the Dinaledi schools comprise 7% of the total number of
schools and contributed 24% to the 62 000 high-level mathematics matric
results in 2008. If this is true, we certainly have a successful method of
training for mathematics in all our learning institutions. We have to use
it more to improve mathematics results. The problem in education lies in
the fact that learners don’t need to know tables — that is minus, plus,
division and multiplication — off by heart any more. We have diverted from
basic education and placed too much emphasis on the wrong things in
education. Numeracy and literacy are very important in early childhood
development and foundation-phase education. It is not about the quantity of
teachers and learners we have in our schools, but how well the foundation
phase is managed.

The dropout rate is still unacceptably high. We must find out what the
reason is for learners dropping out. Only the dropout learners and their
parents can give responsible answers to this situation. Then we can try to
solve the dropout rate in our schools. We must address this problem as soon
as possible and with urgency. If every learner manages the basic principles
of learning and training, fewer learners will drop out, there will be
better results in the foundation phase, and primary and secondary schools
and colleges and universities will get better quality students. We will get
quality workers in all sectors of the economy, and then we will obtain all
the principles set for the nation. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms M W MAKGATE: Modulasetulo, Letona la lefapha, Maloko a Palamente a a
leng fa ... [Chairperson, Minister of the department, Members of Parliament
present ...] on 29 March 1996 Nelson Mandela said, and I quote:

   On its establishment, South Africa’s first democratic government faced
   daunting challenges in the education sector. The lack of proper
   educational facilities and resources, along with apartheid’s devastating
   effect on our social fabric had created a crisis in education and
   training of immense proportions. The problem required a new multifaceted
   approach to co-ordinate the efforts of different sectors of society,
   within an overall framework for fundamental change.

The inequality of education funding during the apartheid era was shocking.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s 2009 report
indicates that certain whites-only schools received 20 times more per
learner than the poorest black schools for personnel and nonpersonnel as
well as for capital needs.

It is against this background that the ANC firmly supports the budget in
the knowledge that it seeks to redress the glaring imbalances of the past
and ensure a fundamental change, from early childhood development, EDC, to
higher education and training.

In this regard, the expansion of the early childhood development programme
should be geared towards ensuring universal access to Grade R and doubling
the number of 0 to 4-year-old children by 2014, as identified in the 2009
state of the nation address.

It is commendable that the department has allocated financial resources in
the 2009-10 financial year to increase the number of five-year-old learners
enrolled in publicly funded Grade R classes in public primary schools and
community-based early childhood development sites, from the current 839 to
1 023 by January 2010.

In addition, the findings of a study of the Grade R sector, which was
conducted in 2008, should be used to give guidance on how to strengthen
national, provincial and district capacity to achieve the 2010 target of
universal Grade R enrolment.

However, for the success of early childhood development provisioning, it is
absolutely significant for the department to pay particular attention to
improving the quality of programmes offered at this level and to employ
properly qualified practitioners with the appropriate skills.

All early childhood development funding must also reach the centres on
time. A well-resourced and functional ECD sector is essential in improving
the quality of the education system and it contributes to ensuring
readiness for formal schooling.

In May 2002, a special session of the United Nations General Assembly on
children committed itself to a time-bound set of specific goals for
children and young people known as the Millennium Development Goals, MDGs,
in terms of which member states pledged to eradicate extreme poverty and
hunger by reducing by half the proportion of people living on less than a
dollar a day.

In meeting the MDGs, South Africa has introduced many strategies, one of
which is the National School Nutrition Programme. In this regard, the key
objectives of the National School Nutrition Programme should be fully
realised. These objectives include creating access to nutritious meals for
learners from the poorest communities, counteracting short-term hunger and
nutrient deprivation, and ensuring enhanced learning capacity.
Subsequently, a total of 6 280 489 learners in 18 279 schools were fed an
adequate meal in 2008, and a total of 6 503 school food gardens were
planted and sustained.

However, the reorientation of the school nutrition programme from its
historical grade level focus towards an explicit affirmation as an
antipoverty measure is the greatest challenge. To achieve this will require
sound policy implementation regarding the identification of the main
beneficiaries.

This represents the intersection of schools funding norms and the school
nutrition programme, and suggests that the future of both programmes is
intertwined. Furthermore, communities need to be given a greater stake in
the delivery of healthy food through sustainable school food gardens. This
does not only enhance the budgetary value achieved by the delivery of the
school nutrition programme, but builds nutrition-conscious communities
whose outcomes stretch far beyond the programme confines of the school
nutrition programme.

The immediate expansion of no-fee schools to 60% in the current year, as
per the ANC Polokwane resolution, is significant in freeing parents from
the responsibility of paying school fees, thereby contributing to poverty
alleviation.

South Africa’s adult population reflects the disparities of the education
policies prior to democracy. This makes the role of adult basic education
and training very important as a means to enable full participation in the
new democracy and to deliver the improvements sought in the economic
transformation of South Africa.

A history of low investment in adult basic education and training and heavy
reliance on nongovernmental organisations has left a legacy of low
confidence in the system to provide sustained high-quality programmes.
Furthermore, strong links between training and employment, particularly
through flexible qualifications pathways, provide a structure for adult
learners to see progression ahead.

In this regard, South Africa’s qualifications framework permits the
recognition of training experienced in a wide variety of settings for
conventional qualifications. I will just skip the other matters.

It is criminal for institutions of higher education to return monies
designated to assist students when there is a growing outcry for
assistance, because many young people from poor families face financial
constraints in furthering their studies.

We are happy to announce that government assistance through the National
Student Financial Aid Scheme is expected to rise at an average annual rate
of 16,6% over the medium term. The increase is in line with our objective
of promoting student access to higher education. An important provision in
the Act was the establishment of democratically elected governing bodies.

However, it is regrettable to note that some of the school governing
bodies, SGBs, are not working properly because they do not have the
necessary skills and are not sure about their roles and responsibilities.
This happens mostly in poorer communities where people have few resources
and where many cannot read and write. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S H PLAATJIE: Chairperson, no budget can be appropriate unless it is
contextually valid. A contextually valid budget tries as far as possible to
respond to the general needs of society. It is absolutely astonishing to
find two glaring, inexplicable and unforgivable omissions in the policy
formulation for education.

Firstly, there is no policy to deal with the enormous vocabulary deficit
within the larger school-going population. Learners who have reached Grade
12 with less than 20 000 to 30 000 words will read with frustration, fail
to comprehend adequately and struggle to understand idiomatic and
figurative language.

The second omission is the lack of availability of the Worldwide Web; it
not being provided in every classroom. Who in the world can do without the
Worldwide Web? This question should also be answered. It is obvious why
Cope has contended through testing times that a society has not succeeded
if the state only prepares children for academic success, but does not
develop their values and readiness for responsible citizenship.

The House will definitely agree with Cope that education is absolutely
central to poverty reduction and that it plays a key role in delivering
sustainable change, opportunity and hope for all children. It is worth
noting that children from poor households, rural areas, slums and other
disadvantaged groups face major obstacles in accessing good quality
education. Cope will strongly support any attempt at investing both human
and financial resources in early childhood education and education in
general, meaning basic and higher education.

The House will further agree and note that the notion of using matric
results as a yardstick for good performance is worrisome. According to the
SA Institute of Race Relations, only 10% of learners in the South African
school system achieve results good enough for them to enter university.

If we are really serious about quality education, we must revisit our
assessment criteria used to allow learners to progress from one grade to
the next. Currently, in order to pass matric exams a learner only needs to
have achieved 40% or above in three subjects, and 30% or higher in another
three. However, in order to gain university entrance a learner needs to
have achieved 50% or above in at least four subjects, and not less than 50%
in two other subjects. These low assessment criteria play a significant
role in dropout and unemployment rates, because most of the matric learners
are half-baked.

As a result, Cope believes that our country will not become a successful
industrialised economy if the Education department continues to produce
inadequate results. In rolling out the non-negotiable mandate as captured
in the state of the nation address, we should encourage members of the
House to adopt schools, with a view to ensuring compliance, and to further
mobilise communities to do the same.

Cope rallies behind the attempts at prioritising the establishment of a
youth cadet service, learnerships and internships to get all school-leavers
to support our communities and learn the necessary skills to find decent
work.

Despite important progress, the majority of teachers are frustrated by the
current trend in the curriculum to fast-track learners to exit Grade 12. It
is further noted that this situation is causing a problem in various high
schools. Is this a cost-containment measure or a deliberate attempt to
throw poor children out of school? At this point we need to stop the abuse
and answer this question. Thank you very much. I appreciate it. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Hon Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, hon Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Chief Whip of
the NCOP, hon members, Cabinet Ministers present, honoured guests, ladies
and gentlemen, as we begin the month of July, which is a very important
month in the history of our country, we must remember the important and
famous statement by the first democratically elected President of the
Republic and the president of the ANC, former President Nelson Mandela,
when he said:

   Education is the great engine of personal development. It is through
   education that the daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, that the
   son of a mineworker can become the head of the mine, that a child of
   farmworkers can become the president of a great nation. It is what we
   make of what we have, not what we are given, that separates one person
   from another.
These important words are still relevant in recognising education as the
most fundamental tool for personal development. It is against this
background, as we debate the Budget Vote on Education, that we should
commend our government for having prioritised education for the next five
years. We commend President Zuma for undertaking in his state of the nation
address to increase government’s efforts at encouraging all pupils to
complete their secondary education by targeting an increased enrolment rate
of 95% in secondary schools by 2014.

The use of computer laboratories as a tool to improve learning and teaching
is still a challenge in many schools. This problem can only be corrected if
the department creates a wonderful, first-class academic environment.

As members of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation, we will
play a greater oversight role over both the Department of Basic Education
and the Department of Higher Education and Training. This will assist us in
responding to the call by the President that the Fourth Parliament be a
house of activists.

In fulfilling our oversight role we will expect the department to fast-
track the process of ensuring that schools throughout the country,
particularly in rural areas, are equipped with modern library facilities
which can increase literacy levels and transform communities and the entire
social structure.
In responding to the challenges facing our schools, the new and the old
schools should be designed to have the following features: computers, a
science laboratory, a biology laboratory, home economics facilities, fully
equipped administrations facilities, school gardens, book libraries, and
state-of-the-art modern classrooms.

We have full confidence that the leadership of the department will ensure
that they deliver on their mandate of spearheading the progressive
transformation of education in which all people have lifelong learning
opportunities which, in turn, contribute towards improving quality of life
and building a peaceful, prosperous and democratic South Africa.

We support the reconfigured Education department, which came about as a
result of intense public engagement, as this will help to improve the
performance of our education system in its response to government’s
objective of turning our schools and institutions of higher learning into
thriving centres of excellence.

We have no doubt that this will contribute immensely to the struggle of
combating the scourge of poverty by creating job opportunities for both
school-leavers and graduates by ensuring that training and skills-
development initiatives in the country respond to the requirements of the
economy.

We have noted in past years from different sections of society that the
issue of safety and security is one of the overriding concerns. In
intensifying the campaign of advocating safer schools, we will expect the
Department of Basic Education to work with provinces on an ongoing basis
through the Council of Education Ministers in order to fast-track the
implementation of appropriate policies that seek to work collaboratively
with school governing bodies, parents and communities with the purpose of
focusing on the promotion of safe learning environments for our children,
in which human life has equal worth and in which every child has an
opportunity to learn and succeed.

Statistics inform us that since 1994, 140 000 students have benefited from
the National Student Financial Aid Scheme, or NSFAS, which is aimed at
improving the participation rate amongst disadvantaged South Africans. But
this scheme needs to be reviewed.

In an effort to develop rural education we would welcome efforts from the
department to enhance the quality of education in rural areas by focusing
on quality teaching, the restructuring of rural schools, curriculum
delivery, education provision, school governance and management, community
participation and poverty alleviation.

As the committee, we are happy to learn that President Zuma will meet with
school principals in KwaZulu-Natal on 7 August 2009 in line with the
commitment he made during the state of the nation address to meet with
school principals in an effort to deepen transformation and development in
education.

Access to higher education remains the greatest challenge for financially
needy students who are academically deserving, but who are precluded from
postschool educational opportunities on the basis of being poor. We are not
going to accept any excuses from people who want to use a lack of funding
as a scapegoat in respect of access to higher education. We know that our
government is capable of providing quality education. In the long run, we
will propose reviewing the NSFAS in order to facilitate the progressive
introduction of free education for the poor at undergraduate level.

In conclusion, in our quest to defend the gains of the national democratic
revolution, the committee supports the Budget Vote of the department. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! To the people controlling the monitors
up there: This is Ms Magadla and not Mr Magadla. I am looking at the
monitors here. Let’s do things correctly, please.

Mr D MASEMOLA (Limpopo): Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
Deputy Chairperson, members of the House, hon Minister, colleagues, MECs
from provinces and everybody in attendance, thank you very much for the
opportunity given to us as a province and the department to come here to
make an input on this policy debate of the Department of Education, and on
the achievements and challenges facing us, equally mindful of the fact that
the details of the work done in the province are well contained in our
annual performance plan - our budget speech - which will be made available
if so required.

One of the third largest electoral processes in the country, the elections
of the school governing bodies, has been launched and successfully
conducted by the province. Obviously, at the end of the process, we will be
starting very important and intensive work around induction of members on
their roles, responsibilities and obligations, as per the SA Schools Act,
to make sure that they are able to deal with matters relating to
legislation, policy, leadership and management.

Importantly as well, with regard to some of the achievements in the
province and as far as our input to this policy debate is concerned, is
that our infrastructure budget in the previous financial year was R675
million, which was fully utilised, and over 1 880 projects in the
department were completed as well as four state-of-the-art schools.

By the end of this financial year we will be completing 14 more school
projects. Therefore, we want to take this opportunity to invite you and
members of this House to the Limpopo province, because, starting from this
month until March next year, we will be opening these big schools – state-
of-the-art schools - almost every month until the end of the financial
year.

Seventeen schools have been electrified; 90 water projects have been
completed in 90 schools; 982 toilets have been completed; 688 new
classrooms have been provided; and 23 laboratories and 169 administration
blocks have been completed. We have very good stability in the province
with regard to the provision of teacher and learner support materials
because almost every year on the first day of the reopening of our schools,
children are in possession and have been in possession of their learner
material.

So far, as well, our Dinaledi high schools in the province have performed
very well because 7 283 maths students passed last year against the
national target which was set at 4 000, resulting in the province coming
second nationally with respect to the performance of our Dinaledi schools.
So far this year we are also very confident as a department that we are
going to meet the targets as set and probably exceed them, because we have
a committed team of men and women, officials and teachers.

A total of 38 181 officials have benefited from bursaries and internships
locally and abroad with regard to their attendance of schooling and
training, and also in terms of furthering their educational development.

We have a number of officials attached to a lot of institutions of higher
learning in the province and some that are abroad, receiving very important
and intensive training in order for them to strengthen, plan and teach and,
of course, ensure that the department in the province is strategically
located to advance its primary mandate of providing and delivering a
curriculum.

One thousand schools have been provided with e-mail connectivity in the
province so that we are able to ensure that we bridge the digital divide
between and amongst our people and are able to access information both
nationally and globally.

We have provided 995 867 primary school learners with nutritious food.
Currently, we have rolled out the programme to 518 quintile 1 secondary
schools, which will benefit 218 351 learners. All in all that means that
1 248 444 learners in the province will be benefiting from the National
Schools Nutrition Programme.

So far, 2 818 members of representative councils of learners have received
training in leadership skills, conflict management, democracy education and
the code of conduct of good learners in the province. Equally important in
terms of some of the achievements, 71% of our schools in the province are
no-fee schools, which means that we have already exceeded the 60% national
target. We are quite clear - and certainly committed - that in the next
financial year, in this regard, 94% of the province’s schools will be no-
fee schools.

As far as the continual development of professional teachers in terms of
their skills and knowledge is concerned, we have established three centres
that specialise in maths, science and technology, commercial subjects and
languages. All these centres are aimed at making sure that our teachers
continually receive proper training for them to be well placed in advancing
their primary mandate and responsibility of making sure that our learners
receive quality teaching in our classrooms.

We have also appointed curriculum advisers and deputy managers responsible
for governance to continue giving our schools support with respect to
governance and professional development in order for teachers to receive
good and professional advice in their respective subjects, and, therefore,
place the province very strategically to advance this national project of
advancing education and teaching as one of the key mandates that this ANC
government’s administration is seized with.

However, as we make an input in this important policy debate, there are,
equally, challenges that the province is facing and that therefore need our
attention, both nationally and provincially. The infrastructure budget of
the province has grown to R852 million and the estimated backlog so far to
cater to and address 4 015 schools is estimated at millions and billions of
rand. At the same time, these 4 015 schools are covered and managed through
a budget of R16 billion, which, we think, is not quite sufficient because
there are infrastructure collapses and challenges that have to be met in
order to intensify and locate the provision of education - there has to be
the necessary space for teaching and learning. These are serious challenges
facing us.

Just to give an example: The province has five districts in which there are
415 schools that have to be managed. But, in terms of the norms and
standards set, we are supposed to have 15 districts of the Department of
Education in the province. Therefore, this shows that the department is
seriously undermanaged and hence the challenges that I have spoken about.
We need to be able to find a way of attending to them. In this regard, the
vacancy rate in the department needs to be attended to administratively to
give the required support to our schools. So far, it stands at 65%, which
is a serious problem and a challenge.

We also still have teachers in the province who do not have the necessary
qualifications with regard to the norms as they have been set. This area
continues to receive the attention of the department. Educators are equally
important as well. There are those who cannot actually be placed in terms
of the curriculum requirements. They are in excess in the system. This
situation says that the province would have to have a basket of posts that
amounts to 57 085. Unfortunately, at the moment, we have only 56 427 posts.


Almost R1,1 billion is required, additional to the current budget, for us
to be in a better position to attend to some of these problems that may
affect the capacity of the department not just to provide and deliver on
its core mandate of curriculum development and implementation, as I have
said, but also to practise and locate, within the necessary space supported
by the tools of the trade, the required infrastructure that will enhance
teaching and learning without any challenge.

Equally important is that in terms of the database of the department’s
national electronic infrastructure management system, there are significant
challenges experienced in the department of education in Limpopo with
regard to facilities in terms of space, condition of buildings, building
standards and maintenance.

We hope that this budget will also take us a long way in redressing and
addressing some of the problems. There is still overcrowding at schools. We
still have schools with dilapidated and inappropriate school buildings.
There is inadequate maintenance of some facilities. There is an
unacceptable level of public health care at schools owing to insufficient
sanitation facilities. There are overcrowded and dilapidated offices and
warehouses at the provincial, district and circuit levels. There is also
inadequate funding of education infrastructure, as I have already said, in
order to address the backlog in space, conditions, standards and
maintenance of our buildings.

We also continue to see a problem that we need to work on very seriously.
We have already started having our people all over the province attend to
some of these matters. Some of these issues also relate to the capacity-
building required in the continual development of our officials and
teachers to meet the ever-demanding needs of the National Curriculum
Statement, which, of course, needs to be well positioned and well informed
through proper training and learning in order for our teachers and children
to be able to receive this important information.

There is still a continual shortage of maths, science and technology
educators, including curriculum advisers. So far, we are clear that working
together, we will be able to provide quality education to our people in the
province. Therefore, we support this budget. [Applause.]

Ms M L MOSHODI: Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon
Minister, MECs, hon members of the NCOP and guests, I feel honoured today
to be part of the House to lead in the discussion of the most important
element in our country, which is higher education.

In the past, regrettably, we never had a choice in the education system
that we wanted in our country. But now, through the ANC-led government, we
do. As the Freedom Charter states, “The doors of learning and culture shall
be opened!”

Why is poverty so widespread and the unemployment rate so high? To answer
this question could take me the whole day, but allow me to give the factors
that lead to that. The curriculum we had or that was designed for us did
not focus on the needs of the country. In other words, most learners
completed their Grade 12, but that did not help them because they were not
skilled enough to face the outside world.

The ANC, correctly, has a clear position in this regard, and it is that
education and training should be basic human rights, that all individuals
should have access to lifelong education and training, regardless of race,
class, gender, age, sexual orientation, or physical and mental disability.

In other words, every child has the right to be educated. This is embodied
in our manifesto in terms of which children have free and compulsory
education from Grade 1 to Grade 12. The government provides schools with
reading and writing materials, stationery and feeding schemes for free. It
even intends to extend the feeding schemes to secondary schools.

The ANC government is also going to provide accommodation for farm learners
who travel long distances to schools. Our township schools are being
improved with facilities that cater for quality education. Libraries are
being built in rural townships to ensure that learners have access to
reading materials, computers, and the Internet, in order to improve
technology in disadvantaged towns. For example, in Edenville a highly
resourced library is in the process of being built. By the way, Edenville
is the area I come from in the Free State.

The government of the ANC has also introduced inclusive education in which
learners with disabilities attend schools with other learners even though
they need special attention. Educators trained in special needs are doing
this, and in district offices there is a section called inclusive
education. This section takes care of learners with family and personal
problems and also assists child-headed households in getting grants in
order to eliminate early pregnancy.

Adult basic education is also functional in terms of increasing the level
of literacy in our brothers, sisters and parents who were denied the
opportunity to learn by factors in the apartheid education system.

Regarding the issue of school governance, the ANC government established
the school governing body as a structure with stated powers which takes the
lead in the governance of schools. Amongst other things, they are
responsible for appointing educators, finances and discipline on the part
of learners.

The school governing bodies are trained to ensure that our parents have a
role in the education of their children. This, in turn, eases the burden on
educators and principals.

The new curriculum, the National Curriculum Statement, is designed to skill
learners so that after Grade 12 they become ready to work. This also helps
parents because it focuses on the social and educational aspects. One can
take the subject of life orientation as a learning area which focuses on
the life of a learner. A number of learning areas have been introduced so
that there is a variety when it comes to subject choices. The country will
benefit because a number of economists and scientists are going to be
produced.

The government is also going to provide laptops to teachers in order to
enhance their technological and IT skills from the early education stage.

For the first time, our country has two Ministers of Education, namely the
Minister of Higher Education and Training and the Minister of Basic
Education. This shows that there is going to be transformation in our basic
colleges, our universities of technology, or former technikons, and our
universities.
Government has also extended its funding to universities and technikons to
ensure that deserving learners can pursue their studies, irrespective of
their socioeconomic background. This scheme is called the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme. It will increase the graduate output in areas where
there are skills shortages.

All of this is contained in the ANC manifesto, and I am proud to say that
the ANC is going to go the extra mile in ensuring that the quality of
education improves because we all know that education is lifelong. We all
know that education remains the most significant area for youth development
and emancipation. What the department needs is our support and not
irrelevant criticism.

Despite all the strengths I have mentioned, it would be fair enough to say
that there are still challenges that must be addressed in ensuring the
attainment of quality education. There is a shortage of science and
technology teachers. As good as the National Curriculum Statement is as a
curriculum, teachers must be well trained and skills must be well
resourced.

There is a lack of discipline on the part of learners at schools. The ANC
government must strengthen disciplinary measures in education policies -
for instance, the SA Schools Act - without using corporal punishment. The
graduate output in skills areas must be increased. This includes measures
to streamline sector education and training authorities, Setas. Teachers’
colleges must be reopened. Sanitation facilities must be improved,
including the provision of clean water, strong buildings and infrastructure
in rural schools.

There should be a rural allowance for teachers who come from far-off places
as a motivation for going the extra mile, for example working on Saturdays
and during holidays. Another challenge is the training of early childhood
education teachers. In addition, the quality of scarce skills education
must be improved. Maths, science, technology and English should be given
special priority.

In conclusion, I want to recommit myself by saying that the ANC government
will always ensure that quality education is provided, as is required of us
by the President. Most important of all: Together we can do more. Thank
you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr M QWASE (Eastern Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister of Basic
Education, provincial MECs, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I want to
take this opportunity to welcome the presentation by the Minister and her
forthright and candid assessment of our education system.

It is indeed true that significant strides have been made in taking our
education system forward in terms of the overall quality of our curriculum,
the number of learners benefiting through poverty-alleviation interventions
in the form of no-fee schools, the National Schools Nutrition Programme,
the mainstreaming of early childhood development centres and many other
flagship programmes that make up the department.

In line with the Polokwane resolutions and the manifesto of the ruling
party, we have declared quintile 3 schools no-fee schools, thus increasing
the number of learners benefiting from this policy from 1,2 million to
1,657 million, which now constitutes 81,67% of the overall number of
learners in the province. This is well above the 60% that is stipulated in
the manifesto of the ruling party.

One hundred and eighty-three quintile 1 high schools covering 174 105
learners are benefiting from the school nutrition programme in the current
financial year. The budget for early childhood development has increased
from R270 million in the 2008-09 financial year to R367,31 million in the
2009-10 financial year. This will cover the pre-Grade R stipends for
practitioners, the training of pre-Grade R and Grade R practitioners, and
the resourcing of the foundation phase, including the 91 early childhood
development facilities that we are constructing. We have also seen an
increase in enrolment in Grade R from 132 599 in 2008 to 141 181 in 2009.

More than anything, though, I welcome your forceful articulation, hon
Minister, of the maladies that continue to blight our schooling system. The
time for shifting blame and refusing to acknowledge challenges and personal
shortcomings is over.

Coming from the Eastern Cape, I would go further and acknowledge that the
combative relations with worker unions have also had a significant role in
the perennial underperformance of our learners and schools, in particular
at the point of exit from the system, which is Grade 12.

In responding to these challenges, we are thus enjoined to find common
platforms that will instead focus our energies towards the improvement and
acceleration of transformation at all key levels of the system. A lot of
ground has been covered in mending relations with our social partners
through the resuscitation of the provincial education labour relations
council, which creates the platform to address matters of common and mutual
interest. And we have also engaged in relationship-building exercises with
our unions to ensure that we work together in ensuring that we deliver
quality education in the province.

The introduction of the new curriculum statement for Grade 12 last year has
not been without challenges in our province. We have had to acknowledge
that critical knowledge gaps were experienced by some of our teachers, and
that maybe the training we provided was not adequate. We have thus
endeavoured to intensify training in addition to providing planning, co-
ordination, monitoring, evaluation and support for the implementation of
the National Curriculum Statement from Grade R up to Grade 12. We shall
continue with the training on the National Curriculum Statement we started
towards the end of last year, during which time we covered about 2 400
educators in the general education and training band, and also about 4 000
at the beginning of 2009 in the further education and training band.

To reduce the administrative burden on educators and to ensure quality and
uniformity, we have developed lesson plans for all learning areas and for
all grades, and these are being distributed as we speak. The department is
busy developing the lesson plans for the third and fourth quarters. We hope
that by September 2009 the process will have been completed and that all
lesson plans will have been distributed to our schools. We hope and trust
that this will translate into increased confidence in the classroom by our
educators and lead to better education outcomes, as well as to a reduction
in the dropout and repetition rates and to an improved promotion rate.

I further wish to concur with the hon Minister that indeed the systematic
and historical disparities continue to have a major role in the quality of
our educational outputs. The majority of our people in the Eastern Cape
reside in the rural areas, which continue to be a hotbed of rabid and
unacceptable levels of inequality. With over 800 mud and unsafe schools due
for eradication, we are in full agreement with the sentiments expressed in
the Minister’s speech on rural schools. This resonates with our own
challenges of underdevelopment emanating from the failed homelands project.


We certainly agree that better co-ordination between departments will help
to fast-track our interventions in this regard. Indeed, the political will
that is displayed by the leadership of government towards the 2010
infrastructure should be adopted to deal with the infrastructure backlogs
in the education sector. If we can adopt the attitude we have adopted
towards the 2010 infrastructure, we will be able to cover a lot of ground
in eradicating the infrastructure backlogs in the sector.

Our own commitment to rural development is demonstrated by our stated
endeavour to undertake key infrastructure development in the rural areas,
even to the extent of building expensive full-service model schools in the
rural areas. Out of the 316 schools that are currently under construction
as we speak - straddled over two financial years - the majority of those,
that is 258 schools, will be finalised in this current financial year. The
majority of them are in the rural areas, including the 12 model schools we
have started that are allocated in both rural areas and townships.

In terms of the provision of resources, proper planning and co-ordination
have ensured that for the first time in a while the Eastern Cape was able
to significantly improve the delivery of learner and teacher-support
material ahead of the resumption of schooling for the 2009 academic year.
This has definitely helped in boosting the morale of our learners and
educators, in that the call — and the insistence — that teaching and
learning resume on the very first day of the school year has indeed been
heeded by the majority of schools. This has enabled the department to
implement its learner-attainment improvement strategy, which is meant to
create a conducive environment for teaching and learning from the beginning
of the year, thus ensuring that all targeted areas of improvement are given
adequate time.

In conclusion, the Eastern Cape has heeded the call to arms in the form of
the Quality Learning and Teaching Campaign. Besides the provincial launch
at Cofimvaba on 2 April 2009, all our 23 districts are falling over each
other as they mainstream this campaign through their own unit launches.

The East London district launch in May 2009 brought together all the
critical components in the campaign, including parents, teachers, civil
organisations, representatives of school governing bodies, learners and
office-based educators from the district office. The mood and the spirit
suggested to me that there was a growing consensus that the turnaround of
our education system was indeed everybody’s business.

Our experience also shows that there is a correlation between poor
performance and dysfunctionality in our schools on the one hand and poor
leadership in schools on the other. In this regard, we are continuing with
the training of the circuit managers on coaching and mentoring in order to
assist and support principals and school management teams in improving the
management and governance of our schools. Secondly, we are also going to
train 2 490 principals in leadership and management of schools. With this
intervention we are confident that our schools will become centres of
excellence.

We are also committed to being the torch-bearers of the message that has
been given and provided by the hon Minister of hard work and resilience,
fully aware that education remains the fundamental tool in the
transformation agenda of our government. With those few words, I support
the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Prince M M M ZULU: Hon Chairperson, hon members, Minister, Deputy Minister
and MECs from the provinces, as the IFP we welcome the fact that we now
have two Ministers to deal with education. Hopefully, many of the problems
we have been experiencing over the past years will be dealt with in a good
manner in every sense, Madam.

Empeleni, mhlonishwa, Ngqongqoshe, kunezinto eziningi eziyaye zingikhathaze
emphefumulweni wami nakuba seniye nayenzangcono imfundo yethu emazingeni
onke kubalwa nama-Governing Body nje. [As a matter of fact, hon Minister,
there are many things that trouble me although you have managed to improve
our education system at every level, including the school governing
bodies.]
My problem, hon Minister and MECs ...

... lawa ma-Governing Body, uma kuqashwa othisha ezikoleni – kukhona omama
nobaba bethu emakhaya, abangazange balubhade esikoleni kodwa kuthiwa abenze
inhlololwazi kothisha. Ngibona ukuthi uMnyango ufanele ukulubhekisisa
loludaba ngoba mina ngokwami ngibona kuwukudlala ngabantu bakithi ukuthi
benze le nhlololwazi. Kusuka umuntu owenze iBanga Lokuqala noma ongazange
afike naseBangeni Lokuqala nje kuthiwe akenze inhlololwazi kumuntu oneBanga
le 12. Ngiyacela, Ngqongqoshe ukuthi nikubheke lokho. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... is that these governing bodies, when they recruit teachers for
schools, involve our fathers and mothers who never attended school, but are
expected to interview teachers. I think that the department should
reconsider this position, because I feel that it is ridiculous that our
people are expected to conduct these interviews. You cannot expect a person
who has only completed Grade 1 or who did not even reach that grade to
conduct an interview with a person who has passed Grade 12. I am pleading
with you, hon Minister, to look at this matter.]

Coming to the budget in these schools ...

... ngiyazi, mhlonishwa, Ngqongqoshe ukuthi ezikoleni zethu
sekunezabiwomali. [... I am aware, hon Minister, that there are budget
allocations for our schools these days.]

These principals are not accountable to the people...

... ngale mali yabakhokhi bentela. [... regarding the taxpayers’ money.]

We should look at all these things, Minister...

... noNgqongqoshe bezifundazwe. Ake nizibhekisise lezi zinto. Laba bantu
kufanele baphendule ngabakwenzile ngoba yizimali zomphakathi lezi ezisuke
zisetshenziswa. Lapho uThishanhloko avele nje athumele isheke elingabhalwe
lutho kuSihlalo ukuthi asayinde noma ashaye isithupha. Lokho ngikubona
kuyinto engahambi kahle.

Okunye, wukuthi ngithanda ukunibongela boNgqongqoshe ngoba niyafika -
mhlonishwa uNzimande, nawe Ngqongqoshe. Ngakho-ke ngiyethemba ukuthi
nizobheka kahle izinkinga ezikhungethe izingane zakithi ezimnyama
ezisemanyuvesi. Kufuneka nazi kahle ukuthi kukhona izingane lapho emakhaya
kungenalutho ezifunda khona laphaya emanyuvesi okufanele kubukisiswe kuyo
le mali le esuke ikhokhwe nguhulumeni ukuthi bayanikezwa yini abantu
ngendlela ekuyiyona yona.

Sengiphetha Ngqongqoshe, okunye okungikhathaza kakhulu wukuthi, ngoba
niyafika, ngeke ngilokhu nginibhaxeka ngodaka olwenziwe ngabanye abantu
ningekho. Le Mithethomgomo ekhona kwezemfundo kufanele ibuyekezwe futhi
kubhekwe ukusebenza kwayo. Okunye mhl onishwa, dadawethu, izilimi zesiNguni
kanye nezinye izilimi zama-Afrika kufanele ziqhutshekiselwe phambili futhi
zinikezwe amandla zikwazi ukusebenza kuyo yonke iMinyango kahulumeni ngoba
asikhona eNgilandi lapha, kodwa sise-Afrika lapho kukhona khona abantu
bakithi abamnyama okuyibona abayiningi okufanele banakekelwe ngokuthi
kuqhutshekiselwe phambili zonke izilimi zabo. Ngiyabonga, Nxamalala.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... and MECs. Look at these things, please. These people should be
accountable for what they are doing, because it is the taxpayers’ money
that is used. Some principals just send a blank cheque to the chairperson
to sign or to attach a thumb print. I feel that that is not right. The
other thing is that I want to congratulate you Ministers, because you have
just joined us – hon Nzimande and you, hon Minister. I therefore believe
that you will look into the problems which are troubling our black students
who are at the universities. You must know very well that there are
children who come from destitute homes who are studying at those
universities and therefore you must look out for them through the funds
that are paid out by the government by making sure that the right people
receive them.

In conclusion, hon Minister, the other thing which troubles me a lot is
that because you have just joined us, I won’t hold you responsible for
mistakes that were committed by others whilst you were not even here. These
policies that are in use here in education need to be reviewed and looked
at closely with regard to how they function. Another thing, hon Minister,
my sister, the Nguni languages and other African languages should be
developed so that they can be utilised in all government departments,
because we are not in England, but in Africa, where our black people are in
the majority and need to be taken care of by developing all their
languages. Thank you, Nxamalala. [Applause.]]

Ms L HLONGWA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, thank you very much for giving
us an opportunity to be part of this debate today, following the tabling of
the budget by the Minister, the hon Angie Motshekga. We wish to start by
congratulating the Minister on her appointment and on being entrusted by
the ANC with this very crucial position to lead the Department of Basic
Education. We also want to pledge our support to constructively critique
where we see shortfalls and be appreciative where necessary.

We draw our strength and comfort from the knowledge that the hon Motshekga,
as a disciplined member of the ANC, will deliver and ensure that she
effects qualitative transformation in this department, which shall bring
about a shift in the manner in which things have been done in the past.
This year the province’s focus is on quality of delivery of education, as
was launched by the then MEC of education, Ms Cronjé, in Ulundi in March
2009. We are pleased to note the new trends in the budget estimates, and
that the education outcomes will be improved by enrolling an increased
number of Grade R pupils, or, rather, five-year-olds in the public schools,
that number to increase from 701 740 to 800 000 by 2010. We applaud this,
Madam. The growth in the public ordinary schools allocation is received
with humility by the province of KwaZulu-Natal, since most of our schools
need renovation and learning and teaching support materials, LTSM.
Chairperson, we think this is in line with, or in the spirit of, the
Freedom Charter, which states that the doors of learning and teaching shall
be opened to all.

The improvement of school management is one fundamental issue that, as the
province, we have identified and we want to support. This year we are
saying, as the province, that we want to grant all our schools section 21
status and, however, put a clear monitoring tool in place so that this is
not abused. In our definition, quality of education is a tripartite
relationship model that encapsulates the role of parents and teachers, as
well as learners; hence, our resolve to strengthen the relationship among
the three main parties.

Teachers remain critical and very important in our task of ensuring quality
education for all. When our people were faced with the oppressive impact of
Bantu education, it was the teachers who stood up and ensured that we
confounded the architects of apartheid by producing doctors, lawyers and
engineers. Now that we are free, Madam Minister, we need a similar resolute
commitment. Our teachers must commit to a set of non-negotiables: to be at
school on time, in class, teaching, with no abuse of learners and no
neglect of duty. This was also said by the President in his state of the
nation address. As the KwaZulu-Natal province, we are very clear that
people must be placed in influential positions because they are fit for a
particular task at hand, not because they belong to a particular union.

We are also pleased that the Minister is engaging with the teacher unions
to address educational challenges, which range from resources and
accountability to curriculum deficiency. We are very fortunate to have the
MEC, in the person of Comrade Senzo Mchunu, who has also declared, in the
public fora, that we shall be meeting, as legislators, with teacher unions
to enhance our working relationship and also curb unnecessary industrial
action.

The province takes the issue of effective teaching and learning very
seriously in that our MEC, together with the senior officials of the
department, have visited a few schools, just to get a feel for what is
happening there. We also note, with humility, in the Estimates of Public
Expenditure, EPE, that the department will focus on monitoring and
evaluation of the management of schools. Without prioritising that, we
shall forever be pumping money into something that doesn’t yield the
expected fruits. The Minister is correct, Chairperson, that all performing
schools have good managers, and this is our conviction, as well, in KwaZulu-
Natal.

Hence we are gearing ourselves to ensure that the state resources do not go
to waste unnecessarily as the President has made a call that every cent
spent should be accounted for. The further focus on the development of
teacher competence, by ensuring that teacher qualifications and continuing
professional development programmes are of an acceptable standard, receives
undivided attention from the province of KwaZulu-Natal, since it is an
imperative central to the maximisation of educational outputs. We are very
humbled by the Minister’s commitment to accountability and confrontation of
all dysfunctional schools, as well as dysfunctional Department of Basic
Education offices.

The province of KwaZulu-Natal undertakes to particularly focus on
developing the capacity of our teachers, improving the capabilities of our
existing educators while training a new generation of teachers, equipped
with enthusiasm, values and skills that will be needed to build a new
education system. The capacity of teachers teaching mathematics, science
and technology remains a big challenge that we think needs strategic co-
ordination from this level of government. Programme 4 of the budget
estimates talks about this point in that the focus is on 500 Dinaledi
schools in 2009. However, we feel that this is too few, if we are to deal
with the challenge ahead.

We want to propose that for us to thoroughly deal with this challenge, we
need to address the teaching methods and understand the context from which
the teachers teach and also the context in which learners are taught. This
will be of primary importance to change the disposition of learners towards
mathematics and science. Again, it is not about developing content
knowledge but is mainly about developing pedagogical knowledge that is
appropriate to the school environment.

We are particularly grateful to the Minister for unequivocally emphasising
the challenges faced by rural schools, especially with regard to our
children who have to walk many kilometres before they arrive at school.
Most of those children come from disadvantaged families where abject
poverty is the order of the day. Thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chair, hon Minister and hon MECs of different provinces,
the ID will make a positive contribution to finding solutions to the
challenges facing the youth in education. These challenges belong to all of
us. We must begin a programme of education, and encourage our communities
to play a more active role in our schools because our children are a
blessing to us.

There are still far too many parents who neglect their duty to play an
active role in the education of their children, simply leaving this
responsibility to teachers alone. Sadly, this behaviour is more prevalent
in our poor areas. Equally guilty are the many businesses in our
communities who also turn a blind eye. We must remind them that unless they
make an investment in education today, they will also suffer the
consequences tomorrow.

Over the past 15 years we have spent more on education than most other
developing nations, and the ID believes we still do not have enough to show
for it. We must also invest in human development and build sports
facilities at previously disadvantaged schools. The ID remains concerned
about the massive inequalities in education, which, we believe, outcomes-
based education has made worse because rich schools have the resources to
implement it and poor schools do not.

Transformation in previously advantaged schools needs urgent attention. You
cannot have a school in which 40% to 45% of the learners are black and
coloured children, but there is only one black or coloured teacher. It is
impossible to have this 15 years down the line, and it is happening in the
Northern Cape.

We need to focus more on reading, writing and mathematics, and each school
must be given access to electricity, water and sanitation, a library, a
functioning science laboratory and free Internet connectivity. Let me just
give you one very important piece of advice today. The Bible says that
money is a shelter; wisdom is also a shelter, but the excellency of
knowledge is that the preserver thereof has eternal life.

Every school must have a social worker that can identify and deal with
problems such as sexual and substance abuse in children. We would like the
department to consider replacing the no-fee schools with a child education
grant, targeting poor learners rather than poor schools and covering school
fees, transport and uniforms. This will mean that schools will no longer
have to struggle to collect fees and that poor learners at wealthy schools
will also be covered. We would like to say to you, hon Minister, Deputy
Minister and Minister of Higher Education and Training, that we hope and
trust that the budget that you have received will be sufficient to see to
all these challenges – they are big challenges - because if we invest in
our children, develop and train them, that is the best investment that we
can make. I would like to say, as I would normally say, to each and every
Minister in education or MEC in education: if you overspend by building
schools and teaching the children, we will support you. Thank you.

Ms J L HARTNICK (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister Motshekga,
hon MECs, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, on
behalf of the Western Cape education department, I would like to
congratulate the Minister on her appointment and wish her everything of the
best. I know that she will be successful.

Education is the bedrock of my government’s vision of an open-opportunity
society for all. Education lies at the heart of this vision, because it
provides our youth with the necessary skills to reach their full potential
and fulfil their aspirations. However, our initial analysis indicates that
the Western Cape’s education system, while undoubtedly the best in the
country, is not yet characterised by the kind of excellence that this
government aspires to and that the future of this country demands of us to
become a truly prosperous nation.

In order to provide quality education, we have to channel funds back to the
classroom and the teacher. More resources simply need to get down to that
level and all our decisions will be guided by what is in the best interests
of the learner. This entails going back to basics: ensuring that our
teachers are adequately trained and present, punctual and prepared, that
textbooks are available, and that there is adequate testing of learner
performance.

This budget was inherited from the previous ANC administration. Therefore,
we will ensure that selected funds within this budget are channelled into
new projects and initiatives to bring them into line with our policies and
vision for the department of education.

The budget allocated to the Western Cape education department, WCED, is the
single biggest allocation in the province. The WCED has been allocated over
R10 billion for 2009-10, representing 35,7% of the total provincial budget.
Public ordinary school education continues to be the main focus of the
department’s funding – it is allocated 81,1% of the budget, with 54,9% of
this allocated to primary schools and 38,4% to secondary schools.

Included in the 2009-10 budget are the following conditional grants and
earmarked allocations. The National School Nutrition Programme has been
allocated R112,5 million to feed 335 000 learners daily. Consolidated
infrastructure and maintenance, including the provincial infrastructure
grant, will receive R378,7 million. Routine maintenance has been allocated
R73,7 million. The HIV and Aids programme will be allocated R14,6 million.
The budget for early childhood development has increased by 37,5% from the
previous year to total R313,4 million for 2009-10. An amount of R92 million
has been provided for teacher development.

Allocations for national priorities are as follows. In order to improve
resources and conditions for learning, the Quality Improvement,
Development, Support and Upliftment Programme has been allocated R129,2
million. The allocation for textbooks for Grades 10 to 12 to support the
National Curriculum Statement is R14,8 million.

In terms of literacy and numeracy, we will embark on programmes to improve
teacher training, establish a literacy and numeracy resource hub in each
district in the province, and introduce new multimedia programmes for use
by teachers. I am pleased to note that the budget for school safety goes up
from R14,9 million to R20,6 million. We will focus on initiatives and
partnerships among schools, parents, neighbourhood watches, the police and
the community. The budget allocation for adult education and skills
training is R30,9 million.

Our administration has also proposed a number of initiatives that will
reinforce our priorities in this department. Firstly, we will be reviewing
and updating the Western Cape Provincial School Education Act of 1997. The
Act has not been subject to any revision in the past 12 years while the
South African Schools Act has been revised eight times during the same
period.

Therefore, the Act must be the subject of a clinical review to bring it in
line with potential future changes in the education landscape. Part of this
legislative process is the need to review the provisions relating to the
establishment of the education council. The provincial government is
currently in violation of a statutory requirement that provides for the
existence of such a council. If properly constituted, such a council can
play a key advisory role in finding solutions to the myriad challenges
facing education in the Western Cape.

Improving and enhancing school management is also a major priority for us.
We will therefore develop and strengthen performance management systems to
ensure that our schools are held accountable for their performance. This
administration is committed to telling the truth about what is working in
this department and what is not. We will take responsibility for our
performance and be accountable to our stakeholders. We will always be
conscious that our number one priority is and always will be doing what is
in the best interests of the learner. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M G BOROTO: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon MECs and hon
members, in 2008 learners across South Africa wrote the same National
Curriculum Statement examination for the first time. This marked the
completion of the radical curriculum change first introduced in 1997 as
Curriculum 2005, and then the Revised Curriculum Statement in 2002.

So it is, therefore, in the interests of all South Africans that the ANC
supports this budget as it seeks to ensure the effective implementation of
the National Curriculum Statement, including the provision of quality
education. Given the challenging postapartheid conditions as well as the
short time for implementation, this is a staggering achievement of which
South Africa’s education system can justly be proud.

Indeed, the ANC-led government successfully championed this improved,
globally competitive and locally responsive National Curriculum Statement.
In addition, the National Curriculum Statement is the effective
implementation of the Quality Learning and Teaching Campaign and it is
significant in ensuring success for learners in the system. This campaign
gives practical expression to the task of building schools as thriving
centres of excellence, as the President alluded to in the state of the
nation address. Furthermore, an invariable commitment to the non-
negotiables by all stakeholders is significant, as was identified in the
ANC January 8 Statement for 2009, and the subsequent state of the nation
address.

It is not only teachers and learners who should commit to being at school
on time, in class, teaching and learning. There is also a need for
education districts to be proactive and responsive to the needs of all the
schools. I think the Deputy Minister has alluded to accountability, and if
we have these processes in place and have accountability from the district,
we are going to go far.

In support of the promotion of excellence, the strengthening of the
integrated quality management system - now being externally moderated - and
the establishment of the National Education Evaluation and Development Unit
contribute to the quest to improve the performance of schools and the
system as a whole. Similarly, relationships between teachers and the state
should be characterised by an inclusive national discourse that focuses on
what support teachers need, and how to achieve quality improvement.

To my colleague from Cope I’d like to say that the integrated quality
management system has elements of needs and skills audits and analysis, and
with your problem of learners not having the vocabulary and the skills that
are envisaged in this programme, that problem will be easily solved.

Furthermore, one of the most significant factors affecting learner
performance is teacher quality, and the effect is greater for the poor. In
this regard, the provision of formal training as a precondition for
promoting teachers to principals and heads of departments is significant in
developing sound management and leadership, as indicated by the President
in the 2009 state of the nation address. We are happy to learn that the
President will be meeting the principals in due course.

Again, I want to say to my colleague in the IFP that when it comes to the
appointment of teachers who are qualified and to school governing bodies
that you say are not well prepared for this, if we all engage in the Kha Ri
Gude campaign that is aimed at educating our adults, we will not have a
problem.

The medium of instruction is a critical issue. In the delivery of the
curriculum the government is well aware that the attainment of initial
literacy and numeracy in the home language for at least four years leads to
improved literacy levels. However, the choice of the medium of instruction
lies with the parents. It takes two to tango. We come with these policies
but the parents keep on dragging their feet. So, it is our job – I say to
my colleague from the IFP – to also encourage our parents and show them the
need for our learners to be educated in their own languages, at least in
lower classes.

Coming from Mpumalanga, the province being a rural area, we are reviewing
the best models to deliver quality education to the remote farms and rural
schools to ensure that we provide holistic support for learners in poor
households. Among other things, we will be using the abandoned boarding
facilities and extending the provision of transport to learners who cannot
access school very easily.
We need to strengthen the capacity of the further education and training
colleges to respond to the needs of provincial economies. I am happy that
this budget talks to that, and the Deputy Minister has also alluded to
that.

Indeed, education is fundamental to the achievement of the society
envisaged in the Freedom Charter. To this end, an educated and engaged
youth are indispensable to present and future nation-building. Government
must intensify the implementation of policies in the education and training
sector in order to ensure that it is committed to increasing access to
quality education so that quality education is realised. I hope my
colleague from the ID realises that we see that policies need to be
implemented and monitored.

As I conclude, I must say that we have to be able to support our own
involvement in our oversight duties as we will indeed be working together
and with communities, agencies and schools, and that we must develop
effective plans to better protect the rights of the learner, particularly
those of young girls, as well as the rights of teachers. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, in closing the debate, I again want
to thank my colleagues who took time off from their provincial duties to
join us here. Ntate Masome and Ntate Qwaso, thank you very much. I also
wish to thank the representatives from provinces for joining us in this
debate. I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for the
preparations and the members of the standing committee and all the
colleagues and hon members who participated in the debate.

I think the member of the DA rightfully raises questions about quality and
I think if you reread our theme and internalise it, you will realise that
the issue of quality is central to our debate. Our position in this debate
is that, as much as we think we have achieved many things, we are still
confronted with the challenge of making sure that our quality matches up
with our quantity. So, I think that we are in agreement on that issue, so
there is no debate about it.

I fully agree with the member of the ANC who mentioned the National School
Nutrition Programme. Indeed, the school nutrition programme should not just
be a feeding scheme; it should also help us to enhance the nutritional
status of our children and promote nutritional programmes in our
communities. It should be part of a healthy living programme, so that our
children are also encouraged and taught through this programme to embrace
healthy lifestyles.

A member of the ANC raised an issue concerning adult basic education.
Again, I fully agree with the comrade. We have a very successful programme
in the national department called Kha Ri Gude. It should, however, also
develop working ties with NGOs and with business and provincial
initiatives, so that we have a comprehensive literacy programme — not a
literacy programme that runs parallel to other literacy programmes. This
time we will sort it out, especially in KZN, to make sure that this
programme works very closely with other initiatives so that it can spread
out and expand.

I don’t intend responding to everything because, as I said yesterday in my
debate in the House, education finds itself in a very fortunate situation
in that it is able to rise above political and ideological divides. We find
that, in most instances, the issues raised by members are issues we agreed
on. Perhaps members had to debate because that is part of what they are
supposed to do. Basically we are in agreement. Most of the things that have
been raised are contained in our strategic plan, and we invite members to
study that strategic plan. They will discover that there is indeed much
agreement between us.

I can also tell hon Plaatjie of Cope that, at the Congress of the People,
convened by the ANC in 1956, the vision of education for all was there.
That vision continues to lead all people who believe in the Congress
vision. So, all members of Cope are under the leadership of the ANC,
because only the ANC can lead the Congress of the People. Any other
congress not led by the ANC cannot be the Congress of the People.
[Interjections.] My point is that the view and vision are contained in our
book. Follow it, Baba, as you want to follow the Congress of the People,
because the Congress of the People can only be led by the ANC.

Concerning the issue raised by hon Magadla, we have agreed that the
infrastructure is underresourced. We have also referred to the matter. If
you want a teacher in class, on time, teaching, there has to be support
mechanisms that enable that educator to be in class, teaching. We agree
that infrastructure – especially in rural and poor areas – continues to be
a challenge for us. Again, we are committed to doing something about it.

What I am quite pleased about is the meetings that we had with provincial
ministers of education. I do believe that all of us, whether in government
as MECs or as players in education, can confront most of the challenges
together. Working together we will succeed. From most of the points that
were raised by members you would have gathered that there is coherence
between what we are doing and what is being done in provinces. Therefore, I
think we will work together as a team.

On the issue of the Western Cape, I think you are quite correct to say that
that is an old budget. But our reports are saying that the education
department with the highest performance in the country is the Western Cape.
In the past five years, under the leadership of the ANC, the province did
very well. So, you are quite right. If you have 3 million you possibly have
the mandate that enables you to change things, but I think you should be
careful not to discard things that work. The WCED is one of the best-
performing departments in the country. So, you are inheriting a good
infrastructure. Don’t hesitate; grab it and build on it, but don’t doubt
that you have a good product in hand.

I also want to say I think Baba uZulu raised fundamental issues and agree
with him. The department is currently planning to bring amendments to our
schools Act to the House. These amendments should begin to address some of
the issues, like nepotism in job interviews. We are also saying that it
won’t be a one-size-fits-all solution.

There are capable governing bodies, so we should find a balance. We need to
make sure that while we support schools which are not capable of
undertaking certain activities, we don’t deny those that are the chance to
do so. That is what we are trying to look at and we will be suggesting some
amendments.

I also agree with you, Baba uZulu, on the issue of the national school
fund. I am very aware that my colleague hon Nzimande is looking at that,
because some of the children who we send to institutions of higher learning
not only need tuition books and accommodation, but also need a living
allowance. They need money for socks; they need money for a few things that
sustain them at school. So, hon Nzimande is looking at that. There is a
review of the fund to make sure that we can accommodate children who come
from the poorest of families. So, again, there won’t be a one-size-fits-all
solution.

I agree with the ID on quite a number of things. We are saying that we
should support our strategic plan, but also agree that poor children are
catered for under Social Development. There is no point in giving a parent
R700 and then charging that parent R700 for fees. We might as well keep the
R700. So, we won’t give families R700 and then ask children to bring R700
for the fees, because what is the point of giving them the money and
immediately taking it back from them?

So, all the other issues are being catered for. Poor children are catered
for under the child support grant. Therefore, we expect that some of the
needs that you are raising will be accommodated there. So, we will continue
to fund schools and not children, because all the things we are providing
schools with are things that we know they need. So, we don’t want to go the
long way of giving and then taking it back from them. We will continue to
do it that way.

Let me conclude by thanking members. I think we have taken note. Most of
the points that I have not responded to concern issues on which we are in
agreement. We appreciate some of the points that comrades and members have
raised. We will integrate them into our thinking and planning and we will
definitely only benefit from the comments or criticisms that are being
levelled against us, and build from there.

In closing, I again want to thank my colleagues. I can assure the NCOP
that, together with the provinces, we are going to work very well. When you
visit provinces you will find a coherent programme which will be a
partnership between us - the national department - and provinces.

We are developing clear plans which really incorporate provincial work into
national work so that we have one seamless system of education which is not
fragmented by the fact that we have a national department and provincial
departments. We will share these plans with members in due course. We are
striving at all costs to make sure that we have only one system of
education, and that that system of education is not fragmented by the fact
that there are different provinces. So, I want to thank everyone for
participating in the debate. It was quite useful. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 4 - Home Affairs:

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Deputy Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, Deputy Minister Malusi Gigaba, chairperson of our
select committee the hon Rasmeni, hon members of the NCOP, later this month
on 18 July 2009 the people of our country and indeed the world will be
celebrating the birthday of the icon and hero of our people, Nelson
Mandela.

Frantz Fanon reminds us that: “Each generation must, out of relative
obscurity, discover its mission, fulfill it, or betray it.” Nelson
Mandela’s generation indeed fulfilled their mandate and laid a strong
foundation for building our democracy with a common destiny and identity.
Home Affairs will indeed be joining the people of our country in whatever
we do to mark the launch of Nelson Mandela Day.

May I also join the people of our country and the world in congratulating
the Brazilian national team on its deserved win of the tournament, as well
as all the participants. The success of the Confederations Cup communicates
a clear message that our country and its people and indeed the people of
Africa stand ready to deliver a world-class 2010 Fifa World Cup.

The Constitution of our country has entrusted our department with a dual
mandate. In this regard, we are the custodians of the identity of all South
African citizens, critical in which is the issuance of birth, marriage and
death certificates; identity documents and passports; and citizenship and
permanent residence certificates.

The full spectrum of ID management goes beyond mere issuance of secure
documents; it encompasses the safe maintenance and archiving of biometric
and demographic records of citizens and persons who have been permitted to
reside in South Africa.

The national population register and related records of births, marriages
and deaths constitute a national resource that is part of our common
cultural heritage. It plays a crucial part in defining who we are as a
nation and in building a democratic and inclusive society by enabling
citizens to access their constitutional rights. We have to ensure an
accurate and comprehensive national population register as a matter of
national priority. For this to be achieved, there must be a national effort
that involves every government department, all institutions and all South
Africans including your good selves, hon members.

The first step is to tighten up the registration of births and to include
the mother’s name and ID number on the birth certificate. This is crucial
because the birth certificate is the basic document that enables people to
be in the population register and apply for IDs and passports. To this end
we shall run a campaign to register all children from 0 to 15 years old by
the end of 2011. After 2011 we shall ensure that babies are registered
before their first birthday and do away with late registration of birth,
which is the main entry point for those who want to access our documents
fraudulently.

Working in partnership with the Department of Education we shall also run a
campaign over the next two years to proactively ensure that all youths from
16 years old obtain an ID. We would also like to delink the capturing of
fingerprints from the ID application process to ensure the security of our
enabling documents. This will also facilitate the faster processing of the
ID.

In terms of Batho Pele principles, our public servants at the frontline
desks must be efficient and ready to assist the public and treat them with
kindness and dignity. The practice of sending people from pillar to post
must end. They should be provided with accurate information on what is
required right at the outset. The public needs to be able to identify the
officials they are dealing with through the wearing of name tags.

We shall also work with the Department of Public Works to provide
infrastructure and create a conducive environment for people to work in. I
hope all of us in the department can work together to create a new Home
Affairs. Together we will strive to develop a new paradigm in the
department with a cadre characterised by new values, attitudes and
behaviour.

Corruption, which is rife in the department, eats into the moral fibre of
our society, whilst denying the poorest of the poor access to critical
rights and resources. We have to act, and act decisively, to rid our
department of this scourge. But fighting corruption will require the
mobilisation of our nation. For us to succeed, we require a very strong,
hardworking and honest team.

There are many vacant posts that should be filled. The current economic
constraints have placed limitations on our ability to fill all of them.
With the funds allocated for the next three years there will be some
progress.

In the light of these constraints, internal skills development becomes more
important. I understand that in the latter half of 2008 efforts were made
in the department to drive new management approaches amongst senior and
middle managers. The training of some specialists, such as immigration
officers, has also improved.

But a lot of work still remains to be done in this area. In the long term
we shall be creating a learning centre, but in the short term we have to
work closely with the Public Administration Leadership and Management
Academy, Palama, in training our managers at various levels.

We have begun experiencing some measure of improvement in the utilisation
of the department’s 117 mobile units, with respect to providing a more
efficient and regular service – especially in rural areas. Expanding the
reach of Home Affairs to marginalised communities, such as farmworkers, is
one of our key objectives in this three-year expenditure cycle. Mobile
units will play an important part in achieving this goal, but we will also
require the support of provincial and local governments.

We also established a client services call centre so that people can call
and get information on a whole range of services that we offer. This will
make the queues fewer and also save money and time for people who live far
from Home Affairs. I would like to remind the hon members that the toll-
free number is 0800 60 11 90.

In addition to this, we shall have a very small unit that can deal with the
most difficult challenges and queries that the public has. People should
not go to Home Affairs offices more than twice without getting satisfactory
assistance. As soon as this unit is in place, we shall announce it — before
the end of this year.

We are also hoping to digitise our records so that we can introduce a
phased upgrade of our electronic document management system and move away
from filing our records only on paper.

The second area of our mandate deals with effective, secure and humane
management of migration. In this regard, we are experiencing significant
challenges managing the large number of asylumseekers at the refugee
reception centres. We are trying as far as possible to improve services in
these refugee centres. In this regard, we will have to expand the number of
refugee centres.

The large number of economic migrants applying for asylum in an attempt to
regularise their stay in the country points to the need for a review of the
immigration policy and legislation.
We are also seeking to transform the permitting environment to ensure a
more professional delivery of visas and permits, including the streamlining
of the processes and regulations where necessary.

We will also continue to enhance the movement control and permitting system
that will enable the department to meet its obligations with respect to
South Africa hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup. We are also going to be
putting in place strong management and governance measures to lead
transformation and take control of the operating environment; empowering
the honest majority of officials with the right skills and values; and
ensuring the out-of-date systems that have been contaminated by years of
data corruption are modernised, cleaned and properly maintained.

In addition, we are going to be improving the security of birth, marriage
and death certificates, and gradually introducing new security features in
the ID documents, including digitised photographs. We hope to eventually
have the smart card.

There have been a number of adverse audit findings over the years. This has
been a matter of concern to all of us, including Parliament and the public
at large. We cannot overemphasise the need to deal with public finances in
a prudent and diligent manner.

Whilst, as Amilcar Cabral noted, we should “tell no lies, claim no easy
victories”, we commit ourselves to redress these endemic problems whilst
working towards an improved audit finding by strengthening financial
management and controls at all levels.

The transformation of Home Affairs is a huge responsibility which was begun
by Minister Mapisa-Nqakula, for whose efforts we are grateful. We also wish
her well at the Department of Correctional Services. I would also like to
thank the chair of our select committee, the director-general and senior
managers and all the hardworking, honest Home Affairs officials.

In conclusion, turning around Home Affairs is not a sprint, but a marathon.
Those who complete the marathon course will do so only because they do not,
as fatigue sets in, convince themselves that the road ahead is still too
long, the incline too steep, the loneliness impossible to bear and the
prize itself of doubtful value.

We too, as Home Affairs, jointly with the people of our country,

   .... must together run our own Comrades Marathon, as comrades who are
   ready to take to the road together, refusing to be discouraged by the
   recognition that the road is very long, the inclines very steep and that,
   at times, what we see as the end is but a mirage.

Those are the words of former President Thabo Mbeki. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms R N RASMENI: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister of
Home Affairs, hon members, distinguished guests, the Department of Home
Affairs’ policy debate before this august House today is informed by the
ANC-led government’s mandate, which derives from our 52nd national
conference held in Polokwane in December 2007, and also from previous
national conferences.

It was at this 52nd national conference where, as the vanguard liberation
movement, we adopted policies that are grounded in the commitment to
promote, protect and serve the interests of all our people. Whilst taking
into account the interests and needs of South Africans, we are also
conscious of our responsibilities and duties in relation to being a
signatory to various United Nations protocols, conventions and
declarations, and other instruments which govern the status of refugees and
migration.

Furthermore, we are guided by our 2009 election manifesto that
unambiguously commits us to a service delivery culture that will put every
elected and public servant to work for our people, and ensure
accountability to our people.

Moreover, during the state of the nation address, we were directed by our
President, Jacob Zuma, amongst other things, to commit ourselves to the
service of our nation with dedication, commitment, discipline, integrity,
hard work and passion. Together we must build a society that prizes
excellence and rewards effort, and which shuns laziness and incompetence.

As we all know, the Department of Home Affairs is grappling with a range of
challenges that can, at best, be described as transient. The Department of
Home Affairs’ Budget Vote debate today seeks to introduce us to a period of
renewal, as the input by the hon Minister of Home Affairs advised. This, we
believe, will provide us with the tools to not only address the challenges
head-on, but also to function in an accountable and transparent fashion.

This brings us to the vexing question of corruption in the Department of
Home Affairs. As we all know, the Department of Home Affairs is a vital cog
in the war on poverty, since its mandate spans the entire lifetime of every
citizen who is born and dies in our country. In this regard, they represent
the face of the delivery cycle of government and are inevitably the first
encounter with government by any person in South Africa.

Suffice it to say that particularly the issue of corruption will be
amplified and sensationalised by some members of the House and those with
unpatriotic agendas. However, closer scrutiny of the department’s
initiatives and innovation in the war on corruption reveals that they are
indeed turning the tide, despite their acknowledgement of weak security
processes.

Let’s look at the facts. Over the last financial year the department has
established a countercorruption unit, resulting in the resolving of
information-technology-related risks. This collaboration gave birth to a
new system, which can detect potential fraudulent transactions. Monitoring
mechanisms are in place to ensure compliance with minimum information
security systems, and there is evaluation and certification of business
processes to eliminate risks in new processes. Over 300 cases have been
finalised. This sends out a clear message of zero-tolerance of criminality
in any form.

We applaud the department for the digitisation of records in the department
and also for the introduction of the smart card programme.

These initiatives and advances are indeed significant and commendable. As
the select committee we wish to assure the department of our unfailing co-
operation and commitment to the period of renewal.

In contrast to these good initiatives and advances, there are challenges
that are still facing the department. I would like to highlight the
following issues. To begin with, there is the audit disclaimer that the
department has been receiving for a period of years. We hope and trust that
the department will be able to deal with this matter as a matter of urgency
so that, in the next financial year, when we stand here we report a
different story.

Another issue is the maximisation of mobile units to rural areas. The
department also has to pay attention to its office accommodation or office
infrastructure countrywide. The intensification of the Batho Pele programme
is also critical.

Having said that, we can by no means afford to be complacent as the
perpetrators are always one step ahead in terms of devising new means and
methods. We shall, as we must, remain vigilant.

In our election manifesto of 2009, the ANC pledged to establish a consensus
on our future social security system to make it comprehensive and
inclusive. We believe that the department will be central to the
formulation and implementation of this system, since access to social
security is, in turn, central to the mandate of the department. And, as we
know, currently, social exclusion remains a bone of contention in all our
communities, particularly for the rural poor.

In this regard and in relation to rural development in the context of the
developmental state, we wish to urge the department to take up the cudgels
for rural communities that do not have secure, efficient and accessible
services and documents, since rural development cannot only translate in a
narrow agrarian sense.
As you know, the select committee, notwithstanding its mandate, namely to
exercise oversight and do monitoring, is looking forward to engaging with
the department in a robust but cordial fashion. We will, as we must,
constructively criticise where criticism is due.

As of now, we are confident in the knowledge that the department will
exercise its primary responsibility with prudence and in the national
interest. Also, we wish to take this opportunity to congratulate Minister
Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma on her new role and new responsibilities. No doubt
she brings invaluable wisdom and experience to this portfolio. Together we
can do more, hon Minister. The select committee will support the Vote.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon
members, this hon Minister inherited the department and this warrants our
condolences. This was done, we hope, because President Zuma believes that
you will be able to turn this department around. It is a tough instruction.
This department has embarrassed all South Africans on an international
level. We are sure that even you, hon Minister, shook your head in shame
and disgrace. Yes, the department failed the citizens of South Africa,
mostly the poor in the rural areas.

It was amazing to listen to all the various budget debates yesterday in
this House during which the hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers and members
referred to further requirements — developmental programmes, policies, the
speeding up of delivery, more resources such as land and financial
resources, new legislation, the changing of our Constitution — but, you
know, when you look at them, there are two basic requirements. One was for
more resources, and the other was for more legislation. But 99% of all our
problems could be resolved if there was political will with the following
four points: firstly, human resource capacity in a lean, mean government
structure; secondly, the elimination of all corruption; thirdly,
accountability and responsibility for all actions promised during elections
and Budget Votes within the set targets; and, fourthly, the implementation
and enforcement of action plans, strategic plans, policies, regulations and
all the Acts that are currently in place in South Africa. So, what I’m
saying is, let’s just stop faffing around and let’s just start working
because that is what we are here to do.

The DA welcomes the Minister’s approach on the differentiation between
economic migrants and asylumseekers. We do, however, wish to remind our
Minister that her intended policy must also create an opportunity for
foreigners, specifically those qualified in scarce skills, to work in South
Africa. I have personally had tremendous problems when trying to register
foreign young professional nurses, nursing at present being a scarce skill
in South Africa.

We applaud the Minister’s efforts and her programmes to bring the services
of this department closer to the people. But there still seems to be a
problem as one has to wait for three hours in a queue for the second
issuing of an ID at the Wynberg office. But, the Minister has turned around
or the department has turned around – you’d think she has a magic wand —
the first-time issuing of IDs by 50% from 127 days and the second-time
issuing by just over 60%. This is really commendable.

Our DA colleagues in the National Assembly pointed out that there is a 34%
vacancy rate in the department and that 75% of its senior members do not
have the necessary skills to do their jobs. If one puts these two figures
together, then there is no senior management in this service delivery
business because there are no skills and there are no people, or one or the
other. So, we are in a bit of a fix here.

There should be a performance and development management system in place
for each official. What we have to understand clearly – even us as we sit
here - is that our salaries are calculated at the value that we have to add
to the company we work for. The bigger the salary, the more value you have
to add. Every single official and every single one of us sitting here must
understand that we have to add value. So, with the performance management
programme in place, those senior managers who cannot deliver within the
first six months must be deployed on ground level so that they can work
where the Minister needs them the most.

We need to do spot checks on departments and offices that aren’t working.
The DA is offering to assist the Minister in identifying the worst Home
Affairs offices in South Africa for her immediate attention.

As public representatives, we have a supervisory role. The Minister has a
role that calls for brutal action to eliminate crime, corruption, backlogs
and unskilled passengers in her department. The President has spoken and
the Minister has now spoken. The DA will hold them and this department
responsible for effective and efficient service delivery in terms of their
targets. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister and
Director-General of the Department of Home Affairs, let me first express
appreciation on being given an opportunity to express my opinion and that
of the committee on the Budget Vote of the department. A loud call has been
made on behalf of all the citizens of South Africa. This call has been made
on all those who are given different positions of responsibility to ensure
that all South Africans have a better life.

Moswana o boletše a re: Lentšu la kgoši le agelwa lešaka. Ge o sa le agele
lešaka, o tla swanelwa ke gore o sepele. Se se hlalosa gore Mopresidente wa
rena wa naga o boletše a re a re yeng go šoma, gobane ge re šoma mmogo re
tla kgona. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[It is very important that we respect what our leaders say. If we don’t, we
will have to face the consequences. Our President mentioned that we need to
work hard and that together we can make it.]

The Department of Home Affairs must heed the call of the President and get
down to work, as per their departmental strategic plan. I assume that the
department will work hard to realise this vision.

Ka mantšu a mangwe, seboko a se tsene nyobeng. Seboko ge se tsena nyobeng
se šoma bjalo ka boro gomme se a bora – se mošomong. Ka fao, kgoro ye le
yona e swanetše gore e swane le seboko gomme e tsene nyobeng e e bore.
[Disego.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[There is a strong emphasis on hard work. The department needs to work hard
to achieve its goals.]

Throughout the 2009 election campaign, the ANC reaffirmed our commitment to
stamping out corruption in all its many and varied manifestations. This was
spelt out clearly in the ANC 2009 election manifesto and was also
underscored by our President during the state of the nation address.
Indeed, the injunction by the President is clear: that a developmental
state such as ours requires commitment to the highest standards of service
probity and integrity. These are the critical issues we are conscious of as
we grapple with the strategies and mechanisms the department of Home
Affairs seeks to implement in order to entrench new value systems.

By far the most urgent and serious problem confronting the department is
that of corruption involving syndicates in collusion with some of the
officials, leading to the theft or illegal acquisition of identity. This
devalues enabling documents and poses a serious threat to individual
citizens and to national security. The problem is complex, with deep
historical roots, and requires a range of responses, including the active
support of government as a whole and of the public. This statement supports
the statement that was made by the hon Minister earlier when she said that
we need to mobilise the public in order to uproot corruption.

This department has been in the print media for some time in relation to
allegations of corruption, and this is still continuing as we speak. The
department must fight corruption in a very serious manner if it is serious
about giving our people decent services. Fighting corruption is not a
favour to the citizens of this country but a constitutional obligation.
Section 3(1) in Chapter 1 of the Constitution provides for a common South
African citizenship. Also, in terms of section 3(2)(a) of the Constitution,
all citizens are equally entitled to the rights, privileges and benefits of
citizenship. Section 20 in Chapter 2 of the Constitution provides that “No
citizen may be deprived of citizenship.”

A transformed Department of Home Affairs, with a sound anticorruption
instrument, is a vital tool to engender public confidence in the actions of
government. Although the department’s turnaround strategy consists of 30
projects, which have been the mainstay of its turnaround strategy over the
last while, we remain vigilant and wish to impress upon the department that
corruption directly undermines the critical national efforts to defeat
poverty and achieve the goal of a better life for all. Remember that
corruption benefits only a few and harms the majority.

It would be unfair and politically irresponsible if we talked about
corruption without talking about the involvement of certain officials. Not
all officials in the department are corrupt. But there are certain
officials that perpetually and continually have their own strategic plans
to commit corruption in the department. If we want to deal with corruption,
we must first uproot those corrupt officials so that the spirit of good
governance can be realised.

In conclusion, we have confidence that with risk management and the
internal controls the department has put in place it can rise to the
challenge and defeat this animal which we call corruption. We bring the
following aspects to the department’s attention and consideration: mobile
unit maximisation; uncollected IDs and those not reaching their owners; the
role of centres of excellence; workable systems to manage immigration; the
smart card system, port entries; the movement of foreigners; illegal
marriages of young girls; registration of children; and the review of
legislation.

With these few words, we, from the Select Committee on Social Services,
support the department. We are behind the department, particularly on
fighting corruption. As the select committee we support this budget to
enable the department to discharge its responsibilities.

Ba re šako la hloka thobela ke mojano. Ke a leboga, Modulasetulo.
[Magoswi.] [United we stand, divided we fall. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo weNdlu, Mhlonishwa Nxamalala, Zuma, mnawami
Sekela Ngqongqoshe Gigaba, Mphathi kanye nabasebenzi boMnyango,
uNgqongqoshe usekubeke kwacaca ukuthi lo Mnyango Wezasekhaya uyifa noma
uyigugu lezwe lakithi eNingizimu Afrika. Ngithi noma nje ukhungethwe
yizinkinga dadewethu nawe mnawami, kodwa uma kusetshenzwa ngokubambisana
lokho kuzokwenza ukuthi nikwazi ukuhlanganyela izinkinga neziNhloko zalo
Mnyango.

Ikakhulukazi ukungena nokuthululeka kwabantu bakwamanye amazwe noma nje
kungabafowethu baseAfrika kodwa kufuneka kubekhona umkhawulo, singadlulwa
yizwe elincane lasekhweni lethu eSwazini. Uma useSwazini uvakashile siyaye
sinqunyelwe izinsuku eziyishumi nane kuphela, sibe sibheka ukuthi
singakuphi lapho singakhona. Kwelakithi kukampunzi edla emini, bagcwele
lonke le lizwe. Ngike ngathi ukuhambahamba ebusuku ngiyothakatha ngabafica
bagcwele yonke indawo laba bantu engingabazi. [Uhleko.]

Ngqongqoshe, nawe Sekela Ngqongqoshe neziNhloko ngiyazi ukuthi kukhona
imisebenzi eniqondene nayo. Lama khomishana akhona isibonelo nje,
ikhomishani elibukene nokhetho kuthiwa uma ngiqondisisa lizimele kodwa loku
kuzimela kuhamba kuhambe kube nomkhawulo ngoba nje kunezintela zethu kule
lizwe abazisebenzisayo.

Nayo ke indlela engithi ngiyacela nje kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi niyibhekisise.
Kufuneka nibheke ukuqashwa kwezikhulu ezikhundleni eziphezulu ngoba kukhona
abantu abadala, engezukubasho ukuthi bawuhlobo luni lwenhlanga
abanositandathi 2 omunye wabo unguMphathi Omkhulu Oyinhloko, (CEO) kuyo le
nhlangano. Ezweni lenkululeko angeke sikumele ukuthi kungaba khona abantu
abanjengalabo. Bese sibuya siya ezifundazweni eziyisishiyagalolunye lapho
kusetshenzwa ngezindlela ezehlukene ngoba labaphathi bazitshela ukuthi
bayoze bephume ngoba sethola umhlala phansi. Isib. njengoba nginamashumi
amahlanu ngizophatha ngize ngibe no-65 ngiphethe ikhomishani lokhetho lapha
eNtshonakoloni ngendlela engacacile kahle.

Ikhomishani lokhetho alingasebenzi sengathi umbuso. Kufuneka lisebenze
phakathi komthetho nemiqathango yezwe lilandele imithetho eyenziwa yilezi
ziNdlu zombili zePhalamende. Kufuneka nenze uphando ngalokhu. EMpumalanga
kunezinto ezithile ezibambekayo la okuthiwa uMqondisi Omkhulu waqasha
udadewabo emsebenzini. Lezinto azemukeleki ezweni lentando yeningi. Yilokhu
engicela ukuthi nikubhekisise. Ngiyazi ukuthi uMnyango wakho mkhulu
kangakanani. Nangu noSihlalo esengihlukumeza kodwa-ke wenza umsebenzi
wakhe. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson of the House, hon Nxamalala Zuma, my
brother Deputy Minister Gigaba, director-general and employees of the
department, the Minister has said loudly and clearly that this Department
of Home Affairs is the legacy or the treasure of our country, South Africa.
I say even though it is beset by a lot of problems, my sister and my
brother, if you work collaboratively that will enable you to share the
problems with the authorities of this department.

With regard to the issue of the migration of foreigners into our country,
though they are our brothers from Africa, there must be a limit. We must
not be surpassed by a small country, which is our country-in-law,
Swaziland. When we visit Swaziland, they give us only 14 days to do
whatever we have come to do. In our country, people do as they please; they
are all over this country. I took a walk one night, just patrolling, and I
found these strangers all over the place. [Laughter.]

Minister, Deputy Minister and the authorities of the department, I know
that you are responsible for certain duties. These commissions we have, for
example the Independent Electoral Commission, according to my
understanding, are independent, but this independence has limitations
because they use our tax money in this country.

That is my concern, which I request the Minister to address. You must
monitor the recruitment of officials to higher positions because there are
old people, whose race I am not going to divulge, who have Standard 2 and
one of them is the chief executive officer of this commission. We will not
tolerate having people of that calibre in a democratic country.

Then let us come back to the issue of the nine provinces whereby operations
differ from one province to the other, because these officials claim that
they will step down only when they retire. For example: I am 50 years old
today; imagine if I were to be in a management position until I am 65,
managing the electoral commission here in the Western Cape badly.

The Independent Electoral Commission should not operate like a state. It
must function according to the rules and regulations of the country and
follow the laws that have been passed by both these Houses of Parliament.
You must undertake an investigation into this. In Mpumalanga there is
tangible evidence that the managing director recruited his sister. These
things are not accepted in a democratic country. These are the things that
I request you to deal with. I am aware how big your department is. The
Chairperson is also abusing me, but he is doing his job. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Chairperson, Minister Dlamini-
Zuma, my little girl over here, Lerato, who has come to support her father,
and hon members, emanating from the redesign of the business architecture
of the department, as well as the adoption of a new operating model
intended to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of our front offices,
we shall, commencing in July this year, begin visiting some of our
frontline offices to engage our management and officials and thus begin to
intervene decisively in front-office operations and frontline services.

This will also give us the opportunity to enforce the wearing of name tags
among our officials to ensure strict compliance with the President’s
instructions. These front-office interventions will focus, among other
things, on: one, operations management; two, customer service; three, front-
office renovations to change the look and feel of our offices; and four,
process implementation to ensure that the redesigned work process begins to
be embedded across the entire organisation.

We will begin to roll out the centres of excellence, which will be model
offices intended to provide excellent customer service.

We intend to review our overall management and approach to refugee affairs,
which should entail the legislative framework, processes and systems.

Part of this should include a heightened focus on stamping out corruption
and the factors that give rise to it. We will also formally establish the
Musina Refugee Reception Centre, to be followed in the coming financial
year by the construction of asylum-seeker processing offices in different
provinces.

We also intend to review and relaunch the campaign against xenophobia, to
be anchored on forging partnerships between and within government
departments and tiers, and, most importantly, local communities. Greater
focus will be given to training, stakeholder management and public
education.

We must here today express our concern at xenophobic sentiments which seem
to be resurfacing in certain communities. We call on religious and other
community leaders, on MPs, MPLs and councillors, to play a leading role in
facilitating dialogue and mediation in communities wherever conflict
involving our immigrant communities may arise.

South Africa values immigrants, because they make a significant
contribution to our economic development and cultural diversity, and
enhance our humanity as a people.

Our officials are the mainstay of our department, the pivot around which it
is anchored. Without them, there can be no transformation. Accordingly, it
is in them that we must make the most significant investment, because no
amount of technology can replace them.

In this context, one of the key challenges is to recruit the right people,
with the right skills and attitude, and to place them in the right
positions.

We will pay greater attention to enhancing the leadership and management
cadre of the department through recruitment, training and development.
Partly to achieve this, and given that as matters stand there is no
training institution in the country that meets our skills requirements, we
have decided to introduce the Home Affairs Learning Centre of Excellence,
and consequently we will this year finalise its business case and benchmark
it with the best practice in both the private and public sectors.

We are pleased to report that we currently have a total intake of 760 young
people involved in the National Youth Service in the department, 457 of
whom are female and 303 male. At the same time, during the 2008-09
financial year, we had 191 interns, placed in all specialised areas in the
department. During this financial year, we plan to recruit 300 youths for
the National Youth Service, as well as 200 for the internship programme.

Hon Chairperson, information services constitute one of the most important
strategic areas of our work and provide essential support to our core
business. Our key target for this financial year is to build the required
organisational capacity and stability in the branch, through the
appointment of competent senior leadership.

As hon members will recall, the Who Am I Online project, which is intended
to integrate our IT systems as a whole, was, at our request, investigated
by the Auditor-General and, based on the Auditor-General’s findings, a
decision has been made to conduct a forensic investigation.

IT preparations for the 2010 World Cup are advanced, and we are confident
that we will have our IT infrastructure ready to facilitate the movement of
keen soccer fans.

Hon Chairperson, during the past financial year the Government Printing
Works achieved numerous milestones, the most important of which was the
construction of the new passport factory and the acquisition of the new
passport machine. During this financial year we will conclude the
conversion of the Government Printing Works into a government component,
which will enable it to recruit and retain the skilled artisans the
organisation requires to discharge its mandate and overcome historical
problems. Once this process is completed, we will also appoint the board
and complete the establishment of the new leadership and management
structures.

We can make bold to say that we are well on our way to transforming the
Government Printing Works into a modern and high-security state printer. We
shall continue this year to acquire even more state-of-the-art machinery to
enhance our printing capacity and services and place the Government
Printing Works in a position to enhance its competitiveness. We have also
made major strides to relocate the Government Printing Works to a new
facility conducive to modern and high-security printing functions. We are
working with the Department of Public Works to prepare it for these
purposes. Meanwhile, the passport factory has moved to a new facility, and
will soon be followed by the rest of the organisation.

Once the Films and Publications Amendment Bill is assented to, its
implementation will include, among other things, the application of the new
governance structure which will improve the board’s efficiency.
Furthermore, the Bill will strengthen and widen the Film and Publication
Board’s scope to protect children from harmful material.

We are pleased to report that the Film and Publication Board has been
accepted as a member of the International Association of Internet Hotlines,
Inhope, a move that will strengthen our co-operation with other member
countries in the fight against the heinous crime of child pornography.

We will continue this year to wage a sustained campaign against child
pornography to meet this obviously growing challenge in our society and, as
part of this, we will make further improvements on the Internet hotline we
launched last year.

We are working with law enforcement agencies and NGOs, as well as the 2010
Local Organising Committee to ensure that there is heightened focus on
child protection against the many paedophiles who will come into our
country pretending to be soccer fans during the 2010 World Cup to ensure
that the World Cup is child-friendly.

Hon Chairperson, these challenges are many and varied, but, working
together, we are certain that we can and will do more. We wish to emphasise
that the select committee has to exercise its oversight responsibility, but
we expect from it robust engagement, going hand in hand with constructive
criticism, as well as suggestions as to what we need to do. Once again we
say, working together we can do more. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, and hon
members, our citizens will now have to apply for visas to travel to the
United Kingdom. For every person who objects to this requirement, with the
cost that goes with it, one thought will arise: All of this is on account
of Home Affairs, the epicentre of corruption in our country.

Government accepts that corruption involving the department’s employees and
national and international criminal syndicates has seriously compromised
the security of our state, as well as the integrity of the documents issued
by the department. It is not sufficient on the policy side to merely look
at a national population register to check corruption. A national
population register is a step in the right direction but only if it can be
effectively implemented. Has it been implemented? What has government to
say on it?

Government should also look at amending further the Criminal Law Amendment
Act of 1997, to include corrupt officials for mandatory minimum sentences
of 20 years if found guilty of corrupt practices. Many government officials
are the greatest enemies of the state and the greatest lawbreakers.

Nepal has now introduced pocketless trousers for customs officials to
prevent them from slipping bribes into their pockets. Government should
also have established a hotline to allow for easy and instant reporting of
corrupt practices. A special police unit should also have been in existence
to bring corrupt employees and syndicate members to book.

Cope believes that a passport should only be issued to a person who has
resided permanently at a given address for a certain length of time and who
can furnish a family tree. The department should also require that utility
bills in the person’s name to prove long-standing occupancy, driving
licences, banking details, title deeds, marriage certificates, school,
college and university reports, payslips, etc, be furnished. Special
accredited commissioners of oaths, who know the applicant personally and
can vouch for him or her from personal knowledge, should verify the
accuracy of the records before they are submitted to the department.

We would also like to see an array of biometric technologies being
implemented in the travel and identity documents Home Affairs issues to
improve airport security, strengthen our nation’s borders and prevent
identity document theft. We have also read in departmental documents about
Home Affairs developing IT applications for advanced passenger information
and advanced passenger profiling systems. Has this been developed and was
it piloted during the 2009 Fifa Confederations Cup? If so, how effective
was it?
If a television crew was to descend on any Home Affairs office tomorrow
anywhere in the country, it would record how nothing has changed though
everything has changed. It is beyond the capacity of government to detect
that which any journalist can dig up without great effort. Surely a policy
should have evolved to improve waiting time and to stop intermediaries from
functioning inside or outside Home Affairs offices.

Finally, what is government’s attitude to negotiating with role-players
regarding the right to use polygraph tests? We cannot afford to do too
little, too late. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D Z RANTHO: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister,
director-general, officials of Home Affairs, hon members of this House,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, allow me to pass on my
greetings to the House at large. Our President said clearly in his address
that we are here because of the mandate given to us by the people on the
ground. Also, we need to do our work as much as those working in the
government sectors must do their work.

There has been an ongoing outcry about the issuing of identity documents
and other documents. People apply for identity documents but what they
constantly experience is that these documents do not reach them in time
and, in other instances, do not get to their destinations. Officials keep
some of the identity documents which do not belong to their areas, thus
disadvantaging people in accessing their rights.

These documents are our lives. The loss of them at any given time can
result in a mess in someone’s life. If they are not issued in time, someone
is not exercising his or her right. If there are identity documents, hon
Minister, in the offices, let those identity documents be collected and use
volunteers to distribute the identity documents within the communities and
use a very close monitoring system for that. For this purpose, you can also
use the mobile systems to bring the service closer to the people.

This department must also promote social security in society. It is this
department that manages the ins and outs of this country by managing
migration. People who are asylumseekers must know where the line is drawn.
If the border gates could be thoroughly and closely monitored, no illegal
immigrants would be able to get into our country. Illegal immigrants are
also helping in committing crime, thereby increasing the country’s crime
rate.

The smart cards that are to be issued by the department are long overdue.
We have been waiting for them for the past two years. The 2010 soccer World
Cup might also bring in more illegal immigrants who will not want to go
back to their home countries after the event. From this day onwards, hon
Minister, security must be tightened by taking the necessary precautionary
measures to avert this from happening.

Officials that are found to be corrupt must be brought to book and be
charged accordingly. Put up systems that are effective, efficient and
integrated, and that will minimise corruption by the officials. The
department must update and maintain the national population register.
Security measures must be tightened to assist in preventing officials from
fraudulently entering individuals’ information. In our identity document
campaigns we should also teach our people that it is important to keep an
identity document and what it does to the economy of the country to always
repeat what has already been done.

Put up more asylumseeker points of entry in all provinces. Also, try to
works hand in hand with the local government to identify illegal people and
use the voters’ roll because, for sure, those people did not vote and are
not on our voters’ roll. Each and every office should have a hidden camera,
because this could help in combating crime and prevent illegal identity
documents.

Without doubt, the ANC’s policies on crime prevention, particularly with
regard to organised crime, are working. The department alone cannot achieve
the desired results. It needs us, as Parliament, and the community to
assist in combating any wrongdoing. It is advisable, therefore, that this
department work hand in hand with the health and social services
departments if we want to speed up and improve service delivery.

Madam Minister, the strengthening of the anticorruption unit will be highly
appreciated and supported. We put this on our shoulders, as a Parliament
and as the ANC, because we know that there is no other government that can
do this, and there is no other government that could do it better than
ours. Hon Chairperson, it is only the ANC-led government that knows that
working together we can do more. That is why the opposition parties, as you
have heard, are making a noise because we are a moving vehicle. Hon
Chairperson, this budget may not cover everything to one’s satisfaction,
but it is mostly welcomed and supported. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Chairperson, I’d like to thank all the
hon members, led by the chairperson of the select committee, hon Rasmeni,
and all participants in this debate.

I think this was a very good debate for us, because all of you had positive
suggestions to make. I think if we could all do that, work together and
make suggestions, that would help a lot. [Interjections.] Yes, we can all
do more.

I’d just like to respond to what hon Rasmeni said, by saying that I agree
with her and the President, that indeed we should shun laziness and
incompetence and make sure that people work hard and are efficient. Of
course she’s right, the department has started fighting corruption. She
mentioned the fact that more than 300 cases have been completed and that
many of those officials would have been dismissed. But, unfortunately, that
is not the end, and we are the first to admit it.

Regarding the challenges of a disclaimer, as I said in my opening remarks,
we are working very hard on that because we don’t want to see a disclaimer
ever again. Of course, it might not be easy to move from a disclaimer to
clean, so there has to be a gradual improvement over the coming years. I
think what we should be looking at is gradual improvement, and that’s what
we are going to be working on. Hopefully, eventually we’ll get to a point
where we get a clean audit.

In response to the hon member of the DA – where is she? – I’d like to agree
with you and take up your challenge to go around during the recess and
constituency period. I don’t want you to look only at the bad things at
Home Affairs, but also to tell us about the good ones. Indeed, I’d like to
urge all hon members to look at Home Affairs as part of the work they’ll be
doing during every recess. Make it a point to pop in and do spot checks,
see how things are and talk to the manager if there are things that are
wrong. Tell them that you’re an MP and this is what you have seen.

That’s why I’m saying turning Home Affairs around has to be a national
effort. The MPs are going to be critical in that. So, I want to agree with
you, but also ask all hon members to do that during recess and give us
feedback. We really have to get this right.

Of course, I may not necessarily agree with you when you say that we need a
very lean and mean department, because Home Affairs is a very labour-
intensive department. You have to make sure that people fill in the forms
properly. Even if we have a live capture that is done properly, it all has
to do with people. So, we can’t be as lean as maybe other departments. It’s
like Education and Health; those can’t be lean because they are labour-
intensive departments. So, we’ll do our best, but we can’t be that lean.

Of course, I also want to say that we have been improving. You mentioned
that we have improved on the first ID. On the reissue, we can actually
issue you with a temporary ID on the same day, and I think we can’t go
beyond that. We can’t give you an ID in less than a day. So, we are at our
best. We can make it shorter, but we want to be able to verify that you are
a South African. That’s the reason you have to go to the offices where we
can verify with your thumbprint that indeed you are on our population
register, before we give you an ID. So, there, I think we have done very
well.

Of course, we will also be improving our mobile units. We’re going to be
equipping them so that indeed they are like a Home Affairs office on
wheels, and they can provide everything that you can get at Home Affairs.

We are going to be filling posts, but we don’t want to rush into filling
posts just for the sake of it. We have to make sure that we get competent
professional people to fill them. During recess, we will be interviewing
deputy directors-general, because we need to fill four such positions,
which are vacant. So, we will be doing that. They should then make sure
that they recruit competent people below them.

I just want to also agree with ...

... Mageba, siyayizwa into oyishoyo ngeKhomishani Lokhetho. Lokho okunye
okushoyo sizokubheka kodwa ubuqinisile uk uthi noma iKhomishani Lokhetho
lizimele kodwa ke lisebenza phakathi komthetho nemigomo yalapha eNingizimu
Afrika, ayikwazi ukuphumela ngaphandle.

Uma kuyiqiniso ukuthi bathatha odadewabo babafake emahhovisi kuzofanele
sikufakele izibuko lokho, ngoba akuyona into okufanele yenziwe. Kodwa ke
sizoyibheka. Nalena yokuthi kukhona izikhulu eziphezulu eziphethe (senior
managers) abaphase isitandathi 2 sizobheka ngoba kwesinye isikhathi mhlambe
sekukhona nokuthi banesipiliyoni, asazi. Ngakho ke sizobheka ukuthi yisiphi
isidingo esiye senza ukuthi kube njalo.

KuMnumzane uFeldman weCope iziphakamiso azenzile ezinye sizozibheka kodwa
... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... Mageba, we understand what you are saying about the electoral
commission. We will consider some of what you are saying, but you were
right when you said even though the electoral commission is independent, it
is working within the laws and regulations of South Africa; it cannot be
excluded.

If it is true that they employ their sisters as office bearers, we will
have to investigate that, because that should not be done. But we will look
at it. We will even look at whether there are senior managers who passed
Standard 2; at times this might happen because they have experience, but we
do not know. Therefore, we will look at why that is so.

We will look at some of the suggestions made by Mr Feldman of Cope, but
...]

... I just want to say, yes, during the Confederations Cup we did pilot
some of the visas, such as the events visa, for instance. But,
unfortunately, we piloted it only with Egypt. It worked fairly well,
because you need to produce a ticket so that we know you are going to the
event, and then you get an events visa free of charge. So, we hope that we
will be able to do that to an even greater extent during the Fifa World
Cup.

I’m running out of time, but I didn’t use all my time during my opening
address. If I don’t respond to some of the issues, it will not be because I
didn’t hear them, but because we agree with some of them as they are just
constructive suggestions that we will be looking at.

But, I just want to dwell a bit on the issue of foreigners. Foreigners in
our country, as I said, can be classified into three groups, actually.
There are those who are genuine asylumseekers who are running away from
persecution. These are in the minority. Then there are those who are here
because they have scarce skills; they are those who have their entry into
the country facilitated. If you know of any foreigners with scarce skills
amongst those whose entry into the country is facilitated, who have
difficulties getting permits or visas, let us know.

Then there is the third category, which is in the majority, that is
economic migrants. Such people come here not because they are persecuted,
but because they are looking for opportunities. I think we must be careful
not to say that they are the ones who fuel crime and who do all these
things. Just as there are criminals in South Africa, there will be
criminals in Mozambique and in Zimbabwe. Some of them, indeed, may find
their way here, but a big portion of crime in this country is probably
accounted for by South Africans, and we should not lose sight of that.

Secondly, the reason we are saying that we want government to agree to a
policy of separating the asylumseekers from economic migrants is because we
want to be able to get everybody who comes into the country documented
properly. Then we’d know where they are; what they are doing, unlike
uMageba.

UMageba othi, uthi uma ehamba ebusuku ethakatha ababone begcwele yonke
indawo kufanele sibazi ukuthi baphi, benzani, uma besebenza basebenza kuphi
futhi kanjani. Ngakho ke yingakho sifuna ukuhlukanisa khona sizokwazi
ukubasheshisa ngoba... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[It is Mageba who says, when he walks at night patrolling he sees them all
over the place; we have to know where they are, what they are doing, where
they are working and how they are working. Therefore, that is why we want
to separate the issues so that we are able to speed up the process because
...]

... processing the asylumseeker is a very long process; it can take years
to complete, yet you know that these people are not asylumseekers. But, if
they lose the case, they appeal and the appeal process takes long. If there
was an opportunity for them to just register as economic migrants, we could
do that very quickly. So, that is the reason we’d like to change that
process.

With regard to IDs that are in the offices, yes, I can give you, Comrade D
Rantho, a breakdown. As we speak, there are just under half a million IDs
that have not been collected countrywide. By the end of the first week in
June, there were fewer than that. However, their number is now increasing.
One of the campaigns that MPs must help us with is to encourage people to
look after their IDs. These are lean times; we don’t have money. We can’t
be producing and reissuing a million IDs that people don’t even bother to
collect afterwards. People misplace their IDs and now that they have been
reissued, they don’t care to collect them. It’s going to be very difficult;
if our budget is cut, that’s where we are to cut – on reissuing of IDs. So,
people must look after their IDs.

Abantu abanakekele omazisi babo njengezikhali zamantungwa. [People must
take good care of their IDs.]

They must look after their IDs as though their life depends on them.

I’d like to thank you for your indulgence. We will meet again and continue
our discussion, but thank you for supporting our budget. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 26 – Housing:

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, thank you for giving us the
time to brief you about our Budget Vote. In a way this is my maiden
address, but I think I have been here before. Let me start by saying as a
former Premier of Gauteng ... [Laughter.] ... one can honestly say that it
is great to be back here in the National Council of Provinces to share with
you as representatives of your provinces as well the thinking that drives
our new mandate as Human Settlements.

This Budget Vote covers what is still defined as the Housing Vote in terms
of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. Our presentation will consist of
three parts: firstly, the concept of human settlements; secondly, the
current housing situation; and, thirdly, the consequential challenges of
our new mandate.

In understanding our approach, we need look no further than the
Constitution of our own Republic, where the very first value referred to in
the very first line of the first chapter is that of human dignity.

The concept of human settlements, which recognises the centrality of human
dignity, may be a new one to many South Africans. Yet it has been part of
the global developmental lexicon for many years, having been first adopted
at the United Nations global habitat summit in Canada in 1976. It gained
ground at another UN conference, this time at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg in 2002. The 52nd national
conference of the ANC in Polokwane in 2007 took this concept further, where
several resolutions committed the new government to the promotion of human
settlements.

Ultimately, in both his state of the nation address and Budget Vote,
President Jacob Zuma formalised this concept with the establishment of the
new Ministry of Human Settlements. He said, and I quote:

   ... housing  is  not  just  about  building  houses.  It  is  also  about
   transforming our residential areas and building communities  with  closer
   access to work and social  amenities,  including  sports  and  recreation
   facilities.

Chairperson, this concept was also referred to by the last Minister of
Housing, Dr Lindiwe Sisulu – we say “last” because that department has now
gone - in what we call the Breaking New Ground policy, which outlines the
need for a human settlements plan.

But what is the letter and spirit of this concept? This is actually
contained in the Freedom Charter, long before the Vancouver conference in
Canada or the world summit, and long before Polokwane. That Congress of
1955 demanded: “There shall be houses, security and comfort.”

Mindful of the consequences of apartheid social engineering, the Congress
demanded that, “All people shall have the right to live where they choose,
to be decently housed, and to bring up their families in comfort and
security.” It went on: “Slums shall be demolished, and new suburbs built
where all have transport, roads, lighting, playing fields, crèches and
social centres.”

In this respect, our task, in terms of the government’s Medium-Term
Strategic Framework, is clear: that is to restore human dignity in line
with the Constitution, to address spatial inequalities and to provide
comfort and security for all in our country, black and white.

This we shall achieve by planning and building human settlements in an
integrated, co-ordinated and holistic way. These must be places where
people can play, stay and pray. They should be pleasant, landscaped
communities where people live, learn and have leisure.

To achieve all this requires a new approach, a paradigm shift beyond
housing. It is about homes. It is not just about a change of name from
Housing to Human Settlements; it is about a change of mind-set, taking us
from a concept to concrete reality.
Let me briefly reflect on the work of the Department of Housing as it
stands. Some of the key developments are the following. Expenditure on
housing service delivery has increased from R4,8 billion in the year 2004-
05 to R10,9 billion in the last financial year, increasing at an average
rate of 23%. Funds allocated to national pilot projects for this financial
year include R400 million for the N2 Gateway, R120 million for the
Zanemvula Housing Project and R150 million for disaster relief in KwaZulu-
Natal.

The roll-out of housing delivery is a key function of provincial government
and our department’s main cost driver is the integrated housing and human
settlement development grant to provinces. This accounts for 92,6% of the
total budget allocation of R13,5 billion in the current financial year. It
should be noted that expenditure in this area during the year 2008-09
exceeded the allocation in view of the fact that the Mpumalanga provincial
treasury allocated the provincial housing department R100 million to
facilitate the acceleration of housing delivery and to finalise prioritised
incomplete projects. The leadership in that province needs to be commended.

Regrettably, the national department had to reduce the Eastern Cape’s
allocation and reallocate it proportionately to three provinces. We
reallocated R270 million: Gauteng received R152 million, the Free State R68
million and Mpumalanga R50 million. This was to avoid a situation in which
appropriated funds have to be sent back. This underspending is an issue
which concerns us and we intend to keep in close contact with the various
MECs to ensure spending stays on track.

At the same time, we will be engaging with our members of executive
councils around the number of qualified audit reports which are emerging
both at provincial and local government level. We all should understand
what qualified reports mean: unspent funds — they go back; no projects on
the ground whilst people are suffering.

Going forward, additional funds are being allocated to provide for large-
scale upgrades of informal settlements and the alignment of the national
housing grant with inflationary price increases. Although the housing grant
allocation has been increased over the 2009 MTEF period, we remind you once
again that the previous studies by the department concluded that continuing
with the current trend in the housing budget would lead to a funding
shortfall of a very staggering amount: R102 billion by 2012. At the same
time, if this trend continues to 2016, it will amount to a backlog of
R223 billion.

We have also strengthened our resolve to provide housing assistance to
people living in shacks, who constitute the bulk of the housing backlog.
The rural housing programme remains a key housing intervention, and new
initiatives are in the pipeline to accelerate the development of quality
rural human settlements.

Let me now turn to the question of corruption. This remains a major
challenge across the housing delivery environment. To ensure we identify
and act against criminals, we have strengthened our partnership with the
Special Investigating Unit, SIU, and taken stern action against offenders.

To date, a total of 772 public servants have been charged, of whom 554 have
been convicted. More than 1 600 acknowledgements of debt have been signed
in respect of nonqualifying government employees, with a total value of
R19,8 million of public funds. Millions have already been collected by the
SIU from nonqualifying illegal beneficiaries.

Let us now come to the question of the consequential challenges of our new
human settlements mandate. From the outset, let me emphasise that ours is
effectively a brand-new Ministry with, for the first time — and there she
is — a brand-new Deputy Minister, the hon Zoe Kota-Fredericks. [Applause.]
And much of what we are undertaking in terms of human settlements is also
brand-new.

In addition, all the provincial MECs are new to their portfolios. However,
they are nonetheless a dynamic team of men and women, with whom we have
already held two successful meetings or lekgotla, otherwise called Minmecs.
These meetings have played an invaluable role in shaping our thinking as
Team Human Settlements, together with our senior management team in the
department, led by director-general Itumeleng Kotsoane and our partners in
the various housing institutions.

Internally, as the Ministry and the Department of Human Settlements, we are
examining the implications of the broader definition of human settlements
in terms of our mandates, policies, procedures and programmes, as well as
the capacity that we have.

We also have several legislative proposals in the pipeline to accelerate
the achievement of the ideal of human settlements — for people as well as
to strengthen the legal environment. These will include the following four:
amendments to the Housing Act; the Sectional Titles Schemes Management
Bill; the Community Schemes Ombud Service legislation to establish a
dispute resolution mechanism for all community housing schemes; and, in
addition to the above-mentioned, the Land Use Management Bill is being
piloted by the Department of Land Affairs. That is quite critical for us.
At the same time, we will be tabling a new national housing code, which is
required in terms of the Housing Act of 1997. The housing code of 2009 was
approved by the Minmec in February of this year.

It must be clear by now that, as much as we aim to address the housing
needs of all South Africans and build integrated communities, our chief
focus is the needs of those South Africans who are on the receiving end of
economic negativities. That is the poor, as well as the poorest of the
poor, where the former qualify for government subsidies and the latter, who
live in shantytowns, qualify for nothing.

Shantytowns exist throughout South Africa, where townships or "slaapdorpe"
[dormitory towns] were built under apartheid far away from urban areas.
This was taken to horrific extremes in many places such as Ekangala, where
people depart for the city of Tshwane as early as 4am, spending hours on
the road. Heaven only knows what time such people had to get up to travel
to work.

This government has made tremendous gains in breaking the housing backlog
and the number of new homes built is second only to China. But this must
not mean that houses should be of a poor standard or that quality is
compromised in the interests of merely chasing numbers.

Consequently, it is crucial that we work closely with the planning and
monitoring Ministries in the Presidency. In our department we already have
our own monitoring unit to assess the quality and quantity of homes as well
as the National Home Builders Registration Council, NHBRC, and we will be
collaborating with the relevant Ministries within the Presidency. That is
the National Planning Commission as well as the Ministry in charge of
performance monitoring and evaluation.

Similarly, we will focus on heightening co-operative governance with
provinces and municipalities to harmonise the national, provincial and
local government in order to continue working together. We will also work
closely with the SA Local Government Association, Salga, as well as with
the SA National Civic Organisation, Sanco.

Increased interaction with local government will, for example, enable us to
redress existing developmental gaps in more established communities such as
Soweto, Langa and so on, where apartheid spatial planners deliberately
neglected the need for community services and facilities. It is important
that we avoid perpetuating the same apartheid spatial development
strategies.

A golden thread runs through all our initiatives: that is, consultation and
community involvement for community development. We plan to work closely
with communities, contractors, regulators, and other stakeholders.

The corporate sector is a key partner in ensuring we meet our objectives.
We will be engaging with captains of industry as well as high net-worth
individuals towards consolidating new partnerships with the private sector.
This would be in recognition of the fact that working together we can do
more. A consultative meeting will be held with business in the coming
months to explore ways and means of addressing the dire situation of the
unbanked and people who do not qualify for credit.

It is well known and appreciated that many players within the corporate
sector are committed to social investment as well as responsibility, but
our new engagement with them will be about going the extra mile for the
sake of our people. We trust and believe that the corporate sector will
come on board.

In the current situation, the global economic downturn is of fundamental
and critical concern to us as Human Settlements, as it negatively impacts
on our endeavours, now and in the foreseeable future. This situation is
worsened by the current economic recession in the South African business
cycle.

This does not paint a rosy picture. In revenue collection terms, this
situation has had a serious effect on the fiscus, which could lead to
decreases in budget allocations, with potentially harmful consequences for
all departments of government in the future.

In our own sector we are already feeling the pinch in the prices which are
increasing on the property market, in building materials, and in access to
housing finance. Many people have lost their jobs or are in the process of
losing their homes and household contents.
On a broader level, an ongoing global slowdown in spending and investment
is likely to impact on the government’s ability to meet some of the targets
of the 2014 United Nations Millennium Development Goals.

The other global phenomenon we need to factor in – and this is important –
is that of planning for urbanisation. UN-HABITAT has pointed out that this
century, the 21st century, is in fact the Urban Century when, for the first
time in history, the world's population will predominantly be living in
cities. We must be prepared for this eventuality and identify its problems
as well as its opportunities.

Yet, there must be no equivocation that the 21st century must also be seen
as the one in which South Africa must grow from being a developing to a
developed country. There must be an active realisation that this is what
our government is working towards as we develop human settlements, because
Human Settlements is not about upgrading squatter camps. It is about
putting up new cities. A question we can ask is: How many cities have been
built in South Africa since Nelson Mandela was released? It’s a challenge.

Lastly, but most importantly, let me emphasise that we will require the
support of the hon members of the NCOP, as well as the Select Committee on
Human Settlements in particular, if we are to succeed in our mission.
Chairperson, I began this presentation by explaining the concept of human
settlements in the context of the Freedom Charter. Let me conclude my
presentation by telling you what I was doing last week, together with a
team of us, on 26 June 2009, the 54th anniversary of the signing of the
Freedom Charter. On that day we were privileged to hand over certificates
to a number of youths – volunteers - who had taken part in our annual Youth
Build programme which encourages young people to get involved in home
construction. In this case the youth volunteers were members of the Eshowe
community in KwaZulu-Natal who participated in new home building schemes in
a suburb called Sunningdale. The houses they built, 76 for that week, were
for the elderly. [Applause.]

Because of good corporate governance we were able to celebrate the creation
of a new community - a community with trees, grass, and vegetables – thanks
to collaboration with the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
and the Department of Water Affairs. We urge you to contribute in getting
this message across. We believe that the NCOP has a duty, not only to hold
this Ministry accountable for the development of human settlements as well
as budgetary expenditures, but to also join us in educating beneficiaries
on the importance of taking care of and maintaining the assets that we
provide people and the environment within which such assets are located.
When you provide people with a house, that becomes an asset and the people
can use it for all sorts of things.

In doing so, we are asking you to echo our message - and we said that
yesterday to the National Assembly - to address the pervasive and negative
entitlement mentality that exists among some individuals within society,
who only see government as something that gives handouts. It is important
for people to also begin to assume responsibility.

Finally, as Team Human Settlements we know the difficulties that confront
us. We understand our mission. We foresee the challenges. It is not going
to be an easy task, particularly given the current economic constraints.
And we know we have to be extremely careful with every cent we spend. After
all, it is public money, contributed by South African taxpayers, both rich
and poor.

We know and trust that we shall have the support of this House, both for
our activities and for the expenditure that is outlined in our Budget Vote.
The commitment that we make in return is that as accountable political
leadership, together with our MECs and our management team, we will put our
shoulders to the wheel on the basis of sound principles and good governance
to ensure success, knowing quite well that this calls for hard work,
diligence and serious commitment. Chairperson, I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Thank you, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: I should have said, Chairperson, with
your permission, to Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, that I’m prepared to
exchange some human settlements for some IDs, because she has quite enough
of those. [Laughter.] I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Thank you, hon Minister. I now call
upon hon member M P Sibande, the chairperson of the Select Committee on
Public Services.

Mr M P SIBANDE: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, I feel honoured once more and again want to thank all South
Africans who voted in the last elections. In Mpumalanga in particular, 1,3
million people cast their vote, with 1,1 million voting for the ANC. These
statistics prove beyond a doubt that the majority of the people in our
province believe in the ANC as the only party that can make their dreams
come true in terms of service delivery.

Malunga Ahloniphekile eSishayamthetho, kunempandana ebizwa ngokuthiwa
ulamthuthu. Ulamnthuthu uphila ngokuphiwa ukudla adle asuthe ehlezi phansi,
bese ezithumela khona lapho ehleli khona. Kwazise belu ukuthi unkabi
akakwazi ngisho nokuzigolela intethe yodwa le.

Nathi-ke kule Ndlu yeSishayamthetho sakubona lokho ngesikhathi sizigayela
amavoti. Thina abakwaKhongolose, ngisho belu u-ANC, sawaxwayisa amanye
ameqembu ukuthi azozisola, azokhihla esikaNandi isililo emva kokhetho futhi
azoyikhotha imbenge yomile ngoba azobuya elambatha. Ngoba thina bakwa ANC,
ngokhetho, asisinisi mahleza - sibhaxabula ngesibhaxu kuphela.

Mangingakhohlwa futhi nokuhalalisela umholi we-DA uNkz Hellen Zille,
ngokufaka igalelo lokwelekelela u-ANC ngokukhankasa ngokuthi axwayise
abantu bakule ngabadi yakithi ngokuthi athi: Stop Zuma. Nangempela abantu
bakithi base besusa uhlamvu u-‘s’ kwase kufundeka kanje: Top Zuma.
[Uhleko.] Ngempela uGedleyihlekisa, uMsholozi, okaNxamalala, uMhlanganyelwa
wakhushulwa waze waphuma phambili ngisho okwesixhumo senyamazane.
Waphumelela ngamalengiso ukuthatha umshini wakhe, waqothula imbokodwe
nesisekelo ngenxa yegunya alinikwe ngabavoti bakule ngabadi yakithi
yaseNingizimu Afrika.

UMsholozi, ngokhetho wazigwazela ibhece nje kwazise phela ukuthi umhlaba
wonke ubunqikaza ngenxa yengwadla nomshophi uKhongolose abebhekene nayo
eyadalwa ngamambuka ayeqembuke ku-ANC. Ngolokho-ke ku-Cope sithi: Indlu
yegagu iyanetha kanti nomthungo wezicathulo uveze obhozo obala kanti futhi
thina sizohlala sinje siwu-ANC. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Hon Members of the Council, there is a type of chicken called the battery
chicken. The battery chicken is fed until it is full without having to get
up, and it relieves itself where it is sitting. It cannot even look for
locusts to eat.
We also saw this in this Council when we were campaigning for votes. The
African National Congress warned the other parties that they were going to
be sorry, that they would cry bitterly after the elections and that they
would have a tough time because they would not get anything. That is
because as the ANC, during the elections, we meant business; we beat
everybody.

Let me not forget to thank the DA leader Ms Helen Zille for helping the ANC
campaign by telling the people of this country to “Stop Zuma”. Our people
removed the letter “S” and then it read “Top Zuma”. [Laughter.] Indeed
Gedleyihlekisa, Msholozi, Nxamalala, Mhlanganyelwa rose to the top like a
fawn. He excelled by taking his machine gun. He conquered all by the
mandate that he was given by the people of our country, South Africa.

Msholozi had an easy win during the elections. The whole world was in limbo
due to the problem which the ANC was facing that was caused by the party
that broke away from the ANC. With those words we say to Cope: He who talks
a great deal achieves nothing. Sweep before your own door; as the ANC we
will remain like this.]

On 9 May this year, during the presidential inauguration, our hon
President, Jacob Zuma, made a commitment to our people and to the world
that “we shall not rest and we shall not falter in our drive to eradicate
poverty.”

Poverty manifests itself in different ways. It is understood to involve
three critical dimensions, namely income, human capital - described as
services and opportunities - and assets. Housing primarily contributes
towards the alleviation of asset poverty. This contribution is to be
strengthened in the new human settlement plan through supporting the
development of sustainable human settlements and the development of housing
assets.

After the 1994 elections the new, democratically elected ANC government
committed itself to developing more liveable, equitable and sustainable
cities. Key elements of this framework included pursuing a more compact
urban form, facilitating higher densities, mixed land use development, and
integrating land use and public transport planning so as to ensure more
diverse and responsive environments while reducing travelling distances.
Despite all these well-intended measures, the inequalities and
inefficiencies of the apartheid space economy have lingered on.

The National Spatial Development Perspective adopted by the Cabinet has
noted that several development programmes, including the housing programme,
are not addressing the distortions of that inherited apartheid space
economy. The Department of Provincial and Local Government has therefore
prepared the draft national urban strategy that proposes a vision of South
African towns and cities which are spatially and socially inclusive, well
designed and developed in an environmentally efficient way. The shift will
be towards a reinvigorated contract with the people and partner
organisations for the achievement of sustainable human settlements.

Sustainable human settlements refer to “well-managed entities in which
economic growth and social development are in balance with the carrying
capacity of the natural systems on which they depend for their existence
and result in sustainable development, wealth creation, poverty alleviation
and equity”. It was then clearly appropriate that the designation of the
old Department of Housing be changed to the new, modern and more
descriptive Department of Human Settlements.

In line with the presidential commitments, we shall provide housing for all
our people. It is therefore totally acceptable that our efforts in this
regard are being - and I shall use harsh words - sabotaged by unscrupulous
entities that would appear to manipulate the prices of building materials.
Only a week ago, it was reported in the national press that the Competition
Commission had raided the premises of several leading cement producers in
an investigation into so-called cartel behaviour in the building material
and construction industries, which have been accused of driving up the cost
of the government’s infrastructure spending programme.

The Competition Commission said that it believes that anticompetitive
behaviour in this market could be substantially increasing the cost of
South Africa’s infrastructure programme with negative effects on the
economy. I think we can safely say that it will, undoubtedly, increase the
cost of house building with extremely negative effects on the housing
programme, and I sincerely hope that this type of behaviour will be nipped
in the bud before too much damage has been done.

Furthermore, monitoring and evaluation becomes a key tool in making sure
that we are uprooting all the so-called vampires who are surviving on
government resources at the expense of poor people. Those vampires include
all constructors who have won tenders and vanish without finishing the
structures, eg in Limpopo, in Mpumalanga at the Dipaleseng Municipality, in
the North West, and in the Eastern Cape in the Amathole District
Municipality in a place called Pedi.

Lapho Ngqongqoshe. Kunezinkinga ngisho nalezi zindlu ezakhiwe, izivalo
zikhona kungathi ngamakhadibhodi. Ngicabanga ukuthi kufanele kwenziwe
okuthile ngalokho ngoba akungabi sengathi kuhlala amagundane lapho.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[There is a problem there, Minister. The houses that have been built have
doors that are like cardboard. I think something must be done about it; it
should not be as if there are mice living there.]

Other problems include constructors who are underpaying their workers,
paying below the average rate in terms of the Labour Relations Act;
constructors who are not paying their workers at all; the allocation of
houses not to the rightful owners; the illegal selling of houses that are
allocated by government; and service providers who are providing goods that
are in a deteriorating condition.

It must be noted that government subsidies have been tripled in order to
assist the poor people, but if government authorities do not take steps to
deal with all the above-mentioned concerns, then all its efforts will be
undermined.

Chairperson, allow me to use this opportunity to mention what happened in
Gert Sibande District Municipality a few days ago. The decision by the
department follows numerous cases of unrest in the municipality. The unrest
has been as a result of protests organised by the community in which the
community has made a number of allegations — underline “allegations” —
against the municipality. Some of these allegations include the
misappropriation of funds, a lack of service delivery, nepotism, poor
implementation of the integrated development plan and a lack of proper
consultation in terms of resource distribution and infrastructure.

Sihlalo, noma-ke lezi zinsolo ezivezwe umphakathi zibalulekile, thina bakwa-
ANC asihambisani nezenzo zodlame ezithunaza isithunzi seqembu kanye nesezwe
lethu laseNingizimu Afrika. Ngoba ... [Kwaphela isikhathi.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, these allegations are serious despite the fact that they were
brought up by the community. We, as the ANC, are against acts of violence
that are tarnishing the dignity of the party and our country, South Africa,
because ... [Time expired.]]

Okay. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr R A LEES: Madam Chair, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, while listening to the hon Minister and the hon
Sibande I had cold shivers. I thought, where did they get my speech from?
They are plagiarising my speech. So, it’s great to hear you saying such
very positive things. Thank you very much. But, nevertheless, I shall
proceed with my speech even if it concurs with yours.

Angisho ukuthi akekho olapha eNdlini namuhla ozokuphika ukuthi ibuhlungu
inhliziyo uma sihamba sibona imijondolo nemikhukhu lapho abantu bethu beh
lala khona. Angisho ukuthi kukhona ozophika lokho na. Akekho. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[I do not think that there is anyone in this House who can deny that when
we go around it is heartbreaking to see the shacks where our people live. I
do not think there is anyone who can deny that. No one can.]

There is no one who can deny the shame of our society where people have to
live in shacks that get flooded, that are crowded and that are totally
unsuitable even as dog kennels.

The wonderful Constitution of our country — the best in the world, I am
told — does not place the responsibility for providing housing solely at
the door of the state. And it’s tremendous to hear the Minister echoing
those remarks.

In the first instance, this policy ignores the initiative of millions of
people who are able, and indeed willing, to participate in the building of
their own homes. It ignores the positive participation of homeowners who
can create real homes and not just houses. It also underutilises and, in
fact, discourages the participation of community-based organisations,
nongovernmental organisations, and the private sector from contributing
their initiatives, energy and resources to provide housing for the poor.

With the best will in the world and given the ever-increasing need for
housing, it is not possible for this government or any government to
provide the number of houses required. And we heard the Minister’s
projections in terms of the billions required as the years progress.

There has been a need for a paradigm shift in the policy. The government
has — as it urgently needs to — accepted that the provision of housing is
not solely its responsibility. Housing must not be seen as being just the
provision of a rudimentary shelter. It must be seen as being part of a
living environment which must include physical, social, and economic
facets, all of which combine to make a house not just a house, but a home
for a family.

The government, clearly, has responsibilities, no doubt about that. First
and foremost, it must guarantee property rights and security of tenure. It
must make ownership of property as easy as possible. The ownership of
property must be extended to those who own none as quickly as possible.

Secondly, the government must put in place an urban planning system which
will ensure a safe environment, a healthy environment and a pleasant
environment. It must discourage the development of slums without stifling
initiative and entrepreneurship. A standard Western style of urban planning
cannot work in our developing society.

The government cannot escape its responsibility to subsidise basic housing
for the poor and the marginalised. This it must of course do. But it must
do this in such a way that these people are part of the community and are
given opportunities to fulfil their potential. They must all become a part
of the open-opportunity society.

The provision of basic services such as clean water, refuse removal and
electricity are self-evident. However, good public transport and good roads
are also required. These must be provided in the most cost-effective way
possible.

What has happened is that the current housing developments have led to a
high level of urban sprawl which, in turn, results in excessively high
costs for the provision of basic services. It also makes the provision of
efficient public transport almost impossible to achieve.

The subsidies paid to public transport get bigger and bigger and yet the
services they provide are inadequate. What is needed are higher density
standards and plot size restrictions on housing developments where state
funds are used. High-density residential accommodation must be provided
alongside major transportation routes.

The creation of public open spaces and other facilities is fundamental to
building communities rather than housing blocks. In the rush to meet
targets of housing numbers in low-cost housing estates, the need for
community facilities has more often than not been ignored and such
developments are sterile and unfriendly. Madam Chair, I shan’t push your
indulgence, but thank you so much for letting me speak. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms L MABIJA: Hon Chairperson, Cabinet Ministers, hon premiers,
distinguished members of this House, ladies and gentlemen ...

... ndi madekwana avhuḓi, a dovha hafhu a vha madekwana ane nda pfa ndi na
dakalo fulu musi Vho Minisiṱa vha Muhasho wa zwa Vhudzulo ha Vhathu vho
amba zwauri vho vha vhe kha fulo ḽa u ṋea pfufo. Hezwo zwi ita uri vhathu
vhashu hangei nnḓa mashangoni vha ṱuṱuwedzee u ita zwinzhi u itela u
swikelela vhutshilo ha khwiṋe kha vhathu vhoṱhe vha Afurika Tshipembe. A
dovha hafhu a vha madekwana ane nda khou sumbedzisa uri ... (Translation of
Tshivenḓa paragraph follows.)

[... good evening, and it is an evening on which I feel happy that the
Minister of Human Settlements said that he was at the campaign to hand over
the awards. That encourages our people out there in the villages to do more
for a better life for all the people of South Africa. It is also an evening
on which I am showing that ...]

... since the democratic government came into being, led by the collective
leadership of the ANC, it is evident that the culture of democracy
permeates every corner of our country. It also reverberates throughout the
workplace and can be felt even in our homes.

I’m bound by South African pride to indicate that South Africans’ decision
to return the ANC to power once again shows that the people of this country
are content with the strides that we have made in the last 15 years.

South Africans, under the wise leadership of President Jacob Zuma, are
confident that we shall do more and that there will be better
implementation of ANC policy, a policy that says all people shall have the
right to live where they choose, be decently housed and bring up their
families in comfort and security.

The principles underlying the ANC housing policy are the following. The ANC
government believes that all citizens of this county have the right to
essential services such as water, sanitation, refuse removal, electricity
and decent housing appropriate to family and individual needs. The
democratic state should do more in undertaking appropriate legislative and
executive action to ensure that these basic needs are met in a progressive
manner.

Given the pervasive poverty and unequal distribution of wealth and land,
the ANC’s housing policy should vigorously promote nonracism and nonsexism
and cater more for the disadvantaged groups such as the very poor, the old
and the disabled. All racially based housing institutions must be replaced
by institutions that are accountable to the people of South Africa. Hostels
should be transformed into family units. To ensure that women’s housing
needs are addressed, their full participation and influence over the
institutions controlling housing must be guaranteed.

A total housing development framework should include the economy,
transport, health, recreation, religion, education, environment, social
welfare policies, policies which facilitate access to jobs and the
restructuring of the apartheid cities, towns and rural areas.

Our housing strategy is based on sustainability in the short, medium and
long term. The ANC government believes that community groups should be able
to participate in the design, implementation and management of their
housing. We therefore advocate the introduction of a housing policy which
encourages and supports community-controlled development initiatives.

Remember, the ANC-led government’s housing policy is more than the delivery
of a product. It is a process that contributes to the cultural, economic
and social development of the entire society and is, therefore, part of our
strategy to improve people’s total living conditions.

Beyond any doubt, I am certain that South Africans witnessed that the
apartheid housing policy focused on the housing needs of middle-income
households at the expense of the disadvantaged. This policy’s biggest
impact was that it resulted in many and varied housing challenges, for
instance the urbanisation of poverty and the proliferation of slums in
urban areas.

To address this, the ANC Ministry of Human Settlements is vigorously
implementing the Breaking New Ground comprehensive plan for the development
of sustainable human settlements, with there being at least one project in
every province that will improve the living conditions of about 103 000
households in informal settlements.

To achieve this goal, hon Minister Sexwale should strive to encourage a
culture of working with a sense of responsibility within the department,
because this must happen and be visible in order to lessen the noise made
by some opposition parties as a weapon. We are also committed to ensuring
that the poor men and women in both urban and rural areas have favourable
access to building credit facilities. We also advocate the restructuring of
the housing finance and subsidies system so as to target those most in need
of assistance.

We reject the privatisation of land for low-income households, as we
believe that it is the state’s responsibility to ensure that low-income
households have easy access to well-located, affordable land while also
emphasising that low-income housing should not be equated or confused with
poor-quality housing.

I have additional measures, or policy proposals, that will need to be
undertaken by the developmental state to support the recommended shift in
funding for housing and human settlements. These are: intervening in the
industry to curb spiralling prices in respect of building materials in
favour of house construction; adopting a central planning approach for the
purposes of directing resource allocation and an overall co-ordinated
response to prevailing socioeconomic trends in a manner that is not
undermined by the regional administrative complex; prioritising
metropolitan areas and large cities for interventions that seek to fast-
track the upgrading of informal settlements and ensure national spatial
restructuring in view of the space economy and preferred development
trajectory. Is my time up? I’m sorry. Thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr B MADIKIZELA (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister, the Deputy
Minister, hon MECs, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, mandibulele ngeli
thuba lokuba ndihlomle ngeBudget Vote no 26 Human Settlement. [Let me thank
you for this opportunity to comment on the Human Settlements Vote, Budget
Vote No 26.]

I would like to begin by reaffirming what the hon Minister, Mr Tokyo
Sexwale, said in terms of his commitment to co-operative governance. He
referred to everyone - himself and the MECs - as the team, which is what we
are, regardless of which party we represent. This is because the issue of
housing cuts across party and colour lines. We must ensure that everything
we do is done primarily to improve service delivery and the lives of the
poor that all of us represent. So, it is very important that we put these
people first.

There is a great deal in Mr Sexwale’s speech that is to be welcomed as we
set about delivering homes for all our people in the province of the
Western Cape. In fact, most of what the Minister said is exactly what I
said in my budget speech two weeks ago. [Interjections.]

Firstly, the hon Minister injected a healthy dose of realism about what we
can achieve with the current constraints we face. It is true that we are
now officially in a recession, a recession that is causing job losses. As
unemployment increases so too will the demand for subsidised housing. It is
also true that we face a severe funding shortfall nationally, which means
that as a province we cannot deliver the number of houses that we would
like to. As the Minister noted, if the current trends continue we will be
faced with a national funding shortfall for housing of about R253 billion
by 2016.

As things currently stand in the Western Cape, with a budget of
R1,5 billion we can only deliver approximately 16 000 houses and 18 000
serviced sites, an untenable situation when you consider that the backlog
in the province is estimated at around 450 000 to 500 000.

Studies conducted by the Western Cape department of local government and
housing indicate that with this trend the backlog in the Western Cape could
have doubled to 800 000 by 2040 owing to migration in the province.

To ensure that, come 2040, we are not in a situation in which the housing
backlog has doubled despite all our efforts, we need to do a number of
things. Some of these were mentioned by the hon Minister today and
yesterday. Firstly, we need to make sure that we get value for money on all
existing housing projects. This means rooting out corruption and political
infighting, things the Minister mentioned here, that can cause the housing
projects to stall, get blocked or fail completely.

As the hon Minister said, corruption remains a major challenge throughout
the housing delivery environment. It is encouraging, therefore, that his
department has strengthened its relationship with the Special Investigating
Unit to take stern action against offenders. This is a process that has
been mirrored in the Western Cape housing department as well.

Secondly, we need to revisit the way in which we deliver houses. We need to
take a long, hard look at whether the current method of housing delivery,
which is primarily through project-linked subsidies for RDP-type housing,
is able to maximise what we can deliver with the resources at our disposal.
In this regard, the national Minister made some very good points about
focusing on in situ upgrading, which I share completely. In fact, it was a
key theme of my budget speech two weeks ago.

Given the extent of the housing backlog, it is crucial that we focus on
what can be achieved with what we have. In situ upgrading of informal
settlements is one way to increase people’s dignity now through providing
them with serviced sites that can be upgraded gradually as more resources
become available.

Another way in which we can achieve more value for money is to look
seriously at the viability of building higher-density structures. I am
aware that there are certain stigmas around building flats instead of
houses, but we need to be realistic about what can be achieved with the
funding we have and the land we have.

If we were to continue with the current low-density model, we would need
enough land to stretch from Cape Town to Mossel Bay, because, currently, in
terms of the backlog, we need about 9 000 hectares of land to be able to
deal with this backlog.

It is this reality we must remind ourselves of as we deliver houses.
Nothing is achieved by raising the expectations of people when it is
impossible to meet those expectations. That is a recipe for conflict that
can be avoided. This is a lesson that the N2 Gateway project has taught us
very clearly.

As we go forward in partnership with the national Department of Housing and
the municipalities of this province, we will remain ever mindful of the
challenges we face. More importantly, we commit ourselves to engaging
constructively with all our stakeholders in finding innovative solutions to
delivering houses for the people of the Western Cape.

I must also add that we share the Minister’s sentiments completely with
regard to the policy changes that he suggested, because we must begin to
have a situation in which all the funding for housing goes into one pot, as
opposed to the current situation.

We must also begin to address the issue of the People’s Housing Process,
PHP, which the hon Mabija just spoke about now – in that we must emphasise
the importance of encouraging our people to be involved in how their houses
are built, so that they take responsibility going forward. With those few
words, I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Prince M M M ZULU: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister and Deputy Minister
and hon members ...

... Ngqongqoshe, kanye nePhini lakho, ngiyakubongela ngoba unikezwe
umsebenzi wokuthi usikhiphe ebugqilini bokuhlala emijondolo. Ngiyazi-ke
ukuthi iminyaka emihlanu yisikhashana nje esincane, singasibuka
kuyisikhathi eside kodwa-ke kuyisikhathi esincane.

Ngoba-ke nibala nezindawo lezi zethu zokudabuka, ngalokho ngithi-ke kuwe
ama-Major stake holders alaphaya kuma-Traditional Councils akhona cishe
ezifundazweni eziyisikhombisa,lokhu okuthiwa ama-Traditional Councils
kunemitheshwana-ke ebusa lezi zindawo zama Traditional Councils ngocela
mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe nama MECs akho ukuba nizifake lezi zinduna emakhaya
ngoba kunemitheshwana engabuye ivimbele abantu bakithi ukuthi bacoshe
intuthuko uma ingalandelekanga.

Ngikufisela inhlanhla-ke okuwukuthi ngoyibona iphela imijondolo eThekwini,
ngoyibona iphela imijondolo eKapa, ngoba ikake iKapa nje nakwamanye
amalokishi akithi ikhona. Bese ngithi-ke kubafowethu nakodadewethu – lokhu
okuthiwa yi-opposition asingakuthathi nje ngokuthi yintwana encane kodwa
yinto eqaphe intandoyeningi yethu – njengezwe elisentandweni yeningi
kufanele ukugxeka kubekhona ngoba uma ungasagxekwa ngeke ubone kahle ukuthi
kuhamba kanjani. Alikho-ke isoka elingenasici ezindaweni zalo. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... Minister and your deputy, I congratulate you because you were given
the task of liberating us from the slavery of living in shacks. I know that
five years is just a short period of time. We can regard it as a long
period of time whereas it is a short period of time.

Since you are referring to our rural localities, I am saying to you the
major stakeholders who are in traditional councils exist in almost seven
provinces. There are rules governing these traditional councils. I request
you hon Minister, and your MECs, to involve headmen in rural areas, because
these rules might prevent our people from being assisted with development
if they are not looked into.

I wish you luck, hoping that I will see fewer shacks in eThekwini. I can
see that fewer shacks are being built in Cape Town. The shacks that you see
surrounding Cape Town are also there in our townships. Let me also say to
my brothers and sisters that we do not have to undermine what is referred
to as the opposition and regard it as a minor thing, because it is
something that safeguards our democracy. In a democratic country there
should be criticism, because if you are not criticised you will not know
whether you are on the right track or not, since there is no one who is
perfect.]

Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, it is a great honour
to have this opportunity to address this august House today on this Budget
Vote. Allow me, Chairperson, to greet the Minister of Human Settlements,
the hon Tokyo Sexwale, whom I welcomed yesterday in the National Assembly
to this vibrant Human Settlements family.

I also recognise the presence of the Chief Whip and the Deputy Chairperson
of the National Council of Provinces. I also welcome in our midst the
chairperson of the Select Committee on Public Services, the hon member Pat
Sibande. I must also welcome the Director-General of Human Settlements Dr
Benny Kotsoane and his team, officials from our department and honourable
guests, the Western Cape MEC Bonginkosi Madikizela, and Salga councillor
Clarence Johnson.

This Budget Vote takes place as we mark the 54th anniversary of the Freedom
Charter, the historic document founded by the people of South Africa from
all walks of life. It also takes place as we celebrate the 33rd anniversary
of 1976, a watershed year, which marks the heroic action by students of the
class of 1976 whose clear message was “Genoeg is genoeg” [Enough is
enough]. Hence, we welcome the initiative by the Department of Human
Settlements in marking this anniversary on 26 June 2009 at Eshowe in
KwaZulu-Natal with Youth Build, a programme in which young people build
housing units for the elderly.

As we embark on the war against poverty, we reiterate and commit ourselves
to the assertions of the Freedom Charter of “housing, security and comfort
for all”. This developmental state led by the ANC has taken upon itself the
translating of these dreams into a reality. As we execute our new mandate,
we will be building on the foundation laid by the Breaking New Ground
policy.

We are unapologetic in asserting that planning together, budgeting together
and co-ordinating together remain the prerequisites and non-negotiables for
the realisation of integrated human settlements. We therefore appeal to the
National Council of Provinces to help us co-ordinate these complex planning
processes.

The department will also be hard at work streamlining funding mechanisms so
that housing grants are consolidated into a single grant that responds to
human settlement requirements. There is also a need to eliminate
unnecessary bottlenecks, contractors must be paid on time and EIAs —
environmental impact assessments — must not be delayed.

The provision of homes to our people cannot be the responsibility of
government alone. We need the participation of all sectors of our society.
Working together, we can do more. The people must be at the centre of
everything we do. Beneficiaries must be active participants in the
provision of human settlements. As we build integrated human settlements,
we must also build a responsible citizenry. I am certain that the NCOP will
take a special interest in its oversight role in addressing issues of a
responsible society. This country can ill afford the kinds of
demonstrations we have recently witnessed in the Western Cape with regard
to the N2 Gateway project.

Inasmuch as this government sympathises and understands the people’s level
of poverty, we certainly cannot promote lawlessness. Services must be paid
for, otherwise they will not be sustainable. Who in this House stays in a
house or a flat they do not pay for? This is the kind of consumer education
we would like the NCOP to help us address. Tenants of the N2 Gateway
project have a contractual agreement. They have to pay rent; they qualify
as having to pay rent — they are not indigent. There is an issue with
subletting, meaning that there are people in those houses who do not
qualify – who occupy those houses illegally.

The role of emerging contractors cannot be overemphasised. Unfortunately,
they have a tendency to continue emerging ad infinitum. Something must be
done to remedy this situation, but we will uproot fly-by-nights in the
building industry. We need contractors who are prepared to contribute
constructively so that government gets value for money.

We commend the continued contribution made by the financial sector, but
more needs to be done in order to enhance this partnership. Of course, we
do know that profit margins are low in the low-cost housing environment,
but the establishment of the Housing Development Agency will bring about
human settlements housing delivery in economies of scale. This will only be
realised with the active participation of the private sector, particularly
in the rolling out of housing rental stock and bonded houses.

In light of this, there is a need to establish a macro-organisational
framework in order to facilitate a convergence of different government
mandates for human settlement development. This is underpinned by a set of
principles that are necessary for strengthening co-ordination in
government.

The priorities of the framework include: to compile a national development
plan for human settlements, produce settlement level plans and promote
innovative project development; to align funding streams and existing built-
environment-related grants; and to ensure, at an implementation level,
effective project management and capacity development which must also speak
to the issues of monitoring, evaluation and risk management.

In the process of providing proper homes for our people, we will also
endeavour to provide community residential units. We will continue to
revisit the issue of hostel redevelopment. We also need to promote
inclusionary housing, meaning that where there is property development at
least 20% of that development should be set aside for low-cost housing.

In response to the government’s rural development drive, the department
will introduce in the current financial year a rural housing subsidy
voucher programme to assist rural households to source building materials
for building their own homes or even for incrementally improving their
homes.

I am happy to announce that there is a newly appointed council of the
National Home Builders Registration Council, NHBRC, chaired by Ms Granny
Seape. It is critical that the NHBRC focus on issues of quality and strict
adherence to building norms and standards as spelt out in the Revised
National Housing Code. It must also make its presence felt in all provinces
so that all human settlement projects are registered with the NHBRC.

This entity must be able to address the complaints the housing consumers
timeously. Failure to do this results in the payment of huge sums of money
to fix structural defects that would have cost less had the matter been
dealt with appropriately. The inspectors must inspect houses at all stages
of housing development, especially at the foundation level. We call upon
all provinces to beef up the inspectorate and ensure that more inspectors
are trained. Prevention is better than cure and always saves costs.

We welcome the establishment of the Housing Development Agency, HDA,
launched in March 2009, which will assist in fast-tracking the delivery of
integrated human settlements. In the main, the HDA will primarily support
the provinces and municipalities in the acquisition of land. This support
will be delivered through implementation protocols developed with all
parties within an established intergovernmental relationship framework. Our
objective is to do away with unnecessary bottlenecks in order to fast-track
human settlement delivery.

UMongameli welizwe obekekileyo uJacob Zuma kwiintetha azenzileyo apha e
Palamente ubeke phambili ukubaluleka kolwakhiwo lwamakhaya. Ukhuthaze onke
amasebe ukuba asebenzisane, ahlangabezane ekufezekiseni amaphupha oluntu.
Eli sebe ayilosebe nje lezindlu, lisebe elijongene nazo zonke iimfuno
zokuhlala kakuhle koluntu ukwenzel’ ukuba amakhaya akhiwe kwiindawo
ezikufutshane nempangelo.

Sithi makusetyenziswane, sihlaba ikhwelo kuye wonke ubani- oosomashishini
abasakhasayo, kuSanco nakubo bonke abahlali ukuba eli sebe lizimisele
ukusebenzisana nabo bonke abantu, eli sebe likhokelwa nguMphathiswa uTokyo
Sexwale.

Mawethu, sithi huntshu kubantu abakha izindlu ngenkqubo ye-PHP, sifuna
ukuyixhasa ngakumbi le nkqubo. Lo rhulumente ukhokelwa yi-ANC uyakhathala
ngakumbi ngabantu, uthi abantu baya kulawula. Masisebenzisane mawethu silwe
indlala. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The hon President of the country, Jacob Zuma, in the speeches he made in
Parliament has stressed the importance of building homes. He encouraged all
the departments to work together, and to help each other in achieving the
dreams of the people. This is not just the department of houses, but the
department that caters for all the needs related to human settlement so
that houses are built closer to the workplaces.

We are saying let us work together; we invite everybody - the upcoming
entrepreneurs, Sanco and the community at large. This department is
committed to working with everyone and it is led by Minister Tokyo Sexwale.

Hon members, we congratulate the people who build houses through the PHP
programme, and we would like to support this programme more. The ANC-led
government cares more about the people and says, “The people shall govern”.
Let us work together to fight hunger.]

This Ministry is committed to making sure that the Breaking New Ground
pilot projects identified in all provinces go ahead as planned. We will
also ensure that there is in situ upgrading of informal settlements in all
provinces. The time has come for all peace-loving South Africans to join
hands with the Team Human Settlements on its journey to make sure poverty
will be history. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms L HLONGWA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, once more, we are grateful to be
given an opportunity to say a few things with regard to the Minister’s
budget speech today.

Sifisa ukuqala ngokubongela uNgqongqoshe neSekela lakhe ekuqokweni
ezikhundleni ezibaluleke kakhulu. NjengeKwaZulu-Natali sizobasekela kakhulu
ekwenzeni isiqiniseko sokuthi loko okushiwo usomqulu wokhetho lombutho
wesizwe uKhongolose kuyafezekiswa kuleminyaka emihlanu ezayo. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We would like to start by congratulating the Minister and his deputy on
being elected to such important positions. As KwaZulu-Natal, we will
support them in ensuring that what is contained in the ANC manifesto is
achieved in the next five years.]

KwaZulu-Natal is a rural province, but a province with great potential to
develop into a haven in South Africa. Human settlement development is again
at the centre of government under the leadership of the hon President, His
Excellency J G Zuma.

The delivery of decent houses to our people requires a co-ordinated effort
between the provinces and the municipalities, which in this case is minimal
due to power struggles. We noted from the Minister’s speech that in order
to have human settlements a new approach needs to be adopted. A paradigm
shift beyond housing is needed, and our understanding, as KwaZulu-Natal, is
that we need more of a political will first, then implementation.

We are, however, proud to stand here and salute the previous MEC, Comrade
Mike Mabuyakhulu, on being the first MEC to pioneer the slums clearance Act
in line with the Millennium Development Goal of eradicating slums by 2014.
Although the department was challenged in a court of law by the shack-
dwellers who perceived the move to be unconstitutional, we are very aware
that shack lords were behind some of these shenanigans in that they made
money out of poor people.

Our task as the provincial government is to defend the poor and better the
lives of all. As we said at our 2007 conference, we are advancing towards a
caring society. We have no intention of chasing these people out of their
homes, but we have an obligation as government, as prescribed in our
Constitution, to restore dignity through decent shelter.

The province has ventured into a new approach of public-private
partnerships to enhance service delivery and supplement the current
government programme, and we are happy to hear from the Minister’s speech
that he supports this initiative.

A classic example is that of Eshowe, which the Minister has referred to,
where about 76 houses were built by our youth for elderly people. This is
really what is espoused in the Freedom Charter and we are very grateful
that you came down to our province to hand over these projects to needy
families. We appreciate the R150 million allocated to disaster management
relief for the province, because in the past we have had unprecedented
disasters that we had not planned for, which claimed lives and resulted in
the current overexpenditure we are servicing as a province.

The province, with its limited budget, is committed to the delivery of
quality housing by ensuring that, prior to handing-over functions, the
houses are subject to various quality tests to try to minimise the
exploitation of government resources by unscrupulous businesspeople. We
want to hold the creators of the workmanship accountable for their actions,
and we shall not delay in acting against corrupt people, either as builders
or in the department itself.

We want to request the Minister to hold an indaba with all the
stakeholders, at which housing matters are ironed out, because shack
dwellers think that if we build houses for people, we are taking away what
is theirs. We are saying, as the province of KwaZulu-Natal, that local
government must be brought to the party, so that we iron out the issue of
waiting lists, where we see councillors selling houses, and those
councillors, most of the time, are in cahoots with department officials. We
want this to come to an end.

The province of KwaZulu-Natal recently launched the rural housing
development project in the northern part of KwaZulu-Natal to accelerate
decent housing. This project is being contested by traditional leaders who
perceive this as a means to create townships in their areas of
jurisdiction. Once again, we want to advise the Minister that maybe there
is going to be a need for him and his colleagues in the Department of Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs to meet and develop a workable
plan, so that we avert this challenge before it spills over into other
provinces.

Siyafisa Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe ukuthi uselekelele lapha KwaZulu-Natali
sinabantu abaningi abaxhamula ekwakheni izindlu kodwa asibazi ukuthi
bangobani. Sifisa ukuthi usinike uhlaka lwabantu abakha izindlu ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We wish, hon Minister, that you could assist us in KwaZulu-Natal; we have
people who benefit from building houses, but we don’t know who they are. We
wish that you, Minister, could give us a database of people who build
houses ...]

... in terms of gender, age and demographics, for us as the ANC to gauge if
we really are denting unemployment and bringing about work redistribution.

The province is currently pioneering a project with regard to an accredited
military veterans’ policy in line with the ANC’s Polokwane conference
resolutions to provide shelter to these families, who, in hard times,
fought for us to attain this democracy we boast about today. Although we
are facing a challenge in this area, as a province we are not going to
despair.

We are facing a challenge in the area of hostel redevelopment to recreate
new human settlements for families. This programme is moving at a slower
pace and it needs more funding. We, therefore, want to plead again here
that in future we be allocated more money towards this project for us to
realise the Freedom Charter’s vision.

In conclusion, the province is currently embarking on the enhancement of
the research unit to explore other alternative building practices which are
both cost-effective and ensure quality, especially at this time of
recession. We hope to have collected information in this regard at least by
the end of this year, so that, when we start next year, we will have this
programme ready for implementation.

We feel that we need to emphasise that money allocated to housing as a vote
in our province is not enough. Therefore, this hinders us from building
more decent human settlements over a five-year period. But we are very
grateful for what we have been allocated. In this term, we have committed
some money to the training and development of both women and the youth to
encounter the economic downturn and for them to be able to create jobs for
themselves. We welcome the budget by the Minister and we wish you well.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Cllr C JOHNSON (Salga): Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister Sexwale, hon
Deputy Minister Zoe Kota-Fredericks, hon Members of the National Council of
Provinces, please allow me to convey greetings from our chairperson,
councillor and Mayor of the City of Johannesburg, Mayor Masondo, and the
Salga leadership to you on this historic occasion of the first Budget Vote
for the Department of Human Settlements.

If we traverse our landscape of South Africa, we see the historic Cape
Dutch houses. We see the decorative Ndebele houses, the humble stick-and-
mud houses in the eastern part of our country and the so-called
“matjieshuise” (mat huts) of Namaqualand. We believe that this is where our
people have built their own houses. I trust that during your term of office
you will bring hope and happiness to our citizens, having gained an almost
two-thirds majority, and I hope that nobody is going to stop you when you
get going.

If we take the intent of the Fourth Parliament, it is a time for renewal.
It is a time for fresh implementation and a new style of governance. It is
a time for innovation, new ideas and approaches to turn around the big
backlog that we have. Funding has been secured, promises have been made and
that funding will realise 2,2 million houses. We know that Minister Sexwale
is the only Minister in terms of implementation who needs to deliver on
time and on budget and a job well done. So, therefore, Minister, you will
be the only Minister in terms of the construction and home-building
industry who will be receiving happy letters.

Housing delivery is not merely about the delivery of houses, and we welcome
the fact that intergovernmental relations have been secured through the
integrated approach to human settlements. At Salga, we have also notices
the efforts of our international donor community in so far as as the Dutch
are concerned, who directly fund certain project on social housing, and
were present yesterday. Our Cuban compatriots were also present at your
Budget Vote debate yesterday.

We have also noticed that initiatives to build the capacity of the
councillors through the Wits Business School have ensured that certain
blocked projects have become unblocked. These are all matters that happened
last year. I also believe that the unfinished business related to the
public participation processes of the NCOP will be attended to.

In order to create sustainable human settlements, one needs to align
housing delivery with other strategies such as infrastructure, Public Works
programmes and basic services. With particular regard to basic services,
reference has been made to climate change and the very high cost of
services like water and electricity.

Many of these facilities are currently the mandate of municipalities.
Therefore, it would be logical for municipalities to also carry the
responsibility for the delivery of houses, as part of and aligned with all
other aspects of the built environment. Furthermore, municipalities serve
as a logical site for the effective alignment of interdepartmental and
intragovernmental funding streams that eventually contribute towards the
development of sustainable human settlements.
I can share with you that in the many meetings on integrated development
plans, the first thing that is said, is: “Mr Mayor, I don’t have a house,”
or, “Mr Mayor, I am struggling.” “Ek kry swaar; ons trek swaar.” [I am
struggling; we are having a difficult time.] These are the words uttered by
citizens and we have the ability to respond to them.

Municipalities form the sphere of government that is closest to the
communities and are, in most instances, the implementing agents for
national and provincial government. We are, therefore, able to respond to
local needs and to deliver tailor-made services. The other matters
regarding consumer services, etc, can be attended to at local government
level.

It is often said that municipalities do not have the capacity to perform
the housing function. Yet, until now, municipalities have not been granted
the responsibility of, or the funding for, housing and, therefore, have not
needed to build their capacity for housing. Once given the full mandate
with the necessary funding and the time to build their capacity,
municipalities will be able to perform the function, as has been shown with
other municipal functions in the past. This position we align with our
linkage to united cities and local governments; we align it to the policy
statements of the ruling party and, as such, we will pursue this matter of
policy alignment.

Some municipalities, despite the fact that they do not have a funded
housing mandate, see housing as their responsibility to their constituents
and use municipal funding for the delivery of sustainable human
settlements. We have demonstrated clearly that we do have the capacity to
deliver.

In September 2005 a policy framework for the accreditation of
municipalities to perform housing functions was adopted. Eighteen
municipalities were prioritised for accreditation. Until now, no
municipality has even been assigned functions for level 1 accreditation.

In addition, the housing Minmec resolved that the accreditation process
will never go beyond level 2, not because of capacity constraints on the
part of municipalities, but because it may mean assigning the function to
municipalities – something which the provincial departments of housing are
opposed to. This is a matter of concern to Salga. It is clear that the
accreditation process is not working. There is a need to consider the
devolution of the function to municipalities.

Last year, Cabinet took a decision to the effect that the housing function
should devolve to municipalities. We hold the view that the Minmec will not
assign the function to municipalities; it will only delegate functions in
terms of accreditation levels 1 and 2. Accreditation will maintain the
current division of responsibilities for housing between the provincial and
local governments and will not improve the efficiency of delivery.

We are really concerned about this. Change needs to happen at the point of
delivery, preferably at the project implementation level and not at the
higher levels. Assignment of the delivery function to municipalities
provides an opportunity for provinces to monitor and supervise delivery,
and even intervene in municipalities and develop appropriate capacity to
focus on this function. This is in line with the constitutional
architecture.

Chairperson, Salga supports this Budget Vote No 26 – Housing. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mr Z MLENZANA: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers and hon
members and the House at large, good evening. Let me start by agreeing with
the Minister that the people of South Africa adopted a living document, the
Freedom Charter, in 1955. Secondly, I agree with the Deputy Minister about
the approach to rural housing. Thirdly, hon Minister, your budget is a
little bit skewed. More money goes to operational expenditure than to
capital expenditure.

I don’t want to comment on whether I am giving my support or not. There
should be continuous support to provinces by the national department,
particularly by the Eastern Cape. If you look at the Alfred Nzo and O R
Tambo districts, we intend supporting you by feeding you reports, hon
Minister.

The focus should be on the implementation of cohousing. The word
“cohousing” may not be common in South Africa, but is taking off all over
the world. By being ecologically sensitive, building a community before the
houses are built, incorporating recycling, compensating for smaller houses
by increasing common facilities, establishing gardens and orchards, sharing
transport, using alternative energy, providing fully for the total
supervision of young children, taking common responsibility for security,
making room for adults and orphans and by generally ensuring that residents
leave only a tiny carbon footprint, cohousing is going in the direction the
world is going in. Cohousing accommodates people, creates viable
communities, preserves the environment, creates job opportunities,
optimises travel arrangements, and decreases the demand for health care.

For a government that is challenged daily to provide service delivery,
cohousing will deal with sanitation through having package plants on site,
recycling water, tapping the wind and sun for energy and becoming self-
sustaining. The provision of bulk services could be slashed by 80% or more.

In conclusion, I suggest that the policy-makers should help in taking us
forward rather than keeping us back. Many townships look more dismal than
they did at the height of apartheid. That is a damning indictment against
this department.

Now that the name of the department has been changed, let fundamental
thinking around housing also change. We hope that with the changing of the
name, a lot is going to change. We also hope that when we are talking about
human settlements there will be security, there will be comfort and the
people of South Africa will also enjoy the fruits of their labour as
enshrined in their struggle, particularly, on 25 and 26 June 1955. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, it has
become a natural trend that houses rapidly deteriorate owing to poor
workmanship and poor quality in many areas in our country.

In the 1985 uprising we fought against these “pondokkies” [huts], but we
are still finding them today in the areas in which we grew up. We need to
restore the dignity of our people. We need to stop building houses like in
Soul City and Dakota in the Northern Cape. We need to start building decent
houses for our people.

It is high time that government gets serious about bridging the divide and
creating communities in which the rich and the poor can live side by side.
I hope that the government and the ruling party can change this policy.
Stop building 40m2 houses and start building 74m2 houses so that people can
have some dignity. [Interjections.]

Bou huise waarop mense kan trots wees en wat as sekuriteit by die bank kan
dien. [Build houses that people can be proud of and that could serve as
security at the bank.]

We need to build sustainable housing that is energy efficient.

Hou op om swak gehalte materiaal, swak balke en sinke te gebruik. Te veel
sand word saam met die sement gebruik - tien kruiwaens sand en een sak
sement – die huis sal nie so hou nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Stop using materials of poor quality, such as beams and corrugated sheets
of poor quality. Too much sand is being used when mixing the cement — ten
wheelbarrows of sand and one bag of cement — the house will not last this
way.]

Emphasis must be placed on integrated human settlements.

Bou ten minste ’n waardevolle huis. [At least build a decent house.]

These settlements must include infrastructure such as roads, transport,
electricity, water, refuse removal, community facilities, schools, shops
and recreational areas.

During the public hearings on this Budget Vote it was discovered that the
Rural Housing Loan Fund, that claims to be a “national wholesale housing
institution”, had failed the rural community dismally in terms of its
disbursements and geographic allocations. With regard to its national loan
assistance budget, the fund gave 0% to the Northern Cape; 3% to the Free
State; 6% to Limpopo; and 8% to the Eastern Cape. The bulk of the loan fund
was utilised in Gauteng, which received 31%. We must start getting serious
about the country and we must start getting serious about the people of
South Africa in order to uplift them. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Chair, hon Minister and Deputy
Minister, I must say to the Deputy Minister that I think she probably feels
very lonely when she looks at the gender composition of the delegation. She
must be very lonely. Nevertheless, I must also say that I find it very
interesting for the hon Gunda to have spoken in the manner that he did.
Being from the same province, I know that the hon Gunda’s construction
company has been declared insolvent precisely because of the issues he
raised. So that is very interesting, Chair.

I also find quite interesting the way in which the DA and Cope in
particular approached the debate. It reminded me of the Nationalist Party.
The Nationalist Party, in fact, adopted the Freedom Charter as not only
their living, but guiding document.

Immediately after the Freedom Charter, the Nationalist Party went to their
general council and declared that there was no sense in their existence,
because the Freedom Charter and the ANC were the most relevant vehicles to
follow. So, they are probably trying to say to us that, yes, of course, the
ANC ... [Interjections.] Of course it is; it is.

I pity the MEC from the Western Cape, if he is still the MEC, and Helen
Zille has not dismissed him already, because he agreed with the Minister’s
speech, and the Minister premised his entire speech on the Freedom Charter,
which Helen Zille does not agree with. That is why I wonder if he has not
already been dismissed.

Yes, of course, hon Lees, the ANC will always be the first organisation to
accept critique, precisely because the ANC is guided by a very fundamental
principle of self-criticism. We don’t wait for the opposition to criticise
us, but instead are upfront. Where we are doing well, we’ll say we are
doing well. Where we don’t do well, we’ll say we don’t do well — and that’s
exactly what our hon Minister did.

He made an assessment and he accepted that, yes, of course, there are
certain things that did not go well and that there are certain things that
did go well. There are areas the ANC-led government needs to improve in
order to ensure that the lives of our people improve for the better in this
particular dispensation.

The chairperson of the select committee also emphasised this issue, because
it’s a matter that really did not go well with us as a committee. One of
the challenges facing the country, as we move towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goal of halving poverty, and that the ANC has
identified, is the question of the aggressive creation of employment
through infrastructure development.

We are faced with global economic challenges. Yes, of course, we are seeing
unscrupulous behavioural patterns emerging not only in South Africa, but in
the world, and these patterns are also right on the doorstep of South
Africa, on its borders. As a result, you will see that the infrastructure
instruments we are going to need in order to advance or expand our
programme of ensuring that we create employment for our people are going to
be compromised. It is, therefore, important that the department be very
sharp in ensuring that, as we deal with this particular issue, we do not do
anything wrong.

For us as the committee there is the issue of rural housing development. We
have seen a particular pattern, of course. We want to develop or change the
structure and fibre of rural areas in the townships – change the kind of
house we are building in these particular areas.

I would like to give examples of a number of areas, but, in this instance,
let’s take the North West where you will find a village with four-roomed
RDP-structured houses. Our people in these particular areas do not want to
move into these houses, because these are not the type of houses they want.
They believe that the rural or village nature of their areas must be
preserved. So, we think, as a committee, that it is important to look very
carefully into this particular area or we’ll end up with a situation in
which we are left with houses that are not occupied by people who qualify
to occupy these houses.

We have also realised as a committee – Chair and hon Minister - that the
bulk of the budget of the department goes to provinces through transfers
and that there is a decline in your budget - even after your annual report
or the previous department’s annual report. The difficulties the department
experienced through intergovernmental relations in housing provision are
acknowledged. We still find a decrease in the subprogramme as allocated. We
would have expected that, having identified this as a problem, the
department would have increased the budget in order to increase the
capacity of provinces to improve the capacity of municipalities in the
provision of houses.

So, I think this is an issue that the department needs to look at
seriously, because that particular subprogramme dealing with
intergovernmental relations needs to be beefed up to ensure that your
provinces are capacitated and that your municipalities are capacitated.
Also, this will give the necessary support to your contractors in our
provinces and so forth.

Linked to that is the question of the President’s statement committing the
administration to the creation of 500 000 jobs by December through the
Expanded Public Works Programme. We are saying that the department is not
really telling us exactly what the buy-in is. What exactly is the
department going to do to ensure that it contributes towards the creation
of these 500 000 jobs?

We need to strengthen our capacity or involvement in building co-operatives
to ensure that young people form themselves into co-operatives, for
example, in brick-making, in plumbing or in whatever activity has to do
with the process of building or the building environment. Thank you very
much, Chairperson. As the ANC we support the Vote and hope that the
department will do well. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, considering that this House
has been in session for the purpose of accommodating three Votes,  namely
Basic Education, Home Affairs and Human Settlements, I am astounded at the
energy that is displayed by the hon Tau. [Laughter.] I had thought that by
now he would be very fatigued, but it is very clear that the NCOP rocks.
[Laughter.]

Let me utilise the few minutes that I have to respond to some of the issues
and maybe say something as a parting shot. From the outset I just want to
place on record that we are not responding to these issues as a finality.
We will be engaging with hon members from time to time in the process of
serving our people, so I am not going to respond as a way of saying how
wise or clever one can be in dealing with issues that have been raised. It
is open season for communication and our office is open to be interfaced
with. The Deputy Minister is here, as well as the officials. I am quite
accessible. I am just across the street from here so that I will constantly
be around as a student of this House.

I want to reiterate that I know the budget is more focused on housing. That
is how it is right now, but there will be a need for us to make that
critical paradigm shift. It is about human settlements. I hope more of us
will begin to learn to pronounce “human settlements” with an “s”. Even some
of the members in my old office keep on saying “human settlement”. It is
about settlements.

I posed a question earlier. Nineteen years since Nelson Mandela was
released, or 15 years into democracy, how many towns have been built?
Johannesburg was constructed, and under apartheid they went on to build
Sandton, a very viable satellite city. Then there is Randburg. And around
Cape Town there are also other towns. Human settlements, once again, is not
about glorifying squatter camps and putting up townships.

The partnership that I want to have with you as your Minister and
representative in the Cabinet is that we are here to build real
settlements, so that in this century of urbanisation, as was articulated by
the United Nations Habitat Conference, this country will move and change in
order to become a developed country. The day we can say that South Africa
is developed will be the day that we have arrived. It will mean that the
cities have gone into the countryside.

I appreciate the comments that were made regarding the development of the
countryside insofar as we are co-operating with the hon Sicelo Shiceka’s
Ministry for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. The hon Zulu
asked us to think about that. He said that we needed to link up with
traditional leaders. That is why the policy of the ruling party is
beginning to emphasise rural development. Mistakes were made by ignoring
the fact that the rural areas contain over 60% of our citizens. That is why
they keep coming to the cities. Our having to clear the squatter camps and
the informal settlements is not the main mission. That is not the main
mission.

It is an irritation to the plans, because people have arrived there and are
squatting. They are telling us there is something they want. That goes for
the people of old age too, who would like to have that human dignity which
is mentioned in the very first line of the first chapter of our
Constitution. The people are squatting next to the highways because they
want to be near transportation and electricity. They also want to be next
to schools, their places of work and shopping malls. They are telling us
something and we are, therefore, answering.

We ourselves are not going to do this within five or ten years. It is a
long, long journey. We say that we are building houses equal to the
Chinese, but don’t change the numbers, let’s change the quality. I normally
speak of a journey of 1 000 miles, that there is always the first step.
This government, this NCOP, this National Assembly, the Cabinet, we have
now started on this footing. It is something altogether new. This is a call
to change the face of this country.

The reason I accepted this mission is that it goes beyond housing. When
President Zuma asked me to serve in his Cabinet, I had been doing
exceptionally well in the private sector, at the level of our operations
within the JSE and in mining and so on. By taking on this mission I was
saying that, whereas in the previous 10 years I had been working with the
wealthiest of the wealthy, it was time for me to walk side by side in the
company of the poor. I see this as a mission and I want hon members to
understand that this is something I am taking on with passion.

I want to comment on one or two things that were raised here. Please be
assured that we want quality to the extent that we are dealing with
informal settlements. That is why the National Home builders Registration
Council is so important to us. We accept the very important thing which the
hon Sibande has said. And we have at least apologised for the fact that we
took your speech. [Interjections.] But, that is how it is. If there’s
commonality between what you are going to say and what we are saying, then
it shows that we are living in one country. Of course, working together we
can do more and be victorious.

Somebody said that the hon Madikizela is now on that side, in Cope, and
that he won’t be fired by Helen Zille. Our deliberations are like chalk and
cheese. It looks like some of us come from Jupiter and others are from Mars
- we are very far away from one another. The purpose of sitting and
debating in this House is to interrogate ideas so that we can find
commonality. There will be differences, as was said by the hon Zulu from
the IFP. He said that we must also accept criticism.

Uthe kithi nsizwa sibokwamukela ukugxekwa. Uma sizohlala sizwana sonke
isikhathi kuyobe sengathi singabadayisi. [You said we must accept
criticism. If we always get along well with each other we will be perceived
as traitors.]

There will be differences. That’s the reason we are here. That’s all we do
in Parliament - we debate. It’s all about words, words and words. But those
words are interrogating actions and activity so that the best ideas around
actions and activity for products can always succeed.

There is an example we were told about. I asked the hon Mlenzana about the
cohousing he mentioned in his speech. I looked at what he was saying. As he
indicated, cohousing comes from Vietnam. It is actually human settlements,
and that’s what we are doing here. That’s why the Vietnamese economy, after
the war with the expulsion of the Americans, has been growing at a
phenomenal rate. They’ve been at 9% for the past 11 years. Now they’re at
15% and so on, because of the kind of human settlements they are putting
up.

The way we drive it, human settlements are also about the economy. They are
right at the centre of the economy, because when you build houses which are
the core and key component of human settlements, it is all about mining. A
lot of hon members don’t realise that. It is about the roof, whether it is
made of iron or tiles, whether it is bricks or iron. A lot of iron and iron
ore are produced. There is manganese and cobalt. All these things have to
be mined and, therefore, housing construction stimulates growth in the
economy, especially in the mining sector. It is a dynamo.

In so far as manufacturing is concerned, the doors, the frames, the
windows, the tiles and all the other equipment one finds inside the house
that is associated with production - all of it - has a multiplying effect.
Then we buy curtains, carpets and kitchenware, all of which stimulate
growth in retail and wholesale. It lies right at the centre of the economy,
contributing to job creation, employment and also to asset ownership.

The Deputy Minister has dealt with other critical issues. We are going to
be co-operating with the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform as
well as the Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs.
Those are very key Ministers. Those are more than just Ministries. Look at
how the hon Nkwinti in Rural Development has to deal with everything that
is out there in the countryside, from which we all steer clear and only go
to visit when we need some fresh air. And the hon Sicelo Shiceka deals with
the whole question of co-operative governance – that’s Chapter 3 of the
Constitution – as well as the traditional leaders. We are taking them on
board and taking them seriously, because they can create stumbling blocks
and bottlenecks if we don’t work with them with regard to development.

The hon Gunda said that we must make sure everything is integrated. Yes,
human settlements is about integration and about holistic development. It
is about making sure that if you have houses here, you ask questions. Where
are the schools? Where is Home Affairs? The hon Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma said
the other day that they want to put a Home Affairs office in our
settlements. Why should people have to go far from where they stay to find
a mall, Home Affairs, schools, a clinic and all these other amenities? That
destroys something very critical which people have, namely disposable
income.

Once they have their wages, after all the deductions, it must be for their
own living. That is their disposable income. Imagine how many people are
spending a lot of money, like one hon member indicated, on travelling this
way to the north to look for a Home Affairs office 8 km away, on travelling
the other way to send the children to school, and on travelling another way
to work. Therefore, when you bring investments to where people are, that is
when cities begin to grow. That is when people appreciate that now they can
have a double storey, because land has to be developed in an intensified
manner. That’s how you start having the development of another city. That’s
where we are going. It is not really about glorifying squatter camps.

As I said, we are not trying to answer everything. People are tired. We
have been here for the whole day. I want to congratulate the management
which came down here from Pretoria with me. They have been here for two
days and it is time for those ladies and gentlemen to go back to their
families tonight. We want to thank hon members for giving us a hearing and
their support. And, again, regarding every penny paid under my leadership,
we are not going to allow corruption. Every penny that is being spent comes
from poor people. The rich can always find insurance for their money, but
the poor people are not insured. They are the people who we have to fight
for while making your words here credible and your support for us worthy. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 9 – Public Service and Administration:

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson and
members of the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs, chairperson and members of the SA Local Government Association, my
counterpart the Minister of Public Functions from the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Mr Botoro Bodias, distinguished guests, our senior leadership of
the Public Service and ladies and gentlemen, vamanana, vatatana, vaboti,
vasesi; riperile n’wana manana [mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters; good
evening to you and to my sibling].

Yesterday we addressed the National Assembly where we outlined our
programme of activities through all the portfolios over which we have
executive authority to account to Parliament. In doing so, we stated our
priorities, which included the following: improving the capacity and
efficacy of the state; improving the delivery and quality of public
services provided; ensuring honesty and transparency; sustaining
participatory governance; and promoting international relations and co-
operation. We have also analysed the financial resources year-to-date
expenditure actuals, on the basis of which we communicated a year-end
projected expenditure of 96%.

We have finally committed ourselves to the following plan of activities
over the given period. By next week, we will have pronounced the final
position on the implementation of the occupation-specific dispensation,
OSD, after a deadline we set yesterday, 30 June 2009. We will communicate a
time-bound 2009-10 salary negotiation programme soon - and we can assure
hon members that it is not our desire to have a long, drawn-out negotiation
process.

We are committed to quality which we measure by time. This means following
up on issues raised in public participation fora such as izimbizo, the
National Council of Province’s programme of “Taking Parliament to the
People” and the National Assembly programme of “People’s Assemblies” - and
we’ll do that with immediate effect.

Other goals include: enforcing compulsory signing of performance agreements
and enforcement of penalties for noncompliance, all with immediate effect;
ensuring the implementation of a time-bound response window to the reports
of the Public Service Commission; introducing a broader turnaround strategy
for the State Information Technology Agency, Sita, by the end of July 2009;
finalising the further transformation process of the Public Administration
Leadership and Management Academy, Palama, by November 2009; introducing a
community development programme turnaround strategy by December 2009;
addressing the nation on the Auditor-General’s report dealing with
conflicts of interest in which it was reported that there were some public
servants who had interests in some companies that were, in turn, doing
business with government — we will soon address the nation on that report
to indicate the practical steps we intend taking forward; hosting a public
sector summit by December 2009; and introducing the graduate top-up
training programme immediately, and sustaining it as we progress.

Maybe we need to expand on this because there are unemployed graduates in
our country and people are saying they are unemployable, yet they are
graduates. The top-up programme, which Palama is introducing and
sustaining, is meant to ensure that these graduates are employable.
Chairperson, these are our short-term pledges and please hold us to them.
We are presenting ourselves fully understanding that the separation of
powers, which is part of our democracy, also has the confession part which
is power relations. And we know very well that in that understanding we are
accountable as an executive to Parliament and included in that
establishment is this august House.

We also promise that by the end of the financial year we will have done the
following: ensured a continuous reduction and final elimination of
qualified audit reports by provincial and national government departments;
facilitated the development of an accelerated policy implementation
framework so that we can see ourselves in a situation in which we are equal
to what is expected of us in terms of policy implementation; hosted a
service delivery summit; and assessed the impact of the capacity-building
interventions introduced so that we know exactly what we have to do.

It is for that reason we are saying Palama is the way to go. Palama is the
new name for the SA Management Development Institute, which deals with the
training of leadership and the introduction of new entrants into our Public
Service. We have committed ourselves to performing an impact assessment of
the internship programme in removing barriers of entry to the Public
Service particularly and the entire job market in general. We will also
have connected all existing Thusong centres to Internet technology by the
end of the financial year and will connect each new one on establishment.
Finally, by the end of the financial year we will have performed a
corruption impact assessment so that we can see if corruption is an issue
and if it has an impact on service delivery. What is the common
manifestation of corruption? Where is it located in terms of the sector? We
are going to do this and have committed ourselves to ensuring that
corruption-fighting instruments are introduced — starting with the
corruption Act, the national anti-corruption Act and following with the
anticorruption strategy. We have held anticorruption summits, made
decisions, and clearly stated what we can and cannot tolerate. How
effective are these instruments going to be? What are we doing to actually
implement all of them so that we accelerate the implementation of decisions
that we have taken?

We promise to introduce to Parliament the Public Administration Management
Bill, thereby ending the debate on the question of a single Public Service.
We will also synchronise the programme of wage or salary negotiations with
the government’s budget cycle as they are related. This sounds like a heavy
programme, and some may ask questions on what informs our confidence. What
makes us believe that we will walk the talk in committing ourselves to
doing all this? Our position on issues like this is that it takes
dedication and effective management to realise the objectives that people
and institutions set for themselves.

Working together within the Ministry for the Public Service and
Administration as well as the entire Public Service, we can do all these
things and still more. Our commitment to service delivery informs us that
if we are to be true to our constitutional and electoral mandate, we should
be available to do more than ordinary things. Hard work is the name of the
game and nothing else.

A very important question was asked yesterday when we were debating the
Budget Vote in the National Assembly — whether we were not far from
implementing the Batho Pele policy. I indicated that when people said we
were far from, or not far from, or not so far, or not near to implementing
Batho Pele, they should first have a full understanding of what the policy
is all about. And I want this House to debate this issue either today or at
a later stage, but soon. It is necessary that we do so, because the meaning
goes beyond just putting people first. It means a lot, and if we were to
pause for a moment here and then say exactly what it means, you would not
be surprised to hear someone saying it means that we must put people first
- even if you put them first to explain to them why services should not be
provided to them. I would not be surprised if members present here or those
who are watching do that. That’s the reason why we need to talk about Batho
Pele. What is it all about?

But, I want to put it very clearly that I’m not saying that we should
debate this matter, because I have no doubt that Batho Pele is the way to
go. I know that we are on board as far as the implementation of Batho Pele
is concerned – at least at the average level of our general performance on
policy implementation recorded over our 15-year record of service delivery.

Let me remind this House of what the Batho Pele policy binds us to do. I’m
going to go through the eight principles of Batho Pele, not just the
heading which has to do with the redress, setting of standards and so
forth. By doing that you are not going deep enough in terms of what it
means. It binds us to do the following: citizens shall be consulted about
the level and quality of the public services they receive and, where
possible, they should be given a choice about the services that are
offered; citizens should be made aware of what services they should expect;
all citizens should have equal access to the services to which they are
entitled — see, it talks about entitlement; citizens shall be treated with
courtesy and consideration; citizens should be given full and accurate
information about the public services they are entitled to receive;
citizens should be told how national and provincial governments are run,
how much they cost and who is in charge - maybe that also applies to the
NCOP and the National Assembly; citizens should be offered an apology, a
full explanation and a speedy and effective remedy if the promised standard
of services is not delivered and, when complaints are made, citizens should
receive a sympathetic, positive response; and public services should be
provided economically and efficiently.

Of course, I know that we may not exhaustively deal with all these issues
on any single day. I want us to appreciate that the ANC government does as
expected in order to live up to what is expected of us through the Batho
Pele policy, as well as what is expected of the broader civil society as
led by all of us in this House and those outside this House. It cannot be
the responsibility of the government alone to implement Batho Pele. We all
have some work to do.

Let us analyse only two principles out of the eight so that we understand
that it takes more than government for us to realise the objectives of
Batho Pele. In so doing, we will come to terms with the argument that I’m
raising. The principle of redress calls on us to ensure that citizens are
offered an apology, a full explanation and a speedy and effective remedy if
the promised standard of services is not delivered, and that when
complaints are made citizens should receive a sympathetic, positive
response.

Suppose the level of consciousness is so high in the community that
citizens know what this principle entitles them to receive: You can rest
assured that we may well have to draw up an annual programme of apology,
giving full explanations and raising more expectations as we try to give
speedy remedies. This can cause people to reject the explanations given,
the apology offered and the remedy provided. Therefore, you will be
reinvited to do exactly what we have done.

This often happens when the level of understanding is such that,
deliberately or accidentally, some people choose to be selfish and less
concerned with what affects the state and more concerned with personal
priorities. Let us take a situation that some of us may not like to hear
about. We are affected by the unfortunate global state of the economy now
and we can, therefore, not move with the same speed to deliver some of the
services that were envisaged.

Meanwhile, the citizens know exactly what our programmes are for effective
service delivery. If we explain the situation and, therefore, say that we
may not be able to live up to what is expected, we may find a challenging
situation, more especially if we have some among us — as, of course, we do
— who would like to see themselves either actively believing that they are
going to co-govern with the government or running a shadow administration
to put forward their own priorities. That is what is giving us challenges.

It takes an informed, positive-minded and readily available civil society
for us to succeed on this journey. Is our civil society ready to create
space for government to implement the principles of Batho Pele? I doubt it.
So, before we ask such questions of the government — as to how far we are
with the implementation of Batho Pele and how much the government has done
to comply with the policy — we should check the contribution we are making
as civil society.

We have had so many comments recently, as the nation is discussing the
implementation of occupation-specific dispensations in the Public Service.
We have had some people conveniently contradicting themselves. When it
suits them, some will say that those public servants who are assigned to do
essential services should not be allowed to strike and when it suits them
for different reasons the same people will say that the situation is
provocative and so they should be allowed to strike. That’s a clear
contradiction. I heard a supposedly responsible adult yesterday saying that
the doctors in KwaZulu-Natal abandoned their work very responsibly. This
was said by a person who is supposed to be a public representative and a
leader: “abandoning their work responsibly”. I’m not sure what that is. It
is sad when such reckless comments are made by people, some of whom have
taken an oath to defend the Republic, and when the government, in fact, is
doing its best to address the situation. We say thanks to the Minister of
Health because he dealt with a serious blow from such empty-minded
individuals.

The Batho Pele principle on openness and transparency calls on us to ensure
that citizens are told how national and provincial departments are run, how
much they cost and who is in charge. There are further questions that may
be associated with this principle, one of which being that citizens would
like to be taken on board as to what the government should spend money on.
Fair enough, but I repeat: it takes an informed, positive-minded and
readily available civil society for us to succeed on this course. Is our
civil society ready to create space for government to implement the
principles of Batho Pele? I doubt it - not in our situation where ulterior
motives sometimes influence people’s thinking. But we are not giving up.
That is why, as the ANC, we believe that mass mobilisation around priority
programmes is the way to go. I committed the Ministry for the Public
Service and Administration yesterday, and I do today, that by the end of
this financial year we will have analysed obstacles in the implementation
of Batho Pele and we’ll communicate the way forward out of this situation.

The debate on a single Public Service should not frustrate any person or
structure. Maybe what worries people is their having the wrong perception,
that the debate is all about doing away with the concept of the three
spheres and creating only one structure of government in the country. No,
that is not correct; that is not the intention. The issue is that we want
to strategically align the institutions that comprise the machinery of the
developmental state, to complement each other so as to operate effectively
and fulfil the needs of all South Africans in a seamless arrangement. Let
us further engage on this subject at the different fora where the issue,
from time to time, is located.

To conclude, allow me to confirm that we are going ahead to all the
provinces in our campaign to strengthen the African Peer Review Governing
Council and to respond to the nine issues that have been raised about us as
a country by our peers on the continent. We have been to Gauteng,
Mpumalanga and the Northern Cape.

During the month of July we will be in the following provinces debating the
following issues: Limpopo — poverty and inequality; the Free State – land
reform; the North West — racism; the Western Cape – diversity management;
and in KwaZulu-Natal — HIV and Aids.

In August we will finalise the programme in the Eastern Cape, focusing our
debate on unblocking service delivery. We need to stress that these are
national issues and not just for provinces. We are not discussing them in
the provinces because we think they are prevalent, but because we are using
provinces as a forum to engage. At the end of this we are going to have a
national consultative conference at which we are going to have a plenary to
reflect on all these issues because they have been raised about us by other
member states of the African Union that have acceded to the African Peer
Review Mechanism.

The journey to an effective Public Service is not my journey alone. It is
not his journey; it is not her journey, but ours. Let’s participate. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Before I call on the next speaker,
I would like to welcome the hon Khotso officially, on behalf of the
Chairperson of the Council and the House. Where is he? You are welcome,
sir. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Chairperson, hon Minister and his counterpart, and hon
members, the past decade and a half of a democratic South Africa has
experienced numerous challenges in the Public Service. These challenges
have been a hindrance to service delivery, especially to both national and
provincial departments.

The current nature and form of the Public Service character falls short of
addressing these challenges. In addition, the Public Service Act of 1994
has proved inadequate and needs to be reviewed. The current system in the
Public Service has failed to address the following issues in the Public
Service.

Firstly, there is a lack of provision for the deployment of staff where
they are most needed. Secondly, some government functions are provided
through national or provincial departments and are not close to the point
of service delivery. The functionaries tasked with such deliveries operate
without direct accountability or decision-making ability. On the other
hand, some government functions are provided via entities outside the
Public Service without direct control and influence by its political head.

Thirdly, the Public Service Act of 1994 and its prescripts are frequently
not complied with, which results in weak organisational and human resource
practices as well as legal disputes. Fourthly, employees dismissed from
departments for any kind of misconduct, including misconduct involving
corrupt acts, are often reappointed soon after their dismissal.

Fifthly, employees suspected of transgressions sometimes resign and are
appointed in other departments without disciplinary steps being taken or
instituted or continued for those transgressions. Lastly, some provisions
of the Act have resulted in legal disputes while others are obsolete,
overly complex or in conflict with legislation.

We need to recognise that certain organisational and human resource
practices in the current Public Service Act directly or indirectly obstruct
service delivery. Currently, some government functions are provided by
national or provincial departments away from the point of delivery and
without direct accountability.

The introduction of the Public Service Bill, also known as the Public
Administration Management Bill, will go a long way towards addressing the
above-mentioned challenges. The preamble of the Bill recognises sections of
the Constitution, including, amongst other sections, section 197(4):

   Provincial governments are responsible for the recruitment, appointment,
   promotion, transfer and dismissal of members of the Public Service in
   their administrations within a framework of uniform norms and standards
   applying to the Public Service.


Another section, section 151(3), states:

   A municipality has the right to govern, on its own initiative, the local
   government affairs of its community, subject to national and provincial
   legislation, as provided for in the Constitution.


And section 153 states:

   A municipality must —


   (a)      structure and manage its administration and budgeting and
         planning processes to give priority to the basic needs of the
         community, and to promote the social and economic development of
         the community; and


   (b)      participate in national and provincial development programmes.

The exercise of legislative and executive authority for local government is
regulated by the Constitution and three Acts, namely the Local Government:
Municipal Demarcation Act, the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act,
and the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act. These statutes deal
comprehensively with local government, leaving a few issues relating to
financial management, budgeting, borrowing, Treasury control, property
rating and taxation to be covered by the Local Government: Municipal
Finance Management Act and the Local Government: Municipal Property Rates
Act.

The Public Administration Management Bill has the following aims. It aims
to improve staff mobility arrangements for the Public Service by allowing
for the deployment of staff where they are most needed, but with due
consideration of the circumstances of affected employees.

The Bill aims to introduce government agencies as a new institutional form
to be accommodated within the Public Service to enable direct service
delivery through a focused, ring-fenced, separate entity under the direct
control of the Ministry. It also aims to enhance compliance with the Act
through investigation and compulsory discipline of transgressors and
reporting thereon.

The Public Administration Management Bill aims to enable the institution of
disciplinary steps against employees for alleged transgressions at their
former departments. It aims to introduce anticorruption measures to
prohibit the re-employment of persons in the Public Service dismissed for
specific kinds of misconduct, such as misconduct involving corrupt acts.
The Bill also aims to address a number of legal difficulties arising from
the day-to-day application of the Act as well as arbitrations and court
cases.

Lastly, it aims to simplify the Public Service Act through streamlining
several provisions, removing obsolete provisions and aligning the Act with
other legislation in order to facilitate its application.

The Bill will impact on local government in the following ways. A single
Public Service is deemed a massive undertaking designed to improve service
delivery by integrating the front office, the back office and the
institutions delivering service to the people. The initiative aims to
integrate all spheres of government, which will allow citizens to receive
government services as a whole in a convenient location, without having to
travel far and wide. The progress made in the implementation of the Thusong
centres initiatives is an indication of how this Bill will satisfy the
demand for service delivery. There are at least 100 Thusong centres that
have been built across the country, and they have been received in a good
spirit.

The Bill further aims to harmonise the conditions of service across
government so that it is able to work better. It will promote access to
service and assist in instilling an ethos of people-centred service.

The Bill states that it proposes alignment, where appropriate, in
recruitment and selection, remuneration and conditions of service,
performance management and development, a competency framework, standards
of ethics and misconduct, incapacity procedures, financial disclosure
requirements, and procedures for the transfer, secondment and deployment
across the full spectrum of national, provincial and local government.

The Bill will enhance our anticorruption initiative. It introduces
anticorruption measures to prohibit the re-employment of persons in the
Public Service dismissed for specific kinds of misconduct.

Some key amendments introduced by the Bill include the introduction of
government components that will function as separate institutions within
the Public Service, with their heads serving as accounting officers in
terms of the Public Finance Management Act.

The Bill respects the powers vested by the Constitution in municipalities,
particularly in their power to appoint, direct and dismiss their own
employees. While the Bill does contain provisions that, in carefully
circumscribed circumstances, enable the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration to set limits in terms of conditions of employment, these
provisions do not compromise or impede municipalities in exercising their
rights or performing the functions conferred on them by the Constitution.

It must be remembered that we inherited a fragmented Public Service which
served our people according to the colour of their skin. The so-called
experienced and skilled public servants, who were not comfortable with the
new dispensation, left and established consultancies which continued
misleading our institutions because they didn’t understand our
transformation agenda.

Our intention and approach to a single Public Service will assist in having
a co-ordinated bargaining approach, which will hopefully minimise the
looming labour action. This approach, informed by the Batho Pele
principles, should be understood within the context of nation-building and
promoting allegiance to one unitary South Africa, where poverty,
unemployment and lack of shelter will be a thing of the past and where our
people will live in peace and prosperity. We support the Vote. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mnr J M G BEKKER: Die afgelope paar dae en veral gister en vandag was dit
vir my opvallend dat die partye hier in die Huis en in die
komiteevergaderings almal baie bekommerd is oor die gehalte en
volhoubaarheid van dienslewering. Ek gaan my toespits op dienslewering deur
munisipaliteite, omdat ek daarvan ondervinding het.

As ons kyk na al die stelsels, besigheidsplanne, ens, dan glo ek die
stelsel moet geloof en geprys word. Die GOP, IDP, begrotings van die
verskillende rade en SDIP as ’n kontrolemeganisme laat dit blyk asof alles
net met hierdie groot en effektiewe ondersteuningsdienste moet gebeur.

Daar is amptenare en bestuurders wat baie bekwaam voorkom en salarisse
verdien wat sterk kompeteer met poste in die private sektor, maar waar
bestuurders aan groter risiko’s blootgestel is. Ministers en amptenare doen
verklarings en gee oplossings vir alle probleme en planne wat net voorspoed
voorspel.

As jy egter na die radio luister, koerante lees, televisie kyk, of net jou
eie omgewing rondom jou waarneem, dan besef jy êrens is daar ’n groot fout.
Daar is strate met gate en spoelslote waarvoor jy ’n vier-by-vier nodig
het. Inwoners kla dat hul watertoevoer en kragtoevoer baie onbetroubaar is
en onderbrekings kom gereeld voor. In sommige woonbuurte vloei menslike
afval in die strate af. In sommige gebiede is daar geen of baie swak diens,
terwyl daar ander gebiede is waar dit goed gaan. Wat is dan die fout?

Ek wil hier saamstem met President Zuma dat openbare ampsdraers en almal in
uitvoerende posisies, harder sal moet werk met die doel om beter diens te
lewer. Ek moet ook met die President saamstem waar hy in ’n televisie-
onderhoud gesê het: “The problem is in implementation”.

Sommige raadslede het nie die kapasiteit om hul werk te doen nie. Hulle
woon elke moontlike funksie en kongres by maar geen terugvoering word gegee
nie. Artikel 56- en 57-aanstellings verdien salarisse wat vir niks skrik
nie. Hulle het almal prestasieverwante bonusse, maar ek het nog nie gesien
dat enige van hulle minder as 100% kry nie.

As hulle oortree of bedrog pleeg, dan skik hulle met die betrokke raad, kry
’n goue handdruk en beweeg voort na die volgende een. Daar is nie enige
skuldigbevindings teen so ’n persoon nie en nêrens kan jy bespeur dat hy
oortree het nie.

Vakbonde is baie goed georganiseerd en beskik oor uitstekende raadgewers
wat baie goed in hul eie lede se belang optree, maar dienslewering
benadeel. Arbeidswette is uiters noodsaaklik, maar vertraag dikwels
produktiwiteit en effektiwiteit.

Daar word baie gepraat en geskryf oor een Staatsdiens en administrasie, met
ander woorde, sentralisering, maar gaan hierdie groot, lywige departement
doeltreffend wees? Die regering moet hier baie goeie navorsing doen voordat
hulle so ’n stap neem.

Ek glo ons moet minder praat en meer doen en net twee woorde gebruik, dit
is verantwoordelikheid en dissipline. As ons hierdie waardes gevestig kan
kry, dan sal ons suksesvol wees. Ek glo daar is ’n wonderlike omgewing
geskep om dienste van ‘n hoë gehalte te lewer, maar as daar nie dissipline
en verantwoordelikheid toegepas word nie, dan gaan daar geen vordering wees
nie.
Besluite en optredes moet saakgerig wees en minder om eie belang gaan. Daar
word eers besluite geneem om amptenare te bevoordeel en dan word die diens
aan die bevolking gelewer. Batho Pele moet die wagwoord wees. Swak bestuur
en dienslewering maak die armste van die armes die seerste. Hulle is nie in
’n posisie om vir hulself op te staan nie.

Ek wil dus ’n beroep doen op almal wat hier betrokke is, kom ons aanvaar
die verantwoordelikheid, gebruik al die hulpmiddels en stelsels en lewer
vyfsterdiens aan ons mense. Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr J M G BEKKER: The past few days, and especially yesterday and today, I
was struck by the fact that the parties here in the House and in the
committee meetings have all been very concerned about the standard, quality
and sustainability of service delivery. I will focus on service delivery by
municipalities, because that is a field where I have some experience.

If we look at all the systems, business plans, etc, then I believe the
system must be praised and commended. The IDP, or integrated development
plan, the budgets of the various councils, the SDIP, service delivery
improvement plan, as a control measure – everything looks as if great
things are about to happen, with these great and effective support services
in place.

There are officials and managers who appear to be very competent and whose
salaries seriously compete with posts in the private sector, where managers
are exposed to great risks. Ministers and officials make announcements and
offer solutions to all problems and introduce plans that herald prosperity.


But, if you listen to the radio, read the newspapers or watch TV, or simply
observe your own environment, then you realise something somewhere is
seriously wrong. There are roads with potholes and ditches for which you
need a four-by-four. Residents complain that their water and electricity
supply is very unreliable, and breakdowns occur regularly. There are
neighbourhoods where human waste runs down the streets. In some areas
service delivery is non-existent or very poor, while others are doing well.
So, what is the problem?

I want to concur with President Zuma’s view that public office bearers and
all incumbents in executive posts will have to work harder in order to
deliver better services. I also have to agree with the President’s
statement in a television interview that “the problem is in the
implementation”.

Some councillors lack the capacity to do their work. They attend every
possible function and congress, but they never supply any feedback. Article
56 and 57 appointments earn salaries second to none. All of them have
performance-related bonuses, but I have never seen any of them receive
anything less than one hundred percent.

If they transgress or commit fraud they settle with the council, get a
golden handshake, and move on to the next one. There are no convictions
against such persons, and it is impossible to detect that they have
transgressed.

Trade unions are very well organised and have excellent consultants who act
in their own members’ interests, but they often impede productivity and
effectiveness. Labour lawas are essential, but they often impede
productivity and effectivity.

Much is being said and written about one single Public Service and
administration, but will this huge, voluminous department be effective? In
other words, will centralisation be effective? The government must do some
serious research before taking such a step.

I believe we should talk less and do more, and we should use only two
terms, namely responsibility and discipline. If we can get these values
established, we will be successful. I believe a wonderful environment has
been created to deliver services of a high standard, but unless discipline
and responsible behaviour are enforced there will be no progress.

Decisions and actions should be determined by the task at hand, and not by
self-interest. Decisions are taken firstly for the officials’ benefit, and
thereafter service is rendered to the population. The watchword should be
Batho Pele. Poor management and poor service delivery hurt the poorest of
the poor the most. They are in no position to stand up for themselves.

I therefore wish to appeal to everybody concerned: Let us take
responsibility, let us use all the resources and systems, and let us
deliver a five-star service to our people. Thank you. [Applause.]]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, Inhloko yoMnyango
wakho, kanye nezikhulu zawo wonke ama-sections akho, Amalungu Ahloniphekile
ale Ndlu. Ngqongqoshe ngithi angikubongele ukuthi unikezwe umsebenzi
omkhulu wesizwe ukuba ubheke yonke iMinyango kahulumeni waleli lizwe.

Uma ubheka iMinyango kahulumeni wakuleli lizwe, ngithi angikukhumbuze
Ngqongqoshe ukuthi kunalezi zinto ezibizwa ngokuthi ngama-Chapter Nine
Institutions akhiwa uMthethosisekelo wezwe ukuthi asebenze ngokuzimela –
independent. Kodwa ngithi ukuzimela kuhamba kube nama-limitation kulo lonke
izwe ngoba uma singathi ngoba bazimele ngakho-ke awungeni lapho ukuthi
ubheke, ngoba ngumsebenzi woMnyango wakho ukuthi ubheke ukuthi bonke abantu
abaqashwayo kuwo wonke lawa ma-Chapter Nine Institution ukuthi bafanelekile
yini kulowo msebenzi.
Ngoba uma nizowayeka kube wuthela wayeka nje nami njengoZulu ngizisebenzele
njengomumzi wami - kusho ukuthi i-mandate le enayinikezwa ngabantu ngomhla-
ka 22 ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon Minister, the director-general of your
department, officials of all the sections in your department, and hon
members of this House, I want to congratulate the hon Minister on being
given the huge responsibility of monitoring all the departments of this
government.

If you look at the departments of this government, I want to remind you,
hon Minister, that there are these structures that are known as Chapter 9
institutions which were created in accordance with the Constitution of the
country to work independently. But, I am saying that independence has its
limits throughout the country. We cannot say that because they are
independent you should oversee their performance. It is the task of your
department to see to it that everybody who is employed in these Chapter 9
institutions is qualified to do the job.

If you are going to allow them to do as they please — if I, as Prince Zulu,
were to operate like I do at my place — that would mean that the mandate
you received from the people on 22 April ...]

... is questionable.
Ngoba nibhekele bona abantu bakithi eNingizimu Afrika ukuba wonke lawa ma-
state organs ayayilandela yini imithetho nemitheshwana yelizwe.

Ngithi ngisheshise nje ngikuhalalisele ephusheni lakho lokuthi zonke
izifundiswa zakithi noma lokhu okuthiwa phecelezi ama-graduates asefundile
nizoba nama-data base ukuthi niqoqe bonke abantu ukuthi bathole imisebenzi
bakwazi ukusebenza. Ngith-ke kulelo phupho lakho ngikufisela inhlanhla
Ngqongqoshe kuloMnyango wakho sengathi ungakubhekisisa lokho.

Ngiphinde ngibuye futhi ngithi Ngqongqoshe, kunomasipala, omasipala akusho
ukuthi bazimele kuleli lizwe – akukho Federal State ekhona kuleli lizwe.
Uma ingekho-ke i-Fedaral State, ngizocela-ke futhi ukuthi nomasipala
ubabhekisise ngoba kuneZinhloko ZeMinyango ezikhona ezingasebenzi ngendlela
ekuyiyona yona kubo bonke ikakhulukazi la bomasipala basemakhaya uthola
ukuthi bakwazi ukushaya imithetho ngaphezu kwamakhansela namkhansela nawo
abesabe.

Kodwa-ke uMnyango wakho ngiyacabanga ukuthi bayowesaba kakhulu ngoba uyobe
ubhekene ngqo nabo kanye nokubheka ukuthi kuhamba kanjani ukuze lokhu
okuthiwa ‘ubuntu/botho’ okhuluma ngakho kwenze ukuthi abantu bazuze kuzo
zonke lezi zinkalo zakithi kuleli lizwe. Ngibonge kakhulu, Mphathisihlalo.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Because you act on behalf of the people of South Africa to see to it that
all these state organs follow the laws and regulations of this country.

I wish to congratulate you in anticipation of your dream of establishing a
database for all the graduates so that every one will be able to find work.
I am, therefore, saying that I wish you well in this department and good
luck, hon Minister; may you succeed in this venture.

Hon Minister, I also wish to say that there are municipalities which are
not independent in this country. There is no federal state in this country.
As there is no federal state, I would like to request you to monitor the
municipalities too, because there are heads of departments who are not
operating properly in all municipalities, especially in the rural
municipalities. They impose laws on the councillors and some councillors
are scared of them.

But, I think that they will be too scared of your department because it
will be directly focusing on them by monitoring what we call “ubuntu botho”
that you referred to so that everybody in every locality of this country
could benefit. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Nkul M W MAKHUBELA: Mutshamaxitulu, Holobye Mudondolofana, Ncila-va-ololi
na Yindlu, ndzi yimile haleno namuntlha ku ta ndhundhuzela ndzawulo ya
n’wina hilaha mi nga tirha hakona. Loko ingaku eka 15 wa malembe lama nga
hundza a va mi thole kwalaho. Swilo leswi hi nga swi twa namuntlha hi leswi
Congress of the People, Cope, yi nga yimela swona. Mi te kahle eka “Batho
Pele”. A ndzi lava ku mi vutisa leswaku loko mi ku “Batho Pele” – Vanhu ku
Sungula; mi sungula hi vanhu loko ku tirhiwa – mi vula yini? Eka malembe ya
15 lama nga hundza, xana mfumo lowu nga kona a wu nga swi voni swilo leswi
ke, leswi swi nga lo tshama swi vekiwa? Leswi mi nge mi ya sungula hi
ndlela leyi ya matirhelo, hi lava leswaku Cope yi va na n’wina kwalaho.

Nakambe, mi vulavule hi Public Administration Leadership and Management
Academy, Palama, mi ku, “it’s the way to go.” Leswi hi leswi hi tshamaka hi
vulavula hi swona eka Cope. Ha tivutisa leswaku xana mfumo lowu wu endla
yini. Loko mi swi vonile, hi ta mi seketela mi yisa ntirho lowu emahlweni.

Xin’wana lexi ndzi lavaka ku xi vutisa i “internship”. Loko vanhu lava nga
tokota va thoriwa – ndzi twile loko mi vulavula eka Ngula ya Vutivi tolo
nimadyambu eka SABC. Mi ndzi tsakise ngopfu loko mi kote ku hlamusela tiko
leswaku ... i Holobye loyi a nga koteki ku tumbeta swilo a tlhela a
vulavula ntiyiso hinkwawo wa leswaku u ta tirha hi ndlela yihi. Ndzi lava
ku tiva kuri eka “internship” mi na vanhu vangani lava nga dyondzisiwa no
tokotisiwa leswaku loko va wu kumile ntokoto va ta kota ku thoriwa va
nghena eka mfumo?

Ndzi vona nakambe eka “strategic planning” xa n’wina leswaku mi na tiposo
ta 112. Poso ya Chief Financial Officer yi na malembe manharhu yi nga se
tatiwa. Xana ku humelela yini hi yona. Xana letin’wana ta 111 leti nga sala
tona ti ya thola rini? A ndzi lava ku tiva ku xana eka tindzawulo hinkwato,
tanihi leswi mi nga vutihlamuleri eka tindzawulo hinkwato, ku na tiposo
tingani leti to ka ti nga se tatiwaka nakona ti na malembe mangani? Hi lava
ku tiva leswaku hi ta kota ku fambisana na n’wina kahle.

Ndzi twa ndzi tsake ngopfu hikuva ndzi yima hi leswi Puresidente Zuma a nga
vula swona. Ndzi ta hlaya hi ririmi ra vadyanhlampfi. (Translation of
Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, Minister Mudondolofana, Ncila-va-ololi and
the House, I am standing before you to praise the way in which your
department performed. I wish you had been employed in that position 15
years ago! What we heard today is what the Congress of the People, Cope,
stands for. It is good that you made mention of Batho Pele. I want to ask
you: When you say “Batho Pele”, or “People First”, and you give preference
to the people when you serve, what do you mean? For the past 15 years,
hasn’t the previous government realised all these things as the work is
still lying unattended to? Since you are saying you want to start working
in this way, we want Cope to be with you in that regard.

Once more, you talked about the Public Administration Leadership and
Management Academy, Palama, and you said, “It is the way to go.” This is
what we are always talking about in Cope. We ask ourselves what this
government is doing. Having seen it, we will support you to do more of this
work going forward. One other thing that I want to ask about is the
internship programmes. When experienced people are employed ...  I heard it
when you were talking on Ngula ya Vutivi yesterday evening on SABC. You
made me so happy when you were able to explain to the nation that ... it is
the Minister who is unable to hide things and once more tell the whole
truth as to how he will perform the work. I want to know how many people
have been trained and empowered through internship programmes so that, once
they are experienced, they can be employed in government?

I see again in your strategic planning that you have 112 posts. The chief
financial officer post has not been filled for three years. What is
happening in that regard? When will the outstanding 111 posts be filled?
Since you are responsible for all the departments, I want to know how many
posts are still vacant in all the departments and for how many years have
they been vacant? We want to know so that we can be on par with you.

I feel so happy because I stand by what President Zuma said. I will say it
in English.]

President Zuma made it clear that the Public Service must respond to the
economic downturn by spending public funds wisely and fruitfully.

Loko ndzi lava ku mi hlamusela kahle, ndzi ta teka xikombiso xo olova. A
ndzi lava ku mi hlamusela leswaku swi dya mali yo tala swilo leswi. [Nkarhi
wu herile.] [Phokotela.] [Va phokotela.] [If I want to be explicit, I will
give a simple example. I want to say that these things waste a lot of
money. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Thank you to the Chairperson and the Minister for a good
presentation that indeed spoke to the needs of the people, and thank you to
the Minister for bringing us his counterpart Minister from the Democratic
Republic of Congo. It shows that indeed the African Peer Review Mechanism
will move.

The Minister has indeed given us a budget that shows a sterling effort
within the required attributes of a developmental state. Indeed, you were
confirming a requirement that the Polokwane resolution said we must come
and fulfil because, underlying that, your presentation is a transformation
of public administration and service, and a modernising of it because it
has indeed inherited, through the sunset clause, what the father of the
gentleman from the DA was saying.

His father was here for 40 years. He created some of these things. Because
of the sunset clause, some of them were comfortable with some of these
attributes, but now, through your agenda and programme, we will be in a
position to remove some of them.

The budget of the Minister will turn the tide on the problems and binding
constraints that the state has. In the developmental state, when we say the
developmental state will meet the objectives of governance, it is when the
Public Service’s attitude has been geared towards the transformation
agenda. Currently, we are working with some elements which would want to
make the ANC government appear corrupt, when it has to do with elements of
the transformation of mental attitudes to the manifesto of the ruling
party. As such, we need to overhaul this administrative system. We thank
the Minister because the programme of his budget will speak to that without
failure.

The other element which the Minister’s presentation has given to us is the
fact that this budget - Budget Vote No 9 - as we said, is a developmental
state budget. It will not only speak to issues of Batho Pele, but is also
going to speak to issues of departmental activities which were inherited
and became an obstacle in the Ministry, hence the problem with the
occupation-specific dispensation. It is this Ministry that began to engage
hands-on with OSD issues, and we hope that things will be done. Of course,
this is not just hope: As the select committee we are prepared to engage
and work with the Ministry. If needs be, as the Minister moves from
province to province, an invitation can be extended to the House so that we
are able to come and make sure that we oversee those things.

While the presentation is good for us as the select committee, there are
certain nocturnal areas that need to be scrutinised. They are dark and need
bright light to shine on them from your plans to make sure that
interventions are made in those areas.

For example, we have the issue of norms and standards. I think they go
beyond the Batho Pele principles. It was once said that they would be in a
position to dictate daily to those who are working in the Ministries across
the spheres, in the parastatals and entities, how they should respond to
the people out there. Norms and standards will again empower the people to
make sure that they are held accountable when certain things are not done
in the process of giving services to the people.

I think that area needs to be clarified and unpacked within the broad
context of Batho Pele principles. But, on a daily basis, what is it that
must be done when I go to the office and find a counter clerk not
responding to these elements? We therefore need that type of scrutiny. It
is important that the department look into that.
The other issue is that of whistle-blowers. We give them toll-free numbers
every time, and they indeed blow the whistle. They are holding red cards
against their seniors; mostly, they are juniors. After red-carding their
seniors, they are then dismissed from work. What is it that the department
is doing to protect these people? Security is not a privilege; it is a
right.

Therefore, from a junior to whomever, everyone must enjoy the security of
the Ministry and the department so that they are not victimised simply
because they are doing their duty. In that way, whistle-blowing is
essentially the protection of the taxpayers’ money and of the people’s
property. The government, departments, municipalities and everything are
the people’s property and we therefore need a mechanism that will ensure
how these people are protected.

On the issue of a single Public Service, I think we will await the process
so that we can make an input. In fact, we can’t keep on singing about
something which we know is there. We are just waiting for that time
because, procedurally speaking, when we say things will come, we don’t mean
now; we mean there will be plans, input, drafts and all sorts of things.
But it must be speeded up; it has to. You have spoken well about Batho
Pele. Some of us are educated enough to go beyond knowing all those things
as concepts. Now we also understand the attitude within every aspect of
Batho Pele.

However, I would want the department and the House to look into this
bureaucracy. I think this is a concept we inherited through the sunset
clause. We need to move and create our own concept, that of “revocrats”. I
understand this to be revolutionary managers in a revolutionary government
and Parliament. “Revocracy” says that people must go according to the
ruling party’s manifesto. People must change every day and must understand
change as ongoing and not static.

Bureaucracy is like a tortoise: you have to break it to change it. If you
don’t, it will remain like that. We, therefore, need to check whether or
not, as part of the summit, we can come up with a concept that will make a
logical impression with the administrative understanding of the politics of
the ruling party. It’s very important.

The other element that we need to look into with my friend and leader
Comrade Nzimande – and he has always acted on this – is the issue of job
access. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very
much, Chairperson. I wish I could donate two minutes of my time to the
chairperson of the select committee.

Let me, as I close the debate on the Budget Vote, thank hon members for
their inputs. As I have indicated, it is our joint responsibility to make
sure that this Public Service is what we want it to be.

All the things that have been said here are relevant and very important. We
commit ourselves to following that up. I may not touch them individually
and say yes to this one and no to that one. No is no answer to any of the
things that have been said. I fully agree with all of those, and we shall
take care of the situation.

As a response to all speakers, I have a one-size-fits-all comment. Thank
you for what you have said.

With regard to the issues around revocrats and bureaucrats, we raised a
challenge — and we shall actually put it here — and we committed ourselves
to revisiting the instrument of recruitment. We are not only going to
revisit the instrument of recruitment, but we shall also define merit in
South African terms. If you do not have a number of factors that merit a
person suitable for an appointment, you may find yourself missing the
point.

I have indicated and requested the Public Service Commission and also
instructed my department to work on an instrument. When I introduced this
to them, I indicated that this recruitment tool must be modelled around the
ruling party’s document Eye of a Needle. This will prevent people from
claiming that they can be appointed public servants, because not all of
them will actually be equal to the task. That is why we have challenges.
That is why departments are not spending their money at the end of the day.

Financial management is a serious issue. We are looking into that.  There
are people in deployment and appointment posts who, instead of working,
play and politicise their deployment. When action is taken against them,
they say they are being purged. We want to deal with that.

Relevance, in terms of understanding policies, honestly speaking, is one of
the things that needs to be practised. You cannot give a person a Bible in
a shebeen, ask them to preach and expect that they will talk to the
contents of that Bible. The two can’t mix.

Thank you very much in terms of what has been said.

Hon Makhubela, Mugwena, loko hi ku hi ta vuya eka tiko hi fika hi kombisa
leswaku xana leswi swi hi sirhelelaka ku simeka tipholisi ta hina hi swihi.
[Hon Makhubela, Mugwena, when we say we will come back to the nation we
will outline what the things are that serve as the guiding principles in
implementing our policies.]

We need to look into these things. For instance, there is nothing that can
be identified as an anomaly in the Public Service that does not have a
policy to address it. We just need to find out why the people are failing
to implement things.

You spoke of 112 vacancies. We can have that as a subject on its own.
One of our commitments — I indicated that when I mentioned that we shall
come up with a Sita turnaround strategy by July - is to find ways of
dealing with our record management system, Persal. Sometimes vacancies that
are said to be available do not tally with the figures. These are some of
the things we are going to investigate. We shall come back and address you
after that exercise. We shall be able to say how many vacancies are
available, where they are located and why they are not filled. If officials
confirm that the personnel record system does not tally with what is
actually reflected, then we shall investigate. Those are the things that
are very important.

Thank you, Mr Burgess, for saying that you feel proud to belong in South
Africa. The ANC says South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and
white. It is for that reason that I’m thanking you for recognising that.
But that recognition should be accompanied by a commitment from all of us
to soil our hands and contribute to the betterment of the lives of the
people of South Africa.

We have taken a decision because you might have seen that we can’t afford a
situation in which the relationship between ourselves, as a caring
employer, as government and labour is antagonistic. We engage one another.
We are not engaging one another out of choice, but we do it because we have
taken a decision to establish collective bargaining processes, and through
those structures we’ll be able to find peace with one another. That is
exactly what we are doing. That is why it was possible, within a short
space of time, to agree as an employer together with labour that we would
set a deadline for 30 June 2009 to resolve all occupation-specific-
dispensation-related questions. We will come back and announce progress
early next week because we are still assessing. But, rest assured, we are
on board. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, tomorrow our sitting will
start at 12:00 to consider Budget Vote No 2 and again at 14:30 in the
afternoon for the other Budget Votes.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 20:13.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Letter from Minister of Finance on proposed technical corrections to
      Appropriation Bill:

CREDA INSERT - 090701e-insert2 – PAGES 316-317
   2. Membership of Committees

      (1)   The following changes have been made to the membership of the
           Constitutional Review Committee:

           Appointed:


           Member                       Province              Party
           Rantho, Ms D Z               Eastern Cape                ANC
           Dikgale, Ms M C              Limpopo               ANC
           Mncube, Ms B V               Gauteng               ANC


           Discharged:


           Member                       Province              Party
           Nesi, Mr B                   Eastern Cape                ANC
           Mokgobi, Mr M H              Limpopo               ANC
           Matila, Mr A G               Gauteng               ANC

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Office of the Public Protector for 1
        April 2009 – 31 March 2012.

2.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Government Notice No R.646 published in Government Gazette No 32299
        dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/378), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (b)     Government Notice No R.647 published in Government Gazette No
        32299 dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/316), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R.648 published in Government Gazette No
        32299 dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/317), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
    (d)     Government Notice No R.643 published in Government Gazette No
        32299 dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/315), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R.670 published in Government Gazette No
        32309 dated 9 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/3/7), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R.671 published in Government Gazette No
        32309 dated 9 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 8 (No 8/7), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (g)     Government Notice No R.678 published in Government Gazette No
        32319 dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1379),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No 618 published in Government Gazette No
        32280 dated 29 May 2009: Determination of interest rate for
        purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official rate of
        interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, in terms of the
        Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    (i)     Government Notice No 642 published in Government Gazette No
        32280 dated 4 June 2009: Determination of interest rate for
        purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official rate of
        interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule: Correction Notice
        for Venda and Zulu translations, in terms of the Income Tax Act,
        1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).
    (j)     Government Notice No 582 published in Government Gazette No
        32246 dated 22 May 2009: The dimension of, design for, and
        compilation of, the year 2009 “FIFA 2010 coin series”, in terms of
        the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) General Notice No 503 published in Government Gazette No 32229
        dated 15 May 2009: Debt Counselling Regulations, in terms of the
        National Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T090701e-insert3 PAGES 320-328


