---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 15 October 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-10-15
---

THURSDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

       POSTPONEMENT UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE OF FIRST ITEM ON ORDER PAPER

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I would like to inform you
that the first item for discussion on the Order Paper will be postponed
until further notice as the Minister has been requested to attend to urgent
government business outside the country.

           DYSFUNCTIONAL LOCAL GOVERNMENT STRUCTURES IN MPUMALANGA

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr A WATSON: Hon Chair, I give notice on behalf of the DA that at the next
sitting of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council –


     1) notes that it is common knowledge that local government services
        have come to a virtual standstill in most municipalities in
        Mpumalanga and that civil violence has broken out in many
        municipalities;

     2) also notes that the disruption of services and consequent violence
        is a direct result of severe friction and infighting within the
        governing party, the ANC, and factions formed ...

[Interjections.] Yes, you can hide ...

        ... by ANC councillors in these municipalities;


     3) further notes that the Thembisile Hani Municipality in the Nkangala
        District of Mpumalanga has been totally dysfunctional since 24
        August 2009 because of the said infighting;


     4) recognises that whilst no services have been delivered and no
        officials have been in attendance for close to two months, the peace-
        loving people of this region have been patiently waiting for
        responses by the provincial leadership and that very few signs of
        resistance have been observed; and

   (5)      therefore, that in the light of the inability of the ANC
        provincial government to act, now calls on the Minister for Co-
        operative Governance and Traditional Affairs to institute immediate
        remedial steps to ensure the proper functioning of this
        municipality, as mandated by the Constitution, to avoid imminent
        violence and disruption as experienced in other regions.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection to the motion? As there
is, the motion, in light of the objection, may not be proceeded with and
this motion without notice will now become a notice of motion.

            SOUTH AFRICA’S INSUFFICIENT POWER GENERATION CAPACITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, I hereby move the following motion without
notice:

   That the Council —


      1) notes that –
          a) the South African economy is in the worst recession since the
             1920s;


          b) this recession has resulted in tens of thousands of people
             losing their jobs;

          c) the majority of the people of South Africa are faced with
             severe financial challenges;

          d) the South African government failed in its duty to ensure that
             the electricity needs of the country were adequately provided
             for and prevented Eskom from building new power generators
             despite warnings years in advance that such generation
             capacity would be required;

          e) the electricity tariff was increased by a whopping 31,3% only
             4 months ago; and

          f) excessively high tariff increases of 45% per annum for three
             years have reportedly been requested by Eskom for approval by
             the National Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa;

      2) therefore urges Nersa to ensure that any electricity tariff
         increase is realistic in terms of the current economic recession;
      3) requires that the government makes sufficient funding available for
         the urgent construction of additional electricity generation
         facilities;

      4) requests that Eskom speeds up the planning and implementation of
         environmentally friendly generation facilities; and

   (5)      urges that a full analysis of Eskom’s costs and expenses be
        undertaken in order to achieve significant savings.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] As there is an objection, the motion may not be proceeded
with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of motion.

           CONDOLENCES ON DEATH OF COMRADE LESLIE NZIMANI YENGENI

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes with deep sadness and the utmost sense of loss the sad and
         untimely death of Comrade Leslie Nzimani Yengeni on 6 October 2009;
      2) further notes that Comrade Leslie, as he was affectionately known,
         was born in Fort Beaufort in the Eastern Cape and later moved to
         Gugulethu in the Western Cape;


      3) recognises that, influenced by the involvement of his sons Norman
         and Tony Yengeni in the struggle, Comrade Leslie became a
         distinguished member of the African National Congress and
         participated in various activities of the movement until his
         untimely death;


      4) acknowledges that over the years he was subjected to regular
         harassment and degrading searches of his house for his so-called
         “terrorist sons” who in 1976 became involved in the struggle for
         the national liberation and social emancipation of the oppressed
         people of South Africa; and


      5) takes this opportunity to extend its deepest and heartfelt
         condolences to his beloved wife, Olive Baba Nonasi Yengeni, and his
         three children Tony, Shirley and Ndodana and his many
         grandchildren.

         May his soul rest in peace.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  WARM WISHES EXTENDED TO GRADE 12 LEARNERS IN FORTHCOMING NATIONAL SENIOR
                          CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes that 10 days from today, on 26 October 2009, Grade 12
         learners will be writing their National Senior Certificate
         examinations;


      2) further notes that it will be the second class of Grade 12 learners
         to write examinations of outcomes-based education, OBE, in South
         African public schools set on the National Curriculum Statement;


      3) recognises that Grade 12 examinations mark the fateful moment that
         every Grade 12 learner works towards from the beginning of their
         education and a defining step towards reaching their dream careers;


      4) calls on all stakeholders, including the Department of Education,
         parents and teachers, to support them during the examinations; and
      5) extends its warmest wishes to all Grade 12 learners throughout the
         country during their end-of-year examinations.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  PLEDGE MADE TO DONATE R750 000 TO BLACK TIE ENSEMBLE SCHOOL NOT HONOURED

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad —

     1) kennis neem dat in Die Burger van 11 Oktober 2009 ‘n berig verskyn
        het dat die Departement van Kuns en Kultuur in 2007-08 R750 000 aan
        die Black Tie Ensemble skool geskenk het;


     2) verder kennis neem dat die belofte wat gemaak is om in 2008-09
        dieselfde bedrag te skenk, nie eerbiedig is nie en daarom nou die
        skool nadelig raak in hul beplande optrede; en

     3) die Minister van Kuns en Kultuur vra om ondersoek in te stel waarom
        net die helfte betaal is, na verskeie versoeke, en die uitslag
        daarvan aan die Raad te rapporteer.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)
[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council —


      1) notes that in Die Burger of 11 October 2009 an article appeared
         that the Department of Arts and Culture donated R750 000 to the
         Black Tie Ensemble school in 2007-08;


      2) further notes that the pledge that was made, which was to donate
         the same amount in 2008-09, has not been honoured and therefore the
         school has now been negatively affected with regard to their
         planned actions; and

      3) requests the Minister of Arts and Culture to investigate as to why,
         after several requests, only one half has been paid, and to report
         to the Council on the outcome.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 CONGRATULATIONS TO MR LOURIE BOSMAN ON BEING NOMINATED AS LIFELONG HONORARY
                            PRESIDENT OF AGRI SA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr J M G BEKKER: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad sy gelukwensing oordra aan Mnr Lourie Bosman, DA-LP, met sy
   benoeming as lewenslange erepresident van Agri SA.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr J M G BEKKER: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the  Council  congratulates  Mr  Lourie  Bosman,  DA  MP,  on  being
   nominated as lifelong honorary president of AgriSA.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    SUSPENSION AND NONREINSTATEMENT OF MR A BOSHOFF, MUNICIPAL MANAGER OF
                        RUSTENBURG LOCAL MUNICIPALITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, the DA moves without notice:

   That the Council —


      1) notes the situation in the Rustenburg Local Municipality where the
         municipal manager, Mr A Boshoff, was suspended by the Executive
         Mayor, Mr Wolmarans, on a case of fraud on 12 August 2009 and was
         removed by force by the SAPS, who were heavily armed with automatic
         rifles;


      2) further notes that there were no charges against Mr Boshoff and he
         was supposed to be reinstated to his position, which the Executive
         Mayor refused to do; and



     (3)    investigates this matter urgently.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] There is an objection to the motion. In light of the
objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
now becomes a notice of motion.

 POSITION OF CENTRAL GAUTENG ATHLETICS ON ATHLETICS SA’S HANDLING OF CASTER
                                SEMENYA SAGA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad kennis neem dat —


     1) ‘n spesiale atletiek-vergadering deur atletiek Sentraal-Gauteng
        gehou was om vas te stel wie die bestuur van Sentraal-Gauteng
        toestemming gegee het om mnr Chuene, president van ASA, te steun in
        verband met sy optrede en leuens oor die Caster Semenya saga;
     2) dit ‘n baie goeie stap is deur atlete om die grondwet van ASA te
        beskerm en die belange van ASA te beskerm;


     3) die belange en waardes van atlete eerste gestel word bo politieke
        belange;


     4) Geraldine Pillay en haar mede organiseerders se optrede en
        standpunt oor hierdie hantering deur mnr Chuene van die Semenya
        saga prysenswaardig is en waardeer word; en

     5) die ontwrigting van hierdie spesiale atletiek-vergadering ‘n
        skreiende onreg en verontagsaming van die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika
        is en geensins aanvaar word nie.
 (Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)


[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council notes that —


      1) a special athletics assembly was held by Central Gauteng Athletics
         to establish who granted permission to Central Gauteng’s management
         to support Mr Chuene, President of ASA, in respect of his actions
         and lies with regard to the Caster Semenya saga;


      2) this is a very good step by the athletes in protecting the
         constitution of ASA and its interests;


      3) the interests and values of athletes are being put ahead of
         political interests;


      4) the actions and standpoint of Geraldine Pillay and her co-
         organisers regarding Mr Chuene’s handling of the Semenya saga are
         laudable and appreciated; and

    (5)     the disruption of this special meeting is a flagrant injustice
         and amounts to disregard for the Constitution of South Africa and
         can in no way be condoned.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] Are you objecting, hon member? Yes, there is an objection
to the motion. In light of the objection, the motion may not be proceeded
with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of motion.

  CONGRATULATIONS TO PRESIDENT OF UNITED STATES MR BARACK OBAMA ON WINNING
                              NOBEL PEACE PRIZE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr J M G BEKKER: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:
   Dat die Raad sy gelukwensing oordra aan President Obama, President van
   die VSA, met die toekenning van die Nobelvredesprys.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr J M G BEKKER: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council congratulates President Obama, President of the USA, on
    being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS IN TERMS OF MONEY BILLS
              AMENDMENT PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS ACT, 2009

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I move the draft resolution printed
in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the Council establish a committee  on  appropriations  in  terms  of
   section 4(3) of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and  Related  Matters
   Act, 2009 (Act No 9 of 2009).

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

          INTERNATIONAL DAY OF RURAL WOMEN: TOGETHER EMPOWERING AND
                     IMPROVING THE LIVES OF RURAL WOMEN

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, hon members,
I am really honoured to have been invited to address the House on this
subject today. It is a very special day and a very special matter to talk
about. We all know that Parliament is a tribune of the people and that
parliamentarians are, in real terms, people’s deputies.

The question of democracy is a very important one in terms of the heading,
the topic or subject matter today of Parliament entrenching a people-
centred democracy in achieving developmental goals. In reality, we
understand democracy in the very traditional sense of “government of the
people, for the people and by the people”. Our view is that this is a
necessary but not a sufficient condition for democracy. This is because in
reality the democracy we are speaking about in South Africa in particular
goes beyond just a representative democracy which really expresses itself
in terms of what we just said. Democracy, in terms of content, refers
rather to a system in which everyone has an equal, proportionate share in
the rights and responsibilities, duties and services and constraints and
opportunities which are accrued to or emanate from their own society. This
is a very important definition of democracy, and one which speaks to a
participatory democracy.

Government of the people by the people speaks to a representative
democracy. Therefore, we are talking about sets of entitlements and
obligations. These are very important in our view, because they are
basically the head and tail of the same coin. They reflect the dialectical
relationship between individual members of society and their society. We
speak about democracy most of the time without reflecting on the
obligations of people. We speak more about entitlements in terms of the
conservative or perhaps the traditional definition of democracy.

In our view in the ANC, we think development refers in the main to
economic, social and cultural progress brought about by certain political
choices. We make choices. Apartheid was a political choice — an unfortunate
political choice — which was driven by certain administrative processes and
programmes that reflected the structures of government.

We can look at the subject matter we are talking about now and use it as an
example. If you look at the migrant labour system — the manner in which it
impacted negatively on land possession — it actually served to dispossess
the land of different cultures of people and actually broke down the fabric
of African communal society. That was a political choice driven by certain
administrative programmes and processes.

When we refer to goals as the ANC, we are talking about social cohesion and
development — the development of outcomes. Social cohesion is something
that binds people together and defines people as people. In other words, it
does this as a cultural entity defined in geospatial terms or contexts. At
a broad national level, symbols of social cohesion include the national
anthem, the national flag, heritage sites and legends. These legends who
are defined are often males.

The other day the hon Minister of Transport, who was the Premier of KwaZulu-
Natal, asked me who the legendary women in my province were. I come from
the Eastern Cape province. I was really confounded. I started thinking and
eventually thought about where I come from — a small region in the Eastern
Cape called Cacadu, where we have the legend about a woman called Sarah
Baartman. I started thinking about that, but that was about it. I was
talking about other women there and he said that I should go back further
in time. We talked about Manthatisi and others. He started relating to me
just how important this subject matter is — the role of women in the past,
how they actually contributed to the transformation of society over time
and the kind of leadership they provided to society. So, social cohesion
talks about legends, and we should begin to address these legends in terms
of both male and female.

Development refers to shared growth and prosperity and full employment. It
speaks to cultural progress and equality and equity, particularly with
regard to women: the question of equality and equity in terms of content
and form for women and whether in fact women do have the right to own land
and to own assets in rural areas in particular.

The entrenchment of a people-centred democracy in achieving developmental
goals therefore talks to transformation and fundamental change,
particularly in terms of land, livestock, cropping and community. Talking
to community particularly refers to the manner in which society relates to
women; not how women relate to society, but how society relates to women in
terms of rights and responsibilities.

We still find, in some of our communities, that women can’t own land, that
women can’t own immovable assets, that women who raise children can’t even
be regents. Sometimes we have women who are unable to take responsibility
when their husbands depart. This is a central issue in terms of the
relations of power in some of our traditional communities. So, we are
talking of relations of land, livestock, cropping and community. Who is in
charge of homes when men are out there in the mines? Therefore, we are
talking about the relations of land as a substance in relation to the way
in which women are related to by society as a whole.

Therefore, rural development talks to social infrastructure, which impacts
very strongly on women. We still have a lot of women having to go long
distances carrying water and firewood on their heads. This is a matter that
relates to the manner in which society relates to women. One won’t find
husbands carrying water and “inyanda yezinkuni” [a bundle of firewood] on
their heads. They don’t do that. Husbands don’t do that.

The President raised the question of economic infrastructure. The President
says that we still don’t have kinds of infrastructure in rural areas which
can make things easier for women, in terms of both social and economic
infrastructure. We are talking about cultural progress. In fact, let’s
start with cultural facilities, libraries, schools, recreational facilities
for young people, playgrounds for children and early childhood
developmental centres in rural areas in particular, ICT infrastructure and
the way in which we manage national resources in rural areas. All of these
impact on the manner in which women live their lives in rural areas. These
things must be there or else the burden falls on women.

Therefore, what this means is that when we are talking about land reform
and rural development we are talking about issues that affect women
directly. We are talking about issues that relate to how women carry the
burden of society by raising children, having to carry firewood and water
for long distances and having to cook for their children.

I think Saba Mbixane related a story about this very well. He said that one
day a man asked God to make him a woman so that his woman could feel the
burden of being a man because he went out there to work every morning and
the woman stayed behind. God said it was fine, that he would grant his
request and that he would be a woman the next day. The next day he woke up
as a woman. She had to cook for the husband and make tea. The husband then
left. She then washed the children, gave them food and took them to school.
When she got back, she had to wash dishes. When she realised it was lunch
time and the husband came back she had to cook lunch for the husband. When
the husband left, she realised that she had to go and fetch the children
from school, etc. Then in the evening she had to cook supper for the
family. After that, the man went to bed and she was still busy. She thought
the man was asleep but he was waiting for her. He said, “Well, there you
are.” And that’s it – you know what happens. [Laughter.]

Of course she felt that she couldn’t be a woman again. She didn’t want to
be a woman the next day. She said, “God, thank very much. I’ve experienced
it. Could you please change me. I want to go back to being a man.” Of
course, God answered back. He said, “Unfortunately, what you were doing
last night resulted in your conceiving a child. So, you are going to have
to wait another nine months before you can go back to being a man.”

So, this is the burden of being a woman. Can you imagine carrying a child
for nine months, having to carry water and a bundle of firewood on your
head, cooking every day — doing all of those things — without respite? That
is what the life of a woman is worth in rural areas. Then a woman is told
that she cannot own a herd of cattle or livestock because it belongs to her
little son — the son she is still raising and the son she carried for nine
months; again, because the girl-child cannot inherit these things so
easily. These things are changing, thanks to our democracy. The
Constitution that we brought about as a nation is changing all of this.

We are talking about equity and cultural progress. The days of girl-
children not being able to go to school beyond standard five — when they
said that one should just write a letter and get a response — are over. We
are talking about women who are running the country. The place of women is
not in the kitchen anymore.

Daardie dae is verby. [Those days are over.]

Chair, we are talking about a very important matter — a matter that is at
the heart of rural development and land reform. When we are talking about
rural development, we are therefore talking about development of women that
talks to cultural progress so that we no longer have women who are supposed
to be uneducated, women who must request their husbands’ permission before
they walk out of the yard, women who must request their husbands’
permission before they can look for a job. We are talking about women who
themselves can take responsibility for the running of not only their homes,
but also their communities and society.

Our Constitution is said to be one of the best in the world because it
created an opportunity for women to realise the best they can be as human
beings, as South Africans and as citizens of the world. Thank you very
much, hon Chair. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Minister. I saw you shook up
everybody. I’m sure they enjoyed your presentation. I now call the hon
Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Chairperson and hon
delegates, the subject of today, which is rural women, is very close to my
heart. The debate is important in the work of this House. It gives us an
opportunity to reflect on the International Day of Rural Women and,
specifically, it gives us an opportunity to share what we are doing
together to empower and improve the lives of rural women. It is for this
reason that we requested leaders of delegations to participate and
highlight the measures, plans and programmes that their provinces are
putting in place to empower rural women in order to improve their lives as
well as to highlight the challenges that rural women are still facing and
how to address them. I’m happy to see MECs from some of our very rural
provinces here today.

In our draft strategic framework plan, to be considered by this House
shortly, we have identified the initiation and implementation of programmes
aimed at assisting vulnerable groups in society as one of our strategic
objectives for the term. Women, especially rural women, form part of this
category. It is therefore significant to have an understanding of what we
are doing, especially as provinces, in ensuring that we empower rural
women.

In trying to address challenges facing rural women, we need to first know
where we come from, where we are now and where we are going. As a veteran,
I regard myself as more qualified to give such a historical background.

We all know that rural women were subjected to oppression in many ways.
They faced discrimination, forced removals and apartheid. There was the
legacy of autocracy, nepotism and corruption in service provision and
decision-making over development issues. Paternalism was entrenched. In
order to provide for their families, rural women tilled the land and were
also there as collectors of firewood and water. Yet, they were expected to
eat after men who usually had the largest share of the family meal. They
stayed at home looking after their families while their husbands were away
as migrant labourers. The system deprived them of the opportunity to be
with their husbands in the cities. If they tried, they were harassed and
hounded by authorities back to their communes in the countryside. In short,
they were treated as secondary citizens in their own country.

As if this was not enough, they were subjected to traditional laws that
often undermined their rights as human beings. But, despite these
difficulties, rural women were able to provide for their families, keeping
the candle burning until they were temporarily united with their husbands.
The enduring philosophy of ubuntu kept their families together. There was
communal tilling of land, communal sharing of seeds and communal
harvesting. The hungry were fed, and the homeless were given shelter.

The intergenerational scars borne by rural women were to be inherited by
their children, especially the girl-child. To this day, we are still facing
the greatest challenge of the emancipation of women, especially rural
women. Until we address this, we are not going to be able to support rural
entrepreneurship. Women in rural areas are at the centre of entrepreneurial
activity despite being less literate. Some are extremely poor and can
hardly eke out a living without some form of government support.

However, our new democratic order has provided hope for rural women. The
rural woman has the freedom to participate in decision-making structures.
She has the freedom to express her views of the kind of development she
would like to see and act on. She has the freedom to assume leadership,
although she is still not empowered to carry out such a responsibility.
There are, of course, many opportunities for such empowerment. One such
vehicle is in the form of co-operatives. But this requires training on
basic business management skills and project implementation in order to be
sustainable. Stokvels constitute a means of saving for rural women as well
as a way of participating communally in the rural economy, but our
financing system remains largely conservative.

Where are we going? As a country we have a vision enshrined in our
Constitution which is to improve the quality of life of all citizens and to
free the potential of each person. The attainment of this vision requires
us to work together now to empower rural women to be able to free their
potential. We need rural women to have the following: access to education
and health care; access to control over land and other productive and
financial resources; and access to the creation of income-generating
activities, thus contributing to job creation.

I am going to shorten my presentation because I’m running out of time.

The report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
improvement of the situation of women in rural areas released at the end of
July this year notes that the persistent inequalities and discrimination
faced by rural women pose significant challenges to the achievement of the
internationally agreed upon development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals. This is a general observation by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations. He notes further in his report that, as member
states, we need to ensure that the rights of older women in rural areas are
taken into account. These include equal access to basic services,
appropriate social protection measures and economic and financial
resources.

One of the important recommendations contained in this report is that
countries need to integrate the creation of nonagricultural employment
opportunities for rural women into all national development strategies and
poverty eradication strategies and increase women’s access to financial
resources, including credit. The report, however, is silent on South
Africa’s attempts in this regard. Could it be that we are not doing enough
to provide rural women with finance and access to microcredit for
development purposes?

Our strategies to empower and improve the lives of rural women will succeed
only if they are well co-ordinated across the three spheres. The NCOP has
great potential in promoting such co-ordination and co-operation, but we
need to work together to empower those who were condemned to hewing
firewood and fetching water for centuries. Rural women are the vanguard of
our rural development vision. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Hon Chair, hon members, hon guests, Cope fully identifies
with the United Nations-initiated International Day of Rural Women.
Although this day is only in its second year, there have been some
remarkable developments already. In New Zealand, for example, journalists
and communicators were invited to compete for the Rural Women New Zealand
Award. This is such a brilliant idea. Rural women and what they do are
forgotten simply because the media has always tended to forget about them.

On our continent, rural women grow 80% of the food produced in Africa. This
is a stupendous contribution. Where would we be without this effort? Yet,
women receive only 5% of the credit made available for food producers.
These sorts of injustices perpetrated against women have continued unabated
throughout history until the present time.

This is a fact, and it is a known fact. Yet, has government done enough
about redressing this wrong? Does the Land Bank have a progressive policy
in this regard?

There is also another issue that greatly concerns Cope. Two thirds of rural
women in the world are illiterate. The proportion may very well be
applicable also in South Africa. Has government done enough to alter this
tragic situation? The number of rural women living in poverty continues to
increase.

It is a moot issue having World Rural Women’s Day take place on October 15
every year, one day before the Food and Agriculture Organisation’s World
Food Day. As the crisis arising from climate change intensifies, we will
need to look to rural women to become familiar with a sustainable approach
to food production. This is urgent.

Finally, we as Cope advocate that South Africa become an activist state,
where all sectors of society are structurally supported by activists in
their cause. Because rural women have never been activists, they were
ignored by the state. We would like for them to become activists so that
they can have increased opportunities in order to become literate, have
access to information technology and resources, own a greater share of land
and emerge into freedom from this feudal state in which they have been
trapped for all these years. Forward with rural women! Forward! I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr M SOGONI (Eastern Cape): Hon Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and
delegates to the NCOP, hon Minister and leaders of delegations, ladies and
gentlemen, I rise to participate in this debate on behalf of the province
of the Eastern Cape. The theme of the debate is: Together empowering and
improving the lives of rural women.
Thank you very much, hon Minister, for laying the fertile ground in order
for us to participate in this debate. My thanks also go to the Deputy
Chairperson.

I have no doubt that the issues raised here are very close to the heart of
the many millions back home. I also wish to join in celebrating all the
women residing in rural areas across the globe.

Historically, the black majority of our country has been subjected to
colonial subjugation, dispossession and marginalisation, with those
residing in rural areas being the most vulnerable. Centuries of
underdevelopment resulting from colonial and apartheid policies have left
enduring structural legacies, particularly in provinces such as the Eastern
Cape. In this province, for instance, the less populous western regions are
materially better off than the more populous eastern regions. This
historically induced structural crisis has been deepened by the current
global capitalist crisis and neoliberal globalisation, which have served to
limit the range of options for a more radical restructuring of the South
African political economy.

Today it is generally accepted that women, through their triple
exploitation, are the hardest hit, and more so women in rural areas. This
is largely because of some ill-conceived and wrongly practised traditional
and customary policies.

There have always been fewer rural women in employment than their male
counterparts. There has also been less income for women compared to men;
fewer women in leadership and management positions; more HIV and Aids
prevalence amongst women compared to their male counterparts, and the story
goes on and on.

It is rural women who were and, sadly in some areas, are still being forced
into marriages.

Phaya kuthi ke kukho into ekuthiwa kukuthwala. UMphathiswa obekekileyo ukhe
wakhankanya ukuba umama ... [In our area there is the ukuthwala custom. The
hon Minister mentioned that woman ...]

... would come into the bedroom voluntarily and engage in some activities
there voluntarily. Where I come from, there are areas where you do that
against your will.

We all know and should appreciate the fact that over the past 15 years the
democratic government has worked relentlessly to bring about equity to
restore the dignity of black people in this country, including empowering
and improving the lives of rural women.

There is no doubt that the progressive policies of the postapartheid
government have had enormous benefits for the women of our country. These
include the right to choose to terminate one’s pregnancy; the child support
grant; justice in the maintenance of children by their father; government
procurement systems, etc.

As recently as December 2007, the ANC, at its 52nd national conference,
adopted elaborate resolutions covering a wide range of issues of concern to
women, including women’s representation in decision-making structures, the
women’s Ministry and rural development, amongst other things.

As early as the year 2000, the province of the Eastern Cape initiated the
rural development framework. However, this did not go far enough, hence the
introduction of the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme by
national government in 2001.

A number of rural municipalities, such as the Chris Hani District
Municipality, the O R Tambo District Municipality, the Alfred Nzo District
Municipality and the Ukhahlamba District Municipality participated in this
programme.

The provincial growth and development programme launched in 2003 emphasised
issues of job creation, poverty eradication, infrastructure development,
human resource development, food security and agrarian transformation. All
of these will benefit women, particularly those residing in the rural
economy.

Guided by the 2009 ANC manifesto and based on the instructions drawn from
the state of the nation address, the Eastern Cape has made progress in
developing a provincial rural development strategy. We believe that there
are key strategic issues that should contribute to the empowerment and
improvement of the lives of rural women in the Eastern Cape. These should
also form the basis for a national strategy and rural development
programme. All these have implications for gender equality and women
empowerment.

We believe that the first issue here is ownership of land and natural
resources and assets. The second issue is employment, because we believe
that rural development interventions should be aimed at creating decent and
sustainable jobs, or at enabling people to generate income that is equal to
or more than what they would have earned in the labour market.

The third issue is eradicating poverty and fighting inequality. The fourth
issue is social development and basic human rights. The fifth issue for us,
which the hon Minister touched on, is organisation and mobilisation of
women residing in the rural areas. We believe that the reorganisation of
people and communities, through democratic processes, is essential for any
process of rural development.

The state should facilitate partnerships and create an enabling environment
for development to take place. Reconstruction programmes for community
institutions with a high level of organisation should be encouraged and
supported by the state, for example the cultural, heritage and sport and
recreational activities.

In conclusion, government has, since 1994, made a lot of progress in
developing policies, enacting laws and implementing programmes aimed at
empowering and improving the quality of life of women residing in rural
areas. However, we are not naive; a lot still needs to be done to reverse
the apartheid legacy and dismantle the historic socioeconomic disparities
between the cities and rural areas. Thank you very much, hon Chair.
[Applause.]

Ms S S CHEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, my hon colleagues, ladies and
gentlemen, before I make my speech, let me first share a story with you.
Forty-five years ago, there was a young, single mother, aged 30, with three
young children and no income. She had only basic education and had no
experience or other formal skills training, other than her desire to
survive and to provide for her children.

She went knocking from door to door, looking for work. She eventually put
all her children through school and university, working as a cleaner at a
hotel. Today she has rough hands and calloused feet, but smiles proudly at
her children, who are now all university graduates and have families of
their own. That single parent is my mother. This is a story of a typical
rural woman in Taiwan.
Having witnessed her struggle and tears, as her eldest daughter, I often
wonder what the world could have offered my mother to ease her plight, even
if it was just a little bit.

It is with great passion that I stand before you today to debate the
question of empowering women in rural communities. There is no need for us
to list numbers and statistics to know how much difficulty women in the
rural areas face. We know that it is a reality, and a reality we need to
address.

The struggle of rural women around the world appears to be universal.
Issues such as low education levels, lack of legal protection, poverty and
the low status given to them by the community affect most rural women. They
are often left to fend for themselves and their children but without any
resources that would ensure any kind of adequate care.

In South Africa, problems faced by rural women include, but are not limited
to, the following: low literacy rates; low status in a patriarchal society;
lack of control over resources; a low level of awareness of their civic or
human rights; limited access to skills-enhancing or skills-acquiring
activities; lack of access to services; being in low-return economic
activities and with very few work opportunities; and having the dual
responsibility of child care and income generation.

Now, we need to think and ask ourselves what we should do about all this.
In order to empower women in rural communities, we should first look at the
current resources they have at their disposal, such as the ability to
mobilise the community and take advantage of currently operating co-ops;
using women with skills as mentors for women lacking the same skills; and
expanding the co-operatives’ function to include supporting women
emotionally, socially and economically.

Information dissemination regarding available services and resources and
regarding women’s civil and human rights is also important. Women need to
be informed of what is available to them and how they can use these
resources to best serve their needs.

Literacy programmes to improve the literacy levels of women in rural
communities would hugely improve their chances of employment and of
interacting with society at large, thereby enhancing their confidence and
self-esteem. This would have a big impact on their families, communities
and society in general.

Another important aspect of empowering women in rural communities is
training in entrepreneurial and business management skills. Showing them
how to start, manage, run and maintain a small business would be invaluable
to communities where access to commercial employment is limited, in terms
of both skills and geographical location. Linked to this is the
accessibility of microcredit and funding to women. Training must be given
on how loans can be acquired, and the qualifying criteria for such should
be made extremely clear and reasonable.

Empowering women in rural communities is clearly not an overnight
endeavour. As the theme of this debate — Together empowering and improving
the lives of rural women — indicates, it is only by working together that
we can achieve all that we hope to achieve. Let us be a success story for
the rest of the world, where a different story can be offered relating to
women in rural communities. It should be a story of support, assistance and
hope. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B P MABE: Hon Chairperson, Minister, hon members, ladies and gentlemen,
the International Day of Rural Women directs our attention to the
challenges that young rural women face in our country. While considering
that over the past 15 years our nation has made formidable progress in
advancing the conditions and needs of women in certain areas, the vast
majority of our young women remain mostly disadvantaged, not reaping the
benefits of our democratic dispensation.

They still suffer from the absence of timely and adequate medical care,
inadequate diets, and a lack of information and maternal health, resulting
in complicated pregnancies and high maternal mortality rates. Young women
in rural areas are particularly vulnerable to poverty and unemployment; and
are subjected to becoming the slaves of culture, which in most cases takes
away their youth and self-esteem. It takes very strong characters, for
instance Caster Semenya, to survive against all odds.

The unemployment rate amongst young rural women is very high when compared
to that of women in urban areas in the country. This indicates that the
majority of young black women continue to live under extremely poor
conditions in rural areas. We must aim to reduce the impact of poverty on
rural women, based on the principles of sustainability and empowerment.

Women constitute 52,2% of South Africa’s population. So, when we call for a
better life for all, it means that we should have a larger impact on women,
who constitute the majority of our population.

Limpopo, the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal have the highest proportion of
females — the largest number of the population - with the lowest level of
development. The poorest of the poor in these highly rural provinces are
the rural young women. This is cause for concern.

Strengthening our rural communities can only yield results once we mobilise
young rural women into a powerful, active and united force that will know
how best to seize economic opportunities in all three spheres of
government, and if we develop policies for the provision of more health
care, and improve the literacy and financial literacy of young rural women.

The legislation on the National Youth Development Agency received unanimous
support in Parliament even from the opposition benches. That shows the
commitment of government to improving the lives of young rural people. The
agency will ensure that the youth agenda occupies centre stage in our
national development agenda. The struggles of South Africa’s youth can
never be in vain and we must continue to rededicate ourselves to the
efforts and cause of the generations before us and advance their ideals as
best we can.

One of the key principles of the Ministry of Women, Children and People
with Disabilities is that 80% of the department’s work will be driven
externally. That means most of the work will be to reach out to
communities.

Young women, stand up and grab the opportunity for socioeconomic rights.
The time is now. No one but you will free you from the shackles of poverty,
victimisation and abuse. Life is not about where you come from, but where
you are going. The ANC has made a promise to better your lives. It will
never forsake you nor leave you. Working together we can do more. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms M G QABATHE (Free State): Chairperson of the House, hon member Tau, the
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces in absentia, our hon
Minister Comrade Nkwinti, representatives from all provinces and hon
members of this august House, one feels honoured and humbled to be given
the great honour of addressing this House, representing the Free State. The
International Day of Rural Women is a call to review all that relates to
the development of rural women in our country, the continent and the world
as a whole.

Yes, much has been done throughout the world. Many countries, including
ours, have developed laws that seek to protect the rights of every citizen
and ensure the development of their lives. The pace differs from country to
country and, yes, we need to acknowledge that some countries are way behind
and need to be assisted to accelerate the pace; hence recognition of this
International Day of Rural Women.

In our country we appreciate that President Jacob Zuma has made it a
priority that there be great development in rural areas and has therefore
restructured his Cabinet and departments in a manner that will respond and
contribute effectively and efficiently to rural needs.

Our Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform, the hon Nkwinti, is
already working at a very fast pace. In the Free State his priority area is
Makgolokoeng in QwaQwa, a former Bantustan that is so underdeveloped that
it puts our people in severe conditions. Plans for an agri-village are at
an advanced stage. Communities are very happy that the Minister is going to
establish an agri-village in Makgolokoeng. As the Free State, tomorrow we
will be celebrating World Food Day in Makgolokoeng.

We appreciate the fact that some of the women who were once farmworkers and
farm dwellers are not only the tillers of the soil but are also landowners.
There are still some challenges in ensuring that they then become full
commercial farmers, but we are marching forward. Most of the farmers in the
Free State are still at an emergent level. I am sure that standing here
today, having done such a lot within such a short period, after 15 years in
power, the Free State women who marched against the Native Land Act in 1913
are proud of us because of what we have done up to now.

For all of us this day should be a celebration of what has been achieved to
date, but it should also be a time to look critically at issues and areas
that still need a lot of attention in order to review our plans for
accelerated service delivery. We need to join hands and look into our laws,
policies and regulations. Where there are gaps, they need to be attended
to.

The NCOP is our hope to ensure that when regulatory mechanisms are put in
place they do not undermine or contradict our laws. The NCOP is our hope to
ensure that the process of developing and amending our laws and Acts is not
dragged out, but is short and effective. We need to ensure that all
platforms that are created for the development of rural women, including
the farm areas, work coherently and in an integrated manner.

At the moment there is no clear-cut coherence between the departments
dealing with labour, land affairs and agriculture and the SA Human Rights
Commission to work together. They still operate in silos. Therefore, there
is a need for them to be clubbed together.

There are areas where human rights are extremely badly violated. We need
these departments, together with the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development, the police, and the committees of Parliament in
all spheres, to respond qualitatively to these challenges. In the Free
State we still have areas where people are made to drink water with
animals.

We still have challenges where some areas are not easily accessible. Our
transport modes need to be looked into in order to incorporate rural areas.
In the Free State the train line that is being developed as we speak, from
Bloemfontein to Botshabelo and Thaba Nchu, which was one of the Bantustans,
is one of the areas we are looking into in our endeavours to improve
transport in rural areas. In later years the train will reach Lesotho.

We still have areas where people are treated as slaves and not as
farmworkers and farm dwellers; and most of the time these areas are not
accessible, particularly farms that are within farms. The Department of
Labour, the police and the SA Human Rights Commission are not able to enter
such areas. These are areas that need to be focused on much more.

There are areas where our people are still deprived of opportunities to
enter schools closer to their homes and where people are still not able to
access government grants. These areas still need to be focused on. This day
should be a day that we use to educate ourselves and our communities in
that those who live with an abundance of service delivery make a call that
for one or two years their areas are just maintained; that they say
“hokaai” [Whoa] to development. Let most of the budget be redirected to the
development of rural areas.

Chair, think of a woman in a rural area who is about to deliver a baby in
the middle of the night where there is no clinic, no hospital, no
ambulance, no electricity, and not enough water. Think of her rearing this
child; when the child is ill and there is nowhere to go; no mobile clinic
or any help. Think of the development of that child in an area where there
is no school close to home and that child has to walk miles to reach one.
At other times, when it is raining, the child cannot access the school.
Think of the girl-child who ends up being raped and abused because of the
rough paths she has to walk to get to any service delivery point.

I have been sent here by the Free State to do lobbying. If we, as the
world, are genuine in our hearts about the International Day of Rural
Women, we will drive and lead the campaign. Those with abundant service
delivery should just let their areas be maintained, avoiding deterioration,
with all the budgets directed towards our rural and remote areas. Let us do
it.

Therefore, as the Free State, we are saying that this day should become a
collective effort by all to assist in the development of rural women and
that we should move at a faster pace. We dare not fail. In working
together, women in the rural areas will enjoy the benefits of this
democracy earlier than anticipated. I thank you, Chair. I thank the ANC and
the ANC-led government for bringing about this democracy. Let us expand it
beyond our areas to the rural areas. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Chair, all protocol observed, three minutes is too little
time to speak about such an important issue. Let me start by saying that
there is no beauty in this world without women. They are the cornerstone of
our nation and they have played a crucial role in the freedom we are
enjoying today. I refer here to women like Lilian Ngoyi, Ruth First,
Adelaide Tambo and many others, you can just name them.

All South Africans have extensive rights on paper and freedoms that we only
dreamt of for years but, unfortunately, these rights and freedoms are not
enjoyed by the vast majority of rural women. Rural women continue to be the
most deprived within our society. Their daily burdens are vast and
entrenched, and all too often they suffer alone. Rural women continue to
carry the burdens of their families, land and communities on their
shoulders, with very little time to focus on their own lives. What
perpetuates this is the added daily toll of rural life and its extremes
like poverty, Aids, poor health care, bad transport, a lack of education
and unemployment. These are the burdens of a woman’s life.

Rural women need empowerment through social initiatives that allow them to
improve their own lives. Rural women have the right to feel secure and
safe, financially and physically, within their communities. Empowerment is
not just about improving a person’s life financially; it is about
empowering a person to feel dignity and pride in his or her life, to be
healthy, and to work with others in the community. We need to encourage the
young women of today and show them the role they can play to take their
place in our society.

As parliamentarians we must help rural women and their communities as a
whole to be empowered and improve their lives. We have a responsibility to
ensure that these women receive their constitutional rights. We cannot sit
here in Parliament and leave our women to suffer. It is important that
empowered women, parliamentarians and leaders assist the women of rural
South Africa to empower themselves.
Chair, allow me to say these last few words. Allow me to thank God for the
precious human beings that He has created to feed us, to help us grow and
understand the purpose of life. Let us treat them with dignity, respect and
honour. They tend to bring the best out in men. There is nothing more
pleasant and beautiful than a woman. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S CACHALIA (Limpopo): Hon Chairperson, hon and distinguished Minister,
hon and distinguished comrades and other hon members, it is Resolution
62/136 of the General Assembly of the United Nations, passed in December
2007, that established 15 October as the day of rural women to be observed
the world over. This idea was born out of the resolutions of the 4th World
Conference on Women in Beijing in 1995. It is also appropriate that the
International Day of Rural Women is observed on the eve of World Food Day,
thereby recognising the important contribution of rural women who, in all
developing countries, contribute to rural economies and livelihoods as
active participants in a wide range of farming activities such as crop
production and livestock care.

In sub-Saharan Africa approximately 60% of women are engaged in or are
employed in agriculture. Women add to livelihoods in rural areas and carry
out the vital functions of caring for children, the sick and the aged. It
is also an undisputed fact that rural women remain the most vulnerable and
disadvantaged in so far as access to social services and participation in
economic activities are concerned.
Rural women, however, remain the most vulnerable to poverty, disease and
abuse. They bear the full brunt of epidemics, food crises, climate change,
natural disasters, and economic meltdowns. Access to health and educational
facilities and to gainful economic activity is riddled with never-ending
obstacles for rural women, yet the struggle of rural women in the fight
against apartheid is well documented in our history.

As a predominantly rural province, 56% of Limpopo’s population consists of
women. Provincial government has put in place active plans and programmes
together with the necessary implementation and monitoring mechanisms aimed
at empowering and improving the lives of women, particularly in our rural
areas. Programmes are implemented by the various line departments in
collaboration, where appropriate and necessary, with national and local
government support and participation. The Office on the Status of Women
based in the office of the premier and the relevant oversight committees of
the provincial legislature monitor the programmes and their implementation.


A provincial war room on poverty co-ordinated by the office of the premier
has been established to oversee poverty alleviation programmes. All the
programmes are located in areas where poverty levels are high, and the
participation of rural women in particular in the programme is an
imperative. This is evident all over the province where rural women, with
government’s assistance, have organised themselves in programmes for, inter
alia, crop growing, beadmaking, and participating in the services required
by schools in the school nutrition programmes.

The pilot programme at Muyeshe village, identified and supported by the
Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform, is a glowing example of how,
through rigorous and co-ordinated participation at all levels of various
government departments as well as with the private sector, we can begin to
breathe life and hope into an otherwise depressed community. Vegetable
tunnels, brick-making, water provisioning, skills development projects,
road building, maintenance and the building of schools and health
facilities are all being undertaken with women playing a pivotal role in
these activities. A similar project on a similar scale and, it is hoped,
with similar vigour, is being undertaken at Ga-Kgatla village in Limpopo.

Female farmers’ programmes running under the structure of Women in
Agriculture and Rural Development, Ward, have been constituted in all five
districts of our province. An annual female farmer awards programme by the
department of agriculture helps women empowerment and job creation. With
regard to the supply chain, in the five districts, offices have been set up
to assist, in particular, rural women in the tendering process, and
workshops are held on a regular basis.

With regard to tourism, we have the Marula Festival, which is predominantly
run by women. Women pick the marula fruit and display their skills in
making marula juice, the marula liquor, butter, lotions and soap. The
festival takes place near the Kruger National Park. This is also a time
when women have the opportunity to expose their products to numerous
tourists.

Abet programmes are in place to ensure that rural women, particularly, have
access to simple literacy and numeracy programmes. Over 4 000 women are
documented as having gone through this programme in the rural areas.

The programmes to allow women to have access to health services within the
rural areas are well under way. The provisioning of clinics, and the
acceleration of health service areas for pregnant women and elderly women
within the rural areas are well documented. Extra ARV centres in the
province have been created to deal with HIV and Aids. In the Expanded
Public Works Programmes women must form part of the drive to create jobs.
The infrastructure programmes within the rural areas demand that women in
our rural areas be given priority in jobs where skills are not as highly
sought.

As a country born out of struggle and a painful past, we, under the
revolutionary leadership of the ANC government, lead the world in espousing
the rights of women in all their forms. We must continue to do so. We must
put the issue of women high on our sociopolitical and economic agenda. We
must continue to use days like these to popularise the cause of rural women
and to actively implement programmes, innovating and bringing in fresh
ideas and programmes as we move forward. Women, and in particular the rural
women, need to and have to assume their rightful place and pivotal position
in all societies of the world. In South Africa, it must continue to be very
much part of our developmental agenda. I thank you, hon Chairperson.

Ms A N D QIKANI: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs, hon members and
the House at large, good afternoon. In addressing the call to address the
poverty and the emancipation of women and ensure basic access to services
for the rural poor, the ruling party has given its full support to the
Comprehensive Rural Development Programme that is being spearheaded by the
Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform.

This strategy is viewed as the answer that many rural women have been
waiting for, and promises access to health care facilities, water, food and
jobs, which are all part of the bigger picture that is envisioned for rural
women.

Currently, approximately 52% of South Africa’s total population is women
and of that amount 47% live in rural areas. South Africa’s progressive
Constitution and legislation provide the legal framework for equality and
nondiscrimination especially in the provision of resources, but the
challenge remains to implement these measures in order to improve the
standard of living for women, especially those in rural areas.

Access to land remains a major constraint for women in South Africa as a
whole. Land reform programmes and the tendency to break up communal land
parcels, especially in areas of tribal and customary tenure, have almost
exclusively transferred land rights to male heads of households. This lack
of access to land for security and production has resulted in many women
being disempowered, especially in rural areas. These women therefore have
less decision-making authority over land use and land care, resulting in
detrimental environmental management and loss of resources.

We need to address these issues by providing women with training and
resources so that the custodians of our resources can be equipped with
tools to use them sustainably. This can be done during the pilot project in
Giyani and other sites identified by the department so that post-settlement
support in the form of equipment, grants and training can be provided to
the women, the providers of their families, empowering them to reach their
potential.

Although rural women are assuming an increasingly prominent role in
agriculture as producers and providers in developing countries, they remain
amongst the most disadvantaged of all the users. The Food and Agricultural
Organisation, the FAO, estimates that rural women are responsible for half
of the world’s food production and produce between 60% and 80% of the food
in most developing countries.

Yet, despite their contribution to global food security, women farmers are
frequently underestimated and overlooked in most development strategies.
Men and women do not have the same access to resources and women’s access
is even more constrained as a result of cultural and traditional factors.
All these concerns need to be addressed if women are to share in the wealth
and opportunities that the sector presents.

While women represent a significant proportion of the farm labour force and
subsistence food producers, they have been the last to benefit from
economic and development transformation. Gender bias persists as farmers
are still generally perceived as male by policy-makers. For this reason,
women find it more difficult than men to gain access to valuable resources
such as land, credit and agricultural inputs, technology, extension
training and services that would enhance their production capacity. Their
access to critical resources and services is limited.

Women in rural areas are severely affected by the lack of marketing
facilities for agricultural products. Infrastructure and distribution
channels are not available to market their products. Proper marketing
analysis is needed in order to promote their products. Women in agriculture
who do not benefit from proper marketing channels are themselves vulnerable
to intermediaries who are able to exploit the situation by buying products
at low prices and selling them at higher prices, thus making a huge profit.


In Giyani, for example, a partnership was established between the Macena
Community Farm, which comprises a group of 36 women farmers, assisted by
the Organic Farms Group and the Department of Rural Development and Land
Reform to produce organic vegetables for the local Spar supermarket in
Giyani. The farm is 15 hectares in size, but only four hectares are being
used productively. Plans to expand the infrastructure to include a pack
house, storage facility and shade-cloth nursery are under way. The
challenge for the group is to have proper expertise and advice on extension
services and production. These need to be provided by the Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries so that the community can be more
productive and have more economic benefits.

Most studies show that in the efforts to generate household food supply and
income, a substantial burden falls on women. Almost everywhere, women are
responsible for processing, storing and preparing family food. Rural women
also fetch water and firewood for the family. Above all, women are engaged
as family labour in agriculture and wage labour, as well as in other income-
earning activities. They generate a substantial proportion — and sometimes
even all - of the basic daily food for the family.

In response to the plight of rural women in the agricultural sector, the
Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries has responded by
reassessing its priorities and making funding available so that the rural
communities of South Africa can be accommodated within the economy. The
Minister is cognisant of the lack of enabling mechanisms to empower women
in these areas and has initiated programmes to address these. Various
grants and Mafisa - the Micro Agricultural Financial Institutions of SA -
are being reinvented to give priority to groups that are vulnerable and
marginalised.

This House fully welcomes and supports efforts put into increasing jobs and
finding new employment and economic opportunities.

The Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development programme, LRAD,
provides an excellent vehicle for redressing gender imbalances in land
access and landownership, therefore improving the lives of rural women and
the households they may be supporting. The programme serves as a means of
creating opportunities to enable rural women to develop in numerous spheres
of life, therefore giving them security against poverty and independent
economic status.

By ensuring that women participate fully in asset redistribution and
agrarian reform, the programme helps government to meet its international
commitments, for example in terms of the Beijing Platform for Action and
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women, Cedaw.
In terms of the agricultural development programme, adult individuals apply
for grants in their own right, rather than as members of households. This
means that women can apply for grants to acquire land individually, or can
pool their grants with whom they choose, therefore augmenting their control
of the manner in which they benefit from the subprogramme.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we are on the right path as South
Africa in realising the need to focus on rural development. We can show the
world that what we have fought to achieve will be realised by all and
therefore will empower women to eradicate the imbalances. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms A ROSSOUW (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, Minister, it is really a
privilege for me to participate in this debate today because our rural
women are the unsung heroes of South Africa.

As julle my sal verskoon, gaan ek verder in Afrikaans praat. Ek het nou my
stukkie Engels gepraat. Landelike vroue dra ‘n driedubbelle las. Die las
van vrouwees beteken die dra van verantwoordelikheid vir haar en haar gesin
te midde van toenemende armoede en afsondering in die platteland, behalwe
die alledaagse gesukkel om
liggaam, siel en gesin aanmekaar te hou.

Bevryding het nie vir al die vroue op die platteland gekom nie.
Navorsing deur Markinor in 2007, het bevind dat slegs 15% van die
plattelandse vroue matriek of hoër onderrig het, in vergelyking met
ongeveer 50% van die stedelike vroue. Sewentig persent van die plattelandse
vroue moet met minder as R2 500 per huishouding, per maand klaarkom. Slegs
20% van die vroue het ’n voltydse werk. Ongeveer 40% van die vroue is
werkloos en dus ook permanent op soek na werk.

Die twee probleme wat ver bo ander uittroon in die landelike gebiede is dié
van migrasie en armoede. Die Wes-Kaap het ’n reuse immigrasie van 250 000
mense uit ander provinsies en die res van Afrika. Die bevolkingsgroei was
5,3% in 2004.

Die bevolkingsgroei is ook groter in distriksmunisipaliteite, soos hier in
die Wes-Kaap. Die aanwas plaas ’n groter en immer groeiende las op ons
reeds sukkelende gemeenskappe en munisipaliteite, waar die mededinging om
werk en oorlewing net soveel feller en meer intensief is as elders. Almal
ding mee om die skaars water, werk en natuurlike hulpbronne van ons
provinsie, soos in elke ander provinsie. Dit is en bly ’n werklikheid en
ons sal elkeen in ons provinsies en in Suid-Afrika ’n oplossing moet vind
om hierdie probleem aan te spreek.

Volgens Statistiek Suid-Afrika, is daar ongeveer 150 000 meer vroue as mans
in die Wes-Kaap. Dit dui daarop dat meer vroue aan die hoof van
huishoudings staan.
HIV/Vigs, fetale alkoholsindroom, tuberkulose, en wanvoeding is van die
ernstige gesondheidsprobleme wat hierdie gemeenskappe teister. Klinieke is
nie altyd binne die bereik van hierdie vroue nie.

Fetale-alkoholsindroom is ’n probleem wat ’n herhalende uitwerking op
gemeenskappe het. Tienerswangerskappe, alkohol- en dwelmmisbruik maak ’n
groot deel uit van die daaglikse stryd van ons vroue in die platteland, wat
hulle vir hulself en hul kinders moet stry.

Statistieke bevestig dat vroue meer dikwels die slagoffers is van geweld.
Nêrens is dit meer waar as op die platteland nie. Sy is bang om die saak by
die polisie aan te gee, omdat sy vrees dat die bietjie geldelike hulp wat
sy by haar lewensmaat kry, van haar en haar gesin ontneem sal word, sou hy
in hegtenis geneem word.

Daar is bevind dat die moeder van ’n gemolesteerde kind nie die saak sal
aanmeld nie, juis uit vrees dat die pa haar sal viktimiseer en die karige
hulpbronne wat die familie aan die gang hou, sal onttrek.

Ongelukkig is dit ook so dat ons polisie en regstelsel dikwels ons vroue
faal. Die feit dat vroue soms lang afstande na polisiestasies moet aflê,
ontmoedig hulle. Baie vroue rapporteer nie verkragting en seksuele
aanranding nie, want hulle persepsie is dat daar min of enige
geloofwaardigheid is, of kan wees, in die regstelsel.

As hulle wel moet gaan vir forensiese en mediese ondersoeke, is die
klinieke bykans onbereikbaar en is daar nie altyd die nodige middels om
hierdie ondersoeke te behartig nie. ’n Verdere probleem is dat klinieke nie
altyd toegerus is met die nodige mediese voorraad nie en dat daar ook ’n
wesenlike tekort is aan kundige personeel om hierdie ondersoeke te hanteer.
Vroue word egter deur die stygende misdaad getref en hulle het ook die
minste toegang tot ons regbank.

In April 2007 is daar ’n verklaring van die vierde Wêreld Kongres vir
Plattelandse Vroue in Durban gehou. Probleme wat die plattelandse vrou
dwarsoor die wêreld benadeel, is bespreek. Afgesien van hul isolasie word
plattelandse vroue verder benadeel as gevolg van ’n beperkte toegang tot
natuurlike hulpbronne, infrastruktuur, finansiële hulp en inligtings- en
kommunikasietegnologie.

Die regering moet voortdurend toegang tot geleenthede en hulpbronne na die
landelike gemeenskappe opskerp en verbeter. Ons moet sorg dat vroue toegang
het tot water en gesondheid, want dit is die pilare van ontwikkeling. Ons
moet mede-verantwoordelikheid neem om in samewerking met die vroue toe te
sien dat hulle hulself bemagtig en sodoende selfversorgend word om na
hulself en hul gesinne om te sien.

Vroue wat bemagtig word, help weer om ander vroue te bemagtig, want hulle
deel hul kennis en vaardighede. Alhoewel die vroue oor ’n magdom
vaardighede beskik, moet programme daargestel word om hulle daarmee te
onderhou en te ontwikkel. Alhoewel daar spesifieke beleide is wat die nood
van die plattelandse vroue aanspreek — soos nou met die stigting van die
ministerie van jeug en vroue met gestremdhede — is die nood op ons
plattelande so groot, dat alle provinsies hierdie probleem met groot erns
moet aanspreek.

Basiese programme met die samewerking van die hele gemeenskap, kerke en
ander organisasies, moet volhoubaar onderhou word. Daardeur sal vroue
bemagtig word, soos byvoorbeeld deur spesifieke onderrig in handwerk om
hulself en hulle gesinne te versorg.

Vaardigheidsontwikkeling in landbou, soos die begin en versorging van
groentetuine, kan nie net vir gesonde kos op die tafel sorg nie, maar kan
ook ’n volhoubare inkomste skep. Vroue kan bemagtig en ondersteun word om
saam te staan en voedingskemas op die platteland by skole te begin, om die
gemeenskap se kinders te voed.

Geletterdheid is ’n basiese reg. Ons moet meer doen om geletterdheid aan te
spreek veral onder ons voorheen benadeelde vroue, waar ongeletterdheid
steeds ’n groot oorsaak van werkloosheid is.

Meer moet gedoen word om ons dogters aan te moedig om vakke soos wiskunde
en wetenskap te neem. Hoe trotser die jong meisies en vroue op hulself is,
hoe meer sal die negatiewe faktore soos tienerswangerskappe, afneem.
Meisies en vroue moet bemagtig word om ’n sê oor hul eie liggame te hê.
Moeders moet hul seuns leer om vroue te respekteer en hulself te
dissiplineer.

Meisies neig om skolasties beter te vaar as seuns en hulle neem meer deel
aan wetenskap en tegnologie geleenthede. Kulturele en sosio-ekonomiese
omstandighede neig om meisies terug te hou uit skool en tersiêre onderrig.
Meisies doen beter in aanleg- en vaardigheidstoetse as seuns. Ondanks die
hoër intellektuele vermoëns van ons dogters, is daar ’n wesenlike afname
van meisies wat by ons skole inskryf. Ongeveer 26% van ons dogters in
landelike gebiede verlaat die skool op ’n vroeë ouderdom, as gevolg van
gereëlde huwelike, tienerswangerskappe, familie en kulturele verpligtinge
sowel as HIV/Vigs. Hulle moet dan as kinders die hoof van ’n huishouding
word.

Meer meisies as seuns voltooi wel matriek. Daar moet meer beurse beskikbaar
gestel word vir skool en vir tersiêre onderrig om ons meisies aan te moedig
om te studeer en hul vaardighede terug te neem platteland toe. Beurse,
spesifiek gerig op ons plattelandse kinders, is iets wat in alle erns
oorweeg sal moet word, omdat ons plattelandse ouers juis nie die finansiële
vermoë het om hulle vir verdere opleiding te stuur nie.

Dit gebeur in ons gemeenskappe dat meisies te bang is om oor seksuele
mishandeling te praat wat deur onderwysers, ouer mans, en selfs familie en
lede in die gemeenskap, teenoor hulle gepleeg word. Dit gee aanleiding tot
die styging van tienerswangerskappe en die vroeë verlating van skool, soos
reeds genoem is.

By die armstes van armes word die kindertoelae gebruik om huishoudings van
ondergang te red en dit kom eintlik nie uit by die kind wat dit werklik
nodig het nie.

Die Wes-Kaapse regering het ’n beleid wat toegewyd is aan landelike
ontwikkeling vir die volgende vyf jaar. Juis om daardie rede gaan daar nou
’n direktoraat in ons landboudepartement geskep word met die doel om
strategies te fokus op landelike vroue se ontwikkeling en om die vroue te
bemagtig. Kom ons werk saam om ons vroue op ons platteland te bemagtig en
ons gemeenskap uit hierdie wrede siklus van armoede te red, tot voordeel
van al ons inwoners van Suid-Afrika. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Pardon me, but I will continue in Afrikaans. I have now said my little bit
in English. Rural women have to bear a triple burden. The burden of being a
woman means bearing the responsibility for herself and her family amidst
increasing rural poverty and isolation, apart from the daily struggle of
keeping body, soul and family together.

Freedom has not come to all women in the rural areas.

Research by Markinor in 2007 found that only 15% of rural women achieved a
matric or higher education, in comparison with about 50% of urban women.
Seventy per cent of rural women have to make do with less than R2 500 per
household per month. Only 20% of these women have permanent work. About 40%
of them are unemployed and therefore also permanently looking for work.

The two problems that tower far above others in rural areas are migration
and poverty. The Western Cape has a huge immigration of 250 000 people from
other provinces and the rest of Africa. In 2004 population growth reached
5,3%.

Population growth is also bigger in district municipalities, such as here
in the Western Cape. The increase places a bigger and ever-increasing
burden on our already struggling communities and municipalities, where the
competition for work and survival is just so much more fierce and intense
than elsewhere. Everybody is competing for the scarce water, employment and
natural resources of our province, as in every other province. This is and
remains a reality and within our provinces and South Africa every one of us
will have to find a solution to address this problem.

According to Statistics South Africa there are about 150 000 more women
than men in the Western Cape. This shows that more women are heading
households.

HIV/Aids, foetal alcohol syndrome, tuberculosis and malnutrition are some
of the more serious health problems that are ravaging these communities.
Clinics are not always within reach of these women.

Foetal alcohol syndrome is a problem that has a recurring effect on
communities. Teenage pregnancies, alcohol and drug abuse form a large part
of the daily struggle of our rural women, who have to fend for themselves
and for their children.

Statistics confirm that women more often fall prey to violence. Nowhere is
this more evident than in the rural areas. She is afraid to lay a charge
with the police, because she is scared that the little financial aid she
does get from her life partner will be taken away from her and her family
if he should be taken into custody.

It has been found that the mother of a molested child will not report the
matter, precisely out of fear that the father will victimise her and
withdraw the meagre resources that are keeping the family going.

Unfortunately it is also true that our police and criminal justice system
often fail our women. The fact that women sometimes have to travel over
long distances to police stations is discouraging for them. Many women do
not report rape and sexual assault because of their perception of the legal
system as having little or no credibility.

If they do have to go for forensic and medical examinations, the clinics
are virtually inaccessible and do not always have the means to deal with
these examinations. A further problem is that clinics are not always
equipped with the required medical equipment and actually lack skilled
personnel to carry out these examinations. Women are, however, being
affected by the increasing crime while they also have the least access to
our courts.

The fourth World Congress of Rural Women was held in Durban in April 2007.
Problems that adversely affect rural women across the world were discussed.
Apart from their isolation, rural women are further disadvantaged because
of limited access to natural resources, infrastructure, financial aid and
information and communication technology.

Government should continually upgrade and improve rural communities’ access
to opportunities and resources. We must see to it that women have access to
water and health care, because these are the pillars of development. We
should take co-responsibility, in co-operation with women, to ensure that
they empower themselves and thereby become self-sufficient to look after
themselves and their families.

Women who become empowered in turn will help other women to become
empowered, because they share their knowledge and skills. Although women
possess lots of skills, programmes should be put in place so that they can
maintain themselves in this regard and develop. Although there are specific
policies to address the hardships of rural women — such as the recent
introduction of the Ministry for youth and people with disabilities — the
need in our rural areas is so great that all provinces must address this
problem in all seriousness.

Basic programmes should be maintained in a sustainable manner with the co-
operation of the whole community, churches and other organisations. That is
how women will become empowered, for instance by way of specific training
in a craft, to look after themselves and their families.

Skills development in agriculture, such as starting and maintaining
vegetable gardens, will not only put healthy food on the table, but can
also create a sustainable income. By empowering and supporting women, they
can unite and start feeding schemes at schools in the rural areas and feed
the children of the community.

Literacy is a basic right. We should do more to address literacy,
especially among our previously disadvantaged women where illiteracy
remains a major cause of unemployment.

More should be done to encourage our girls to take subjects such as
mathematics and science. The more proud of themselves young girls and women
are, the more negative factors such as teenage pregnancies will decrease.
Girls and women should be empowered to have a say over their own bodies.
Mothers should teach their sons self-discipline and respect for women.

Girls tend to do better than boys academically and they participate more in
opportunities in science and technology. Cultural and socio-economic
circumstances tend to hold girls back from school and tertiary education.
Girls fare better than boys in aptitude and skills tests. Despite the
higher intellectual capacity of our girls, there is an actual decrease in
the number of girls enrolling at our schools. About 26% of girls in rural
areas are leaving school at an early age because of arranged marriages,
teenage pregnancies, family and cultural commitments as well as HIV/Aids.
As children they then have to become the head of a household.

More girls than boys do complete their matric. More bursaries should be
made available for school and tertiary education to encourage our girls to
study and take their skills back to the rural areas. Bursaries specifically
targeted at our rural children should be considered in all seriousness,
because our rural parents just don’t have the financial means to send them
for further training.

It happens in our communities that girls are too afraid to speak about
their sexual molestation by teachers, older men, and even relatives and
members of their community. The result is more teenage pregnancies, which
is why they leave school early, as already mentioned.

Among the poorest of the poor the child grants are used to keep households
from collapsing and they never reach the children that are really in need
of them.

The Western Cape government has a policy dedicated to rural development for
the next five years. For that very reason a directorate is now being
created in our agricultural department with the aim of focusing
strategically on the development of rural women and of empowering them.
Let’s work together and empower our rural women and save our community from
this cruel cycle of poverty, to the benefit of all inhabitants of South
Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, may I just raise a very
disturbing matter. I don’t know if you have observed it. Let’s respect the
decorum of the House by switching off our phones. If you don’t know how to
switch it off, ask the person next to you to assist you. If that fails,
then just take out the battery. If it is new, and you don’t know how to
operate it, just take out the battery. We will assist you after the
adjournment to put the battery back in and switch on your phone. Please,
let’s just show respect in this basic way.

Mrs Y N PHOSA (Mpumalanga): Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Chairperson T C
Memela, hon Chief Whip N D Ntwanambi, hon members, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Ministers, hon members of executive councils from provinces, distinguished
guests, comrades and friends, ladies and gentlemen, I feel privileged and
honoured to have this opportunity to address this august House on this
relevant and important debate in the evolution of our struggle. We have
defined the fundamental objective of our struggle as being the turnaround
of the interconnected racial, gender and class contradictions that
confronted our society that arose from decades of a special type of
colonialism.

It is on occasions such as this that we are reminded about the instructive
words of the former President of Frelimo, the first President of the post-
independent Republic of Mozambique, Comrade Samora Machel, when he said:

   The emancipation of women is not an act of charity, the result of a
   humanitarian or compassionate attitude. The liberation of women is a
   fundamental necessity for the revolution, the guarantee of its continuity
   and the precondition for its victory. The main objective of the
   revolution is to destroy the system of exploitation and build a new
   society which releases the potentialities of human beings ... This is the
   context within which women’s emancipation arises.

These instructive words of the late President Comrade Samora Machel are
still relevant even today, and they apply equally in the rural areas.

The province of Mpumalanga is predominantly rural in nature. As such, there
are various programmes earmarked by the Mpumalanga government for the
improvement of the rural communities of which the majority are women.

The provincial department of agriculture, rural development and land
administration is mandated to implement most of the projects. The
department of agriculture, rural development and land administration is
implementing Masibuyele Emasimini [Let’s go back to growing our crops],
agriculture infrastructure development linked to the Expanded Public Works
Programme, a livestock improvement programme, and research and development,
as well as the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme.

In as far as Masibuyele Emasimini is concerned, as part of promoting
integrated rural development and responding to the food price crisis, the
province is implementing the Masibuyele Emasimini programme. The province
has purchased 185 tractors and other implements over the past four years,
and these tractors are utilised to provide mechanisation for rural
communities.

In addition, the province assists the rural communities with the
acquisition of production inputs for their own food production and sales of
their surplus produce. The cultivation includes both fields and backyard
gardens, which are extended to school gardens. To date, 28 000 households
and 116 830 individuals have been reached directly through the programme
over the past four years. The province has planned to reach at least 39 000
households or 200 000 beneficiaries this current financial year, making
livelihoods much easier as households will be food secure.

During the current year, the province is also developing maize mills and
silos to further allow rural women to engage in economic activities through
the selling of the surpluses. More than 60% of these beneficiaries are
women, as most of them remain in the rural areas, due to migratory labour.
The administrators of the mechanisation programmes are mostly women and
about 10 have been employed.

Regarding agriculture infrastructure development linked to the Expanded
Public Works Programme, for effective and efficient intervention in
improving the lives of women in the rural areas of the province, the
province has developed a focused and integrated approach to agriculture.
This approach fosters the consolidation of resources in the form of, among
other things, capital investment, to achieve maximum impact on poverty and
unemployment. Through this programme, the province provides assistance to
beneficiaries and women in particular on the land-reformed farms, to derive
economic benefits through this capital investment.

The support given by this programme includes projects dealing with the
production of macadamia nuts, horticulture, sugar cane and poultry in the
Ehlanzeni District Municipality; the production of horticulture, soya
beans, poultry and cattle in the Gert Sibande District Municipality; and
the production of soya beans, poultry and gold in the Nkangala District
Municipality. About 2 507 beneficiaries have been targeted for this
financial year to be covered by the infrastructure intervention on their
respective farms, and more than 40% of them are women.

In infrastructure development, more women are employed, thus contributing
to the job opportunities in line with the EPWP II framework. In addition to
the job opportunities, technology and skills transfer to these women form
the core. During construction, about 1 139 people were employed during the
previous financial year and 34% of these were women.

Fencing as part of soil conservation also assists in the creation of job
opportunities and ensures sustainable resource development. This does not
only cover current needs, but also the needs of future generations as the
resources will remain in perfect balance.

With regard to risk and disaster management in the province, the province
has a disaster management programme that is meant to provide relief
assistance to farmers in general, including women farmers, if they fall
victim to any natural disaster that would affect their agriculture
business. The assistance is generally in the form of livestock replacement,
repairing of infrastructure and fodder supply. In the previous financial
year, about 35 women benefited from this programme, receiving about 200
cattle to replace livestock lost during the 2007 veld fires.

In terms of the livestock improvement programme, the province contributes
to the control measures when it comes to arresting animal disease
outbreaks. The province provides assistance to women livestock farmers by
controlling and preventing significant animal diseases. This is done
through vaccination against diseases like anthrax, rabies and foot-and-
mouth disease, among other diseases.

In collaboration with the Industrial Development Corporation, the IDC, the
province is also assisting rural communities, predominantly women, in
enhancing the productivity of Nguni cattle. This will also provide an
enabling environment for the women farmers to farm commercially with the
traditional Nguni cattle.

Regarding research and development, the province is continually
contributing through its research and development programme in order to
effectively respond to the environmental and economic needs of our
communities. This focus has been on adaptive research, in order to maximise
the support to women subsistence and emerging farmers and to rural women’s
developmental needs. Through the land tenure programme, the province
contributes to the emancipation of rural women by providing land surety.
Through this programme, women landowners are provided with title deeds to
ensure that women become economically active.

The province is leading in implementing a pilot project for the
Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, focusing on the Donkerhoek,
KwaNgema and Emahashini communities in the Mkhondo Local Municipality. This
pilot project is targeting at least 4 016 households. More than 2 500
decent and sustainable jobs will be created, and the women will be
prioritised and targeted in compliance with the transformation policies.
The province’s plan is to direct resources and ensure that there is maximum
participation and involvement by women. At least 50% women beneficiaries
are assured from this programme.

The Expanded Public Works Programme, co-ordinated by the provincial
department of public works, roads and transport, has programmes to improve
the infrastructure, particularly the roads network, in the rural areas of
the province through a programme called the Siyatentela project. This is
done by involving the local communities.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Unfortunately, your time is up.

Mrs Y N PHOSA (Mpumalanga): In conclusion, Chair, if you would allow me,
the inspiring words of Stephen Grellet remind us that we are the servants
of the people, when he says:

   I shall pass through this world but once. Any good therefore that I can
   do or any kindness that I can show any fellow creature, let me do it now.
   Let me not defer or neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again.


Indeed, I totally agree with Stephen Grellet. We have an opportunity on our
hands. Let us make full use of it, and let’s add value to the women in the
rural areas. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you very much, hon member Phosa.
It is not always easy but I took advantage of the fact that she is a former
Speaker so she understands very well what I am going through as a result of
her time expiring.

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo ohloniphekile waleNdlu, Phini likaSihlalo
sojodu omkhulu wakuleNdlu, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, oNgqongqoshe-ke abancane
bezifundazwe abakhona phakathi kwethu, ngithi ke, usuku lwanamhlanje usuku
lwezizwe zihlanganyela ukuhalalisela abesifazane ekwenzeni izinto ezinkulu
noma ekuphatheni imizi labo abasemakhaya. Ngithi mina, isifazane sesizwe
siwumgogodla wesizwe, isizwe esingenaso isifazane saso akusona isizwe leso.
Ngithi omama yibona abazi ubunzima bamakhaya, ngithi-ke kuyihlazo nje ke
ukuthi yonke leminyaka babekade bengabonakali indima yabo ebalulekile
abayidlalayo ekubusweni kwezwe. Ngithi ke ekuphathweni kwekhaya omama
yibona izinsika zezwe ezazi ukuthi izingane zidlile noma azidlanga, ngoba
thina singamabhunguka nje njengoba umuntu ebhunguke lapha eKapa nje awazi
ekhaya kwenzekani, umama owazi kahle ngengane nekhaya ukuthi kwenzekani.

Ngithi-ke, labomama besizwe kufuneka ukuthi uNgqongqoshe weZolimo njengoba
ephethe umgogodla wezwe, ngoba inhlabathi le esifihlayo uma sesihambile
emhlabeni iyona futhi esiphila ngayo, iyona futhi ingubo yethu. Ngithi-ke,
kusemqoka Ngqongqoshe ukuthi kufuneka uzibheke zonke lezi zifundazwe
eziyisishiyagalolunye ukuthi omama bayanikezwa yini na amathuba namathuluzi
okuthi bakwazi ukondla izisu  zethu nezingane zethu. Ngoba kuke kushiwo
ukuthi intandane enhle ngumakhothwa ngunina nje, uma efile unkosikazi mina
ndonda ngakusasa nje ngoba amadoda asizili abuye ahambe ayobheka omunye
umama, kanti umama uyakwazi ukuthi a zilele mina njengendoda iminyaka
emibili abe ondla izingane zakhe. Ngithi kulokho Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe
noma nenze konke okusemandleni njengohulumeni wethu ukuba nibhekelele
izindawo zasemakhaya.

Ngingavumelani ngokuthi omama babengenalo ilungelo lokusho okuthile,
ngizekelisa ngoMthani indlovukazi, yaphatha izwe kwaZulu, uMkabayi kaJama.
Izwe ngabe laliphethwe uMandlakazi uma wayengekho uMkabayi, wahamba
wayoshelela uyise intombi yagana yazala uSenzangakhona.

Indlovukazi ukaMsweli yaphatha izwe ngesikhathi uDinizulu eboshiwe indodana
yakhe iboshelwa e-St Helena eNyakatho Kapa, waphatha izwe wabutha amabutho
kwaZulu. Ngithi ke abafazi babelalelwa kwelakithi namanje uma ekhuluma
umkami ehleba ngiyakwazi ukulalela ukuthi uthini bese ngivuka ekuseni
ngikhulume. Ngibonge mphathi wohlelo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Hon Chairperson of this House, Deputy Chairperson,
chief of this House, hon Minister and the provincial MECs that are amongst
us here, today is International Day of Rural Women, when all nations
celebrate women in doing great things or for managing homes and those who
are stay-at-home mothers. The nation’s womenfolk are its backbone — a
nation without womenfolk is not a nation. Women are the ones who know
domestic hardships. It is therefore shameful that the important role that
women play in the running of the country has been overlooked all these
years. In respect of running a home, women are the pillars of the nation as
they are the ones who know if the children have eaten or not. I am saying
this because as we are here, we are migrants who have migrated to Cape Town
— we do not know what is happening at home, but the mother knows very well
about the home and the child.
It is important for the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries to
investigate whether women from all nine provinces are provided with farming
opportunities and implements, to enable them to feed us and our children.
The Minister heads the department that is the backbone of the nation,
because the soil that we live by is the very soil that we are buried in
when we have passed on and this soil is also our blanket.  It is sometimes
said that for a child to look well his or her mother should look after him
or her, but if my wife should die, I as a man —like all other civilised men
— will go and look for another wife, whereas a woman mourns her husband for
a period of two years while maintaining her children at the same time. With
that in mind, hon Minister, you, as our government, would have done
everything in your power if you could look out for rural areas.

But, I do not agree with the notion that women had no right to say anything
in the past — I can mention Queen Mthani and Mkabayi kaJama who ruled
KwaZulu. The land would have been ruled by Mandlakazi if Mkabayi had not
been available. Mkabayi at some stage went to declare love to a young
maiden on behalf of her father. He later married the maiden and she bore
him a son, Senzangakhona.

Queen kaMsweli ruled the land when Dinizulu her son was incarcerated at St
Helena in the Northern Cape — she ruled the land and recruited the army in
KwaZulu. I am therefore saying that women were listened to in my ancestral
land and even today I listen to my wife when she speaks — when she whispers
in my ear at night — then I wake up in the morning and talk. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Rre G G MOKGORO: Modulasetilo, Tona e e tlolegang, batlotlegi ba ba tswang
kwa diporofenseng tse dingwe, maloko a Ntlo e, ke a dumedisa. Ke kopilwe ke
Ntlo e ka manontlhotlho go bua Setswana. Jaanong ke tla bua ka tshotlego ya
bomme mo malatsing a gompieno. Rona ba ba godileng ka dingwaga tsa bo 1930-
1950 re fitlhetse batsadi ba rona ba tshela ka temothuo gonne ba ne ba na
le lefatshe, megoma, didiriswa tse di tlhokegang e bile pula e na.

Morago ga gore Lekoko la Manašenale le tseye puso ka 1948, la tla ka maano
a go humenegisa mothomontsho le go dira gore a tshele ka tlala le bolwetse.
Fa ba sena go tsaya puso ba dira melao ya gore batho ba seka ba tlhola ba
lema. Ka mafoko a mangwe, gore ba seka ba tlhola ba na le go ka itirela ka
bobona. Mora go ba laela batho go kgaola leruo la bona. Sekai, fa o na le
dikgomo di le 10 ba kgaola di le 4 mme o sale ka di le 6. Ba tswelela go
dira jalo mo ngwageng o o latelang fa di sena go tsala. Ka tsela eo batho
ba simolola go humanega le go tshelela mo tlaleng e e neng ya lere malwetse
a le gompieno re tshelang ka ona.

Ka nako eo, lelapa le ne le tshwarwa ke mme fa rre a ya go batla didiriswa
go di tlisa gae. Mme o ne a di laola a bona gore mongwe le mongwe wa lelapa
o tsaya kabelo e e mo lekaneng. Ka moo go ne go sena dingongorego.
Balemi ba ne ba na le didiriswa tsa temo. Ka nako ya kotulo ba ne ba kopa
malapa a a sa kgonang go lema go ba thusa go kotula mo masimong. Fa ba sena
go kotula mmidi, mabele kgotsa dinawa mme wa lelapa o ne a tsaya karolo e e
rileng mme a kgaoganye bomme ba ba mo thusitseng. Ka mafoko a mangwe, o
lemile kgotsa o sa lema o ne o nna le se o se isetsang balelapa la gago
morago ga kotulo.

Borre ba ne ba dira kwa meepong. Ka nako ya fa dipula di na ba ne ba tla go
lema mme morago ba boele kwa meepong. Bomme ba ne ba sala ba etse tlhoko
masimo, ba etse tlhoko leruo, ba etse tlhoko sengwe le sengwe sa legae.
Borre ba ne ba tla ka tšhelete go tshedisa malapa a bona. Morago ga 1948
dilo tsotlhe tseo tsa fedisiwa ke tlhaolele, tsa fedisiwa ke go kgaolela
batho dilo, tsa fedisiwa ke gore batho ba se ka ba se tlhola ba lema.

Mokgatlho wa rona o lwantshitse tlhaolele, e fedile fa ke bua jaana.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr G G MOKGORO: Chairperson, hon Minister, dignitaries from other
provinces, members of this House, good afternoon. This House requested me
to speak Setswana. So, I am now going to speak about women’s hardships
nowadays. Our generation that grew up in the 1930-1950s found our parents
surviving through agriculture because they had land, coulters, necessary
resources and it used to rain.

After the National Party took over the government in 1948, it came with
plans to make black people live in poverty and disease. After assuming
power they made laws that told people not to plough anymore. In other
words, they could no longer be independent. After that they instructed
people to cull their herd. For example, if you had 10 cattle they would
cull 4 so that you were left with 6. They would continue to do that the
following year after the cows had given birth. In that way people became
poor and lived in poverty, which brought diseases that we have even today.

At that time, a family was under the woman’s care while the man had to find
food to bring home. The woman had to make sure that every family member
received a fair share. Therefore there were no complaints.

Farmers had farming resources. During the harvesting season they asked
families that could not plough to help them harvest. After harvesting
maize, wheat or beans the mother of the house would take a certain portion
and share it amongst the women who helped her. In other words, whether you
ploughed or not you had something to take to your family after the
harvesting season.

Men were working at the mines. During a rainy season they would come home
to plough and afterwards go back to the mines. Women would stay behind to
take care of the fields, the herd and everything that belonged to their
families. Men would bring money to take care of their families. After 1948
all that was brought to an end by apartheid. It was ended by the reducing
of people’s herds; it ended because people were not allowed to plough
anymore.

Our party fought against apartheid; it no longer exists as I speak.]

I’d like to direct what I’m going to say to the Minister, Comrade Gugile
Nkwinti. I feel that his appointment as the Minister of Rural Development
and Land Reform was one of the best decisions of the President. I have
respect for him; he is a committed man and I know he is going to succeed.
Two months ago, he became the first Minister to invite us to unveil a
project on rural development in Giyani. I could only see the potential of
development, and I could see the commitment of the Minister in that during
his tenure he would like to see the lives of many people being changed,
especially those of women.

Mr Minister, I am from the Northern Cape and recently during our provincial
week we undertook what is called in the NCOP an oversight visit. We went
around the region and took the delegation to four points as we wanted them
to see what was taking place there. At those four points there are natural
resources: water, land, people and the sun. People staying adjacent to
these resources do not use the water. The water is only used by the big
commercial farmers.

We took the delegation to Vaalharts and Spitskop - I would like you to
write down these names. Vaalharts is a big irrigation scheme which,
according to the media, is the biggest in the southern hemisphere. We then
took them to Spitskop, a big dam which is almost the size of Lake
Tanganyika. The caretaker told us that the dam holds about 6 million
kilolitres. Next to these facilities there are big settlements of African
communities, but they do not enjoy any of these. We need to ...

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order: I want to thank the
speaker for this political education, but it is not part and parcel of the
debate. But, we’ll let him continue because he is talking about water now.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I have always thought that central to
the programmes of rural development is the very strategic role water plays
and therefore becomes part of the debate. Therefore the point of order is
not carried.

Could you proceed and wrap up, please, hon member?

Mr G G MOKGORO: No, that man took my minutes. [Laughter.] I haven’t
finished yet. I was still addressing the Minister that ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Your time has expired, but I will allow
you to conclude.

Mr G G MOKGORO: Hon Minister, I would like to invite you to come to the
Northern Cape one day to see what is happening there. The possibility of
developing people in those areas is so huge that it doesn’t even have to be
planned. What needs to be done is to take these four resources, combine
them and there will be production, and many people will not be hungry.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you, Mr Mokgoro.

Mr G G MOKGORO: In conclusion ... [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Your time has long expired.

Mr G G MOKGORO: I agree with Mr Gunda that three minutes is too short a
time to give a speech because he is a really eloquent speaker. I would
advise him to join the larger parties so that he can get 10 minutes to
speak. Thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I call on the hon Minister to conclude
the debate. Hon Nkwinti?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Thank you, hon House
Chair. I will not follow them. I was a Speaker once – Speaker and Deputy
Speaker.

I spoke here about social infrastructure in rural areas. I spoke about
economic infrastructure in rural areas. I spoke about cultural facilities,
ICT infrastructure and resource planning capacity for women. If you don’t
deal with those things in the rural areas, you are not going to have an
impact on the hardships that are experienced by women.

I will give a few examples. An hon member spoke about 36 women in Giyani
who need a pack shed because they produce and sell. But as long as they
don’t have a pack shed where they can keep their produce and preserve it,
they do not have full control over the market. So we built that for them.

They use an engine to irrigate. One of their engines was stolen. So we had
to build a small room for them to keep their engines in. These are women
who live in the village. They have got a market with Spar. This is a very
important economic infrastructure development.

I spoke of social infrastructure. If you look at the health side of things,
this affects women more than men. We had a secondary and a primary school
with no ablution facilities. What does that say about health?

This government prioritises health. One of the first things that we did was
to build 4x4 ablution blocks in both of the schools so that we can deal
with the health aspect of the community. Again, you are actually impacting
on the lives of women because they constitute the majority there.

The question of a market for women in rural areas as they produce needs to
be addressed, because that’s what they do. They have small gardens — some
of them are relatively big. They produce. But they need a market.

In Dutywa, in the Eastern Cape, we constructed, in that department — I
thought the MEC would say that – an agripark. In this agripark, we have 35
hectares. We constructed a vegetable processing plant. And this we did in
conjunction with Fort Hare. That was for women because out there it is the
women who are producing vegetables.

At the moment, if you go there, you can buy soup powder. That is from women
growing vegetables and selling them. What is left in excess, they sell.
This does a couple of other things for women, because it creates an
opportunity for women to sell, as a market, as well as to create relatively
sophisticated job opportunities and then for them to be trained. If you
follow that through, you will find that, again, that talks to economic
infrastructure.

If you look at the rural employment and training model of the Department of
Rural Development and Land Reform, you will find that it is household-
based. We are going to Mkhondo on the 30th and 31st of this month. I heard
the hon member Phosa saying that there were 4 000 households there. That’s
exactly the point. Our model is based on households. For every household,
we are going to contract one person. That person will be paid in terms of
the principles of the Expanded Public Works Programme.

This has to do with creating opportunities for women to work. They will be
contracted for two years. They will work; they will train. That’s exactly
the process we are going through in terms of our facilitation in the Free
State. We are doing that because we want women to benefit from these
programmes and to transform their lives using social infrastructure
development and economic infrastructure development.

We are saying that when you contract, 50% of what you are earning must go
to the household, and you can do whatever you want to do with the other
50%. We want to relieve the stress on women, not only by creating jobs, but
also by making sure that there is food in that household for two years. We
will train them. Finally, the most important thing is the social impact on
women.

Firstly, we will employ them for two unbroken years using the principles of
the EPWP, which say that at least 60% of employees must be women. We have
discussed that. We engaged them. We said to them that we wanted them to
postpone pregnancy for at least two years. That is the impact, and we want
the hon members here to judge us on that. That is the first aspect.
Secondly, we said that, as a result, we want to reduce the HIV infection
rate because, in order for them to delay pregnancy, they must use condoms.
The government has not been able to force young men and women to use
condoms. We hope that this is going to happen.

Thirdly, we want to reduce the dependence on social grants by young women.
It is the young women, and not the men, who are negatively affected by
this. Fourthly, we want to reduce petty crimes, particularly domestic
violence.

All of these things are factors that affect women more than they do men.
That is how we want the government to be judged. It all has to do with us
wanting to impact positively on the lives of women, especially young women.
This is what we will do in every province we go to. We are in the Free
State. We have started in KwaZulu-Natal and in the Eastern Cape. We are now
going to two provinces which we have not touched on: Mpumalanga and the
North West. We are going to Mpumalanga at the end of this month.

We will focus on the household because women are the people who are often
heads of households, whether they are working in the mines or wherever. I
went to Hlobane in KwaZulu-Natal, and I was shocked to find women in an old
hostel. They are the ones who carry water. They live upstairs. They carry
water upstairs because the facility does not allow them to have a tap up
there. They carry water upstairs, wash there and then they have to bring
the bucket down to throw the water out. These are women. That is what the
programme of government is supposed to do in order to impact on women
positively. That is what we are doing as the government.

Therefore, when we say, as government, that we are talking about social
infrastructure, we mean this thing that has to do with constructing
ablution facilities to improve the quality of health of our people. When we
talk about economic infrastructure, we talk about creating village markets
where women can grow and sell their produce, get jobs and feed their
children.

ICT infrastructure is very important. When we talk about cultural progress,
we are talking about rural women not having to go into the city in order to
see the World Cup, if it’s possible. Let them stay home. Let’s provide this
infrastructure at home. We are talking about women who can access
information through the Internet from where they are in the rural areas.
That is why we are building these Thusong centres, including at Muyexe
where we built one.

The hon Bahlekazi [sirs] will perhaps be happy about this. We built one
that is standing there. The community came together with their children and
said that it was too small and that they would like it to be a traditional
council chamber. They showed us a site where to build a new one.

That, again, tells you that now they feel they can make a decision, because
you cannot emancipate women when they are unable to make these fundamental
decisions, even against you as the government. You need to be able to say,
“Fine, we thought that centre would be fine there, but we have learnt. We
understand now. It can’t be there.” The community should be able to say,
“This is what we want you to do. That’s where we want you to build this
centre.”

We will. We have to respond to it because the majority of the people we are
dealing with there are women. Why they decided to turn what we referred to
as a Thusong centre into a traditional house, we don't know, but that’s
what they want. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you very much, hon Minister.
Before we conclude, I just want to thank the Minister, of course, on behalf
of the House for having opened and closed this very important debate.

A very important observation, of course, is the level of interest that has
been shown by MECs from the provinces. Four MECs actively participated in
the debate, two being female and two being male. In terms of the overall
participation of members in the debate, the males participated more than
the females. This is quite an important and progressive sign of how very
seriously, as Parliament and as the National Council of Provinces, we take
matters of women’s empowerment and, in particular, in relation to rural
women. So, therefore, thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

   Consideration OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL
 RELATIONS - Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into outer Space

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL
   RELATIONS - Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by
                                Space Objects

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, the Convention on Registration of Objects
Launched into Outer Space and the Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects are two related issues. That is why we have
one statement for both of them.

South Africa, being a member of the United Nations and adhering to the
principles applicable to members of the UN and in recognition of
internationally binding agreements that arise from this, has ratified these
two international conventions.

We should note the fact that space exploration is a development which began
with the launch of the first artificial satellite in 1957. Since then,
incredible progress has been made, leading to the landing of men on the
moon. A look at the number of launchings which have been registered with
the United Nations will show the influence of space science and technology
on human endeavours.

We should further note the fact that satellites can always be used for
communications, weather forecasting, education, and remote sensing of the
resources of the earth.

It is the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that
is the focal point of international co-operation in space activities.

The Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space, which
was adopted in 1975, ensures that all objects launched are registered with
the United Nations and identifiable with a registration number. Secondly,
the launching state maintains a register and provides the necessary
information to the United Nations.

The benefits attached to working with the conventions include the
following: freedom of exploration; an increase in the safety of space
activities; an increase in credibility and confidence in South Africa’s
space operations and enhanced authority; peaceful settlements of disputes;
and the protection of victims.

The Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space
Objects, having been drafted in 1972, ensures liability of a launching
state for any damage caused on earth or to aircraft in flight that may
arise from these launchings – taking into account that most hon members
also use aircraft. The convention also regulates liability, while
international law governs the compensation whenever there are claims
arising out of disagreements on the application of the convention.

South Africa has made an investment in a satellite named Sumbandila, a
Venda term for “pathfinder”. The satellite was launched recently in Russia.
It is not economically viable for South Africa to have its own internal
launch facility, owing to its having to stand idle for much of the time at
a high cost to the country. As a result, there is a bilateral agreement
with Russia, hence the launching in Russia.

South Africa is currently working towards concluding an agreement with
India. India is using outer space technology for developmental purposes and
has a number of programmes involving satellite communication to enhance
health and educational programmes. We should note that launch capability is
a very expensive option, but raises the level of South Africa’s scientific
capabilities.

South Africa is currently working with other African states and is in the
process of finalising a memorandum of understanding with Nigeria and
Algeria. We are in the process of developing a declaration of intent.

South Africa is steadfastly working on the development of a South African
scientific capability which would enhance and aid our scientific research
and development capacity sustainably. Therefore, we as the committee humbly
request this House to support the ratification of these two reports. I
thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on Convention on Registration of Objects
Launched into Outer Space be adopted.
IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report on Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space
Objects accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
 DEVELOPMENT — Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate T C Oliphant

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
      DEVELOPMENT — UPLIFTMENT OF PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF
                             MAGISTRATE BACHARAM

Mong T M H MOFOKENG: Modulasetulo komiti e ile ya kopana le khomishene ya
bomakgiseterata mme ya fumana tlaleho tse pedi tse fapaneng, ya Mme T C
Olifant moo ho ileng hwa tlalehelwa komiti ka maikemisetso a ho fuputsa
menyenyetsi ya boitshwaro bo sa phethahalang mabapi le Mme Olifant.

Menyenyetsi eo e ne e amana le ho se itlalehe ha hae mosebetsing ho tloha
ka di 25 tsa Mmesa ho fihlela ka di 10 tsa Pudungwana ka 2008. Ho
hlahelleng ha hae komiting ya kgalemo ka Pudungwana o ile a nehelana ka
lengolo leo a neng a supa hore o ne a ena le kgatello ya maikutlo hoo a
ileng a ba a amohelwa kliniking ya phekolo ya kelello ho tloha kadi 2 tsa
Mmesa ho fihlela ka di 24 mme a tshepisa hore o tla qala ho kgutlela
mosebetsing ka di 10 tsa Pudungwana 2008.

Komiti ya kgalemo e ile ya mo kopa hore ha a kgutlela mosebetsing a tle le
lengolo le tswang ho motho ya neng a mo hlahloba ho hlalosa hore o maemong
a matle a hore a ka qala ka mosebetsi. Ha a ka ba a tla le lona lengolo
leo, ka di 17 tsa Pudungwana ha a ka baa itlaleha mosebetsing hape, ho
fihlela le kajeno hoo khomishene e ileng ya nka qeto ya ho mofanyeha
mosebetsing mme ya tlalehela komiti ka metjha yohle eo e enkileng ho leka
ho kgutlisetsa maemo madulong.

Kamora ho lekola tlaleho eo ya khomishene komiti e dumellane ka ho
tshehetsa kopo ya hore Mme Olifant a tloswe mosebetsing ka ho phethahala.

Ya bobedi ke ya makgiseterata Mme Bacharam wa ofisi ya Scottsburg moo teng
a ileng a fanyehwa mosebetsing ka baka la qoso e neng e le kgahlano le
yena.

Pheletsong ya nyewe ha aka a fumanwa a le molato mme kopanong ya khomishene
le komiti re ile ra tlalehelwa hore letona le eleditswe ho kgutlisetsa Mme
Bacharam mosebetsing. Kamora ho sekaseka tlaleho eo komiti e dumellana le
qeto ya hore Mme Bacharam a kgutlele mosebetsing mme re kopa ntlo e
tshehetse qeto tseno di le pedi. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.] (Translation of
Sesotho speech follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Chairperson, the committee met with the Magistrates’
Commission and found two different reports, one of which was on Mrs T C
Oliphant and was presented to the committee regarding the intention to
investigate allegations of misconduct on the part of Mrs Oliphant.

These allegations related to her failure to report for work from 25 April
until 10 November 2008. During her appearance at the disciplinary committee
she produced a medical certificate indicating that she was suffering from
depression to the extent that she was admitted to a psychiatric clinic from
2 April until 24 April, and she promised to return to work on 10 November
2008.

The disciplinary committee asked that when she returned to work she should
bring the letter from the person who was examining her in order to see
whether she was in a condition to start working. She did not provide such a
letter. On 17 November she did not report for work again and has not done
so until today when the commission decided to suspend her from work and
reported to the committee about all the necessary efforts it made to
restore the situation to normalcy.

After careful examination of the commission’s report, the committee agreed
to endorse the recommendation that Mrs Oliphant be permanently removed from
her job.

The second case involves that of Magistrate Bacharam from the Scottburgh
office who was suspended from her job as a result of charges against her.

At the end of the trial she was found not guilty and therefore at the
meeting of the commission and the committee it was reported that the
Minister had been advised to reinstate Mrs Bacharam in her job. After
deliberating on the report the committee concurred with the decision to
have Mrs Bacharam reinstated in her job, and we would therefore like the
House to endorse the two decisions taken. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on Provisional Suspension from Office of
Magistrate T C Oliphant be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate T C Oliphant
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates
Act, 1993.

Question put: That the Report on Upliftment of Provisional Suspension from
Office of Magistrate Bacharam be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Upliftment of Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate
Bacharam accordingly adopted in accordance with section 13(4)(c) of the
Magistrates Act, 1993.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   DEVELOPMENT – PROTOCOL OF AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL HYDROGRAPHIC
                        ORGANISATION, IHO, CONVENTION

Mong T M H MOFOKENG: Ke a leboha Modulasetulo le maloko a Ntlo a
hlomphehang. Aforika Borwa ebile setho sa International Hydrographic
Organisation ka selemo sa 1967 mme ka Mmesa 2005 haeba le tshisinyo e ileng
ya etswa ho fetola tse ding tsa dihlomathisetswa tsa molao wa motheo ka
maikemisetso a ho matlafatsa tshebetso ya mokgatlo.

Lefapha la tshireletso ya metsing le ile la tlalehela komiti mme la e
netefaletsa hore boramolao ba mmuso ba tiisitse hore diphetoho tseo ha di
tlo ho ba le ditlamorao tse mpe tshireletsong ya naha. Ka hona komiti e
ikgotsofaditse ka tlaleho ena mme re kopa ntlo e dumellane le kopo eo. Ke a
leboha. (Translation of Sesotho speech follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Thank you, hon Chairperson and hon members of the
House. South Africa became a member of the International Hydrographic
Organisation in 1967, and in April 2005 there was a proposal for a protocol
of amendments with the intention to strengthen the capacity and
effectiveness of the organisation.
The South African Navy reported to the committee and assured it that the
state law advisers have ensured that those amendments will not negatively
affect national security. Therefore the committee is satisfied with the
report and we would like the House to adopt it. Thank you.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:47.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
        South Africa for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-2009 [RP 215-2009].

                          MONDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
       Council (IMC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
       2008-2009 [RP 134-2009].

2.    The Minister of Health

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
       Schemes for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
       on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
       2009 [RP 67-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
       Laboratory Service for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
       Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
       Information for 2008-2009.


3.    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board
       for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
       Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
       172-2009].
4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
       Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2008-2009, including
       the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
       Performance Information for 2008-2009.


5.    The Minister of Mining

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
       (CGS) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
       the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
       [RP 55-2009].


6.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
       Authority (TCTA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
       Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
       Information for 2008-2009.


7.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Drug-Free
       Sport for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
       the Financial Statements for 2008-2009 [RP 99-2008].


                         TUESDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on an investigation at the South
        African Broadcasting Corporation [RP 237-2009].


2.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and
    Evaluation

    (a)     Green Paper on Improving Government Performance: Our Approach
        [RP 223-2009].
        Please note: The above report is an amendment of the entry of item
        1 under Tablings published on page 732 of the Announcements,
        Tablings and Committee Reports of  8 September 2009.


3.    The Minister of Police

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Department of
        Safety and Security for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 22 for 2008-2009 [RP 204-2009].


4.    The Minister of Science and Technology
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Energy Research Institute (Pty) Ltd for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
        for Natural Scientific Professions for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
        Council (HSRC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 184-2009].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
        South Africa for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009.


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory
        Council on Innovation for 2008-2009.


5.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        130-2009].

6.    The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
        Board for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
        [RP 207-2009].

7.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
        Deposits for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        201-2009].


                        WEDNESDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
        Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
        Linguistic Communities   for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 212-2009].

2.    The Minister of Communications


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department of
        Communications for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 24 for 2008-2009 [RP 209-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
        Office (Ltd) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-2009.


3.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
        Social Development for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 16 for 2008-2009 [RP 225-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
        Agency   for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009 [RP 58-2009].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Social
        Security Agency (SASSA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 29-2009].


4.    The Minister of Energy

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
        Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 220-2009].

5.    The Minister of Mining
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
        Council (MHSC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 8-2009].

National Council of Provinces

 1. The Chairperson

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 15 September 2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council
        of Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the extension of
        the employment of the SA National Defence Force for a service in
        fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the Democratic Republic of Congo:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
        CONGO, TO TRAIN THE DRC ARMED FORCES (FARDC) RAPID REACTION FORCE
        (RRF) FOR THE PERIOD 01 APRIL 2009 TO 31 MARCH 2010


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        extended the employment of the South African National Defence Force
        (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), for a
        service in fulfilment of the international obligations of the
        Republic of South Africa towards the Democratic Republic of Congo
        to train the DRC armed forces and the rapid reaction force.
        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to train the DRC armed forces
        and rapid reaction force. The employment of these members expired
        on 31 March 2009.


        The SANDF’s mission in the DRC is not yet completed. The employment
        of the SANDF members is now extended until 31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
        attention of the National Council of Provinces.
        Regards


        signed
        J G ZUMA
        PRESIDENT

                          FRIDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the South
        African Human Rights Commission for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 65-2009].

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
        Service (SARS) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 238-2009].

3.    The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
        Foreign Affairs for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 3 for 2008-2009.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance and
        International Co-operation Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


4.    The Minister of Police

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Independent
        Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 20 for 2008-2009 [RP 234-2009].


5.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
        Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 184-2009].

6.    The Minister of Energy

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group of
        Companies (CEF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information of the Central Energy Fund Group of
        Companies for 2008-2009 [RP 186-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy
        Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 177-2009].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
        Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 141-2009].

7.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of
        Trade and Industry for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 32 for 2008-2009 [RP 18-2009].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     a) Report on the outcome of an Investigation into alleged
        irregularities at Kungwini Local Municipality in terms of section
        106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No
        32 of 2000).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.


                          MONDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
        Council (ARC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 199-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
        Export Control Board (PPECB)for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department of
        Agriculture  for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 23 for 2008-2009 [RP 210-2009].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Onderstepoort Biological
        Products (Ltd) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty)Ltd for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

2.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – Department of
        Public Service and Administration for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 8 for 2008-2009 [RP 190-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
        Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd (SITA) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 47-2009].


3.    The Minister of Mining

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
        Minerals and Energy  for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 28 for 2008-2009 [RP 240-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mintek Group for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 27-2009].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the State Diamond Trader for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        178-2009].


4.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Collective Investment
        Schemes for 2008-2009 [RP 202-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Sasria (Ltd) for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


                         TUESDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
        Defence for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 19
        for 2008-2009 [RP 193-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Castle Control Board for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        165-2009].


2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
        Company (Ltd) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Airways
        (Pty) (Ltd) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-2009.


3.    The Minister of Public Works

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of Public
        Works for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 5 for
        2008-2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
        Trust (IDT) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 200-2009].


4.    The Minister of Human Settlements

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
        Housing for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 26
        for 2008-2009 [RP 136-2009].

5.    The Minister of Transport
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
        Africa (Ltd) (ACSA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
        Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2008-2009, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (c)     Reports and Financial Statements of the Ports Regulator of
        South Africa  for 2007-2008 and 2008-2009, including the Reports of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 and 2008-2009.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
        (RSR) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
        [RP 158-2009].


    (e)     Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of
        South Africa and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company for
        2008-2009.


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Roads Agency Limited for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 145-2009].


    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
        Corporation for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 170-2009].


    (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
        Rescue Organisation for 2008-2009.


    (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        217-2009].
    (j)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
        Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.

6.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
        Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        53-2009].


7.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of
        Sport and Recreation South Africa for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 17 for 2008-2009 [RP 152-2009].


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     a) Legislative Proposal with regard to the amendment of the Municipal
        Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000) (Hon D B Feldman, Permanent
        Delegate to the National Council of Provinces).

        Referred to the Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative
        Proposals for consideration and report.


                        WEDNESDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2009] – Act No 17 of 2009
         (assented to and signed by President on 29 September 2009).

      2) Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2009] – Act No 18 of
         2009 (assented to and signed by President on 29 September 2009).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of
        Water Affairs and Forestry for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 34 for 2008-2009 [RP 163-2009].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Biodiversity Institute for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 165-2009].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Parks (SANparks ) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 148-2009].

2.    The Minister of Science and Technology
     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of
        Science and Technology for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 31 for 2008-2009 [RP 236-2009].


3.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


4.    The Minister of Transport


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        221-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Passenger Rail Agency of
        South Africa (PRASA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 157-2009].


5.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
        Justice and Constitutional Development for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 21 for 2008-2009 [RP 189-2009].
6.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
        Intellectual Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2008-2009,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 115-2009].



7.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
        Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 192-2009].

8.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Arts and
        Culture for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
        Arts for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
        [RP 192-2009].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
        Council for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009 [RP 242-2009].
9.    The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
        Development Board (CIDB) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 233-2009].
    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa (ASA)
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.




    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
        Environment (CBE) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.

10.   The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – National Treasury
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 7 for 2008-
        2009 [RP 198-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
        Board for Auditors for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 156-2009].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Pension
        Funds Adjudicator  for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
        Centre for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009 [RP 162-2009].

11.   The Minister of Health

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of
        Health for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 14
        for 2008-2009 [RP 169-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation
        Commissioner for Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
        Research Council (MRC) for  2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 174-2009].

12.   The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and
        Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2008-2009, including the
        Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
        Universal Service and Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) and
        the Universal Service and Access Fund (USAF) for 2008-2009 [RP 222-
        2009 ].

13.   The Minister of Home Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
        Affairs for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 4
        for 2008-2009 [RP 239-2009].


14.   The Minister in The Presidency for National Planning

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 - Statistics South
        Africa for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 11
        for 2008-2009 [RP 211-2009].


15.   The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of
        Provincial and Local Government for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 29 for 2008-2009.

                           MONDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        60-2009].

                          WEDNESDAY, 7 OCTOBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial Inspectorate
        for Correctional Services for 2008-2009 [RP 132-2009].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Strategic Plan for the Companies and Intellectual Property
        Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2009/10 – 2011/12.
                          THURSDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

   1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled


    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:


        (a)      Report on the upliftment of the provisional suspension of
           a magistrate:  Ms A Bacharam, an additional magistrate at
           Scottburgh.

        (b)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mrs
           N E Ndamase, an additional magistrate at Pretoria in terms of
           section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
           1993).

        (c)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr C
           M Dumani, a magistrate at Graaff Reinet in terms of section
           13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Film and  Publication  Board
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009  [RP
        224-2009].

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No.892 published in Government Gazette No
        32546 dated 31 August 2009: Determination of interest rate for
        purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official rate of
        interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, in terms of the
        Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    (b)     Government Notice No R.918 published in Government Gazette No
        32582 dated 25 September 2009: Exchange Control Regulations:
        Cancellation of appointment of an authorised dealer in foreign
        exchange:  Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft in terms of the Exchange
        Control Regulations.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bank Supervision
        Department of the South African Reserve Bank for 2008.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT – TO91008e-insert1 – PAGES 959-978


                           FRIDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2009
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
        Bank for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2008-2009.

    (b)     Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank – 17
        September 2009.

Correction: The following two entries replace the tabling published under
          the name of the Minister of Energy in the Announcements, Tablings
          and Committee Reports (ATC) of 31 August 2009, page 622:

2.    The Minister of Energy

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
        Regulator (NNR) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 36-2009].

3.    The Minister of Mining

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond
        and Precious Metals Regulator for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 132-2009].

                           MONDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2009

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    OVERSIGHT VISIT REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE
GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS TO ALFRED NZO DISTRICT MUNICIPALITY – 19
AUGUST 2009

1.    Background and Overview
1.1   The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the request by the National Council of
      Provinces (NCOP) to consider and report on the interventions notices
      in terms of section 139 (1) (b) of the Constitution in Alfred Nzo
      District Municipality, reports as follows:

1.2   In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or does not
      fulfil an executive obligation in terms of the Constitution or
      legislation, the relevant provincial executive may intervene by taking
      any appropriate steps to ensure the fulfilment of that obligation,
      including assuming responsibility for the relevant obligation in that
      municipality.

1.3   In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of the NCOP
      referred the notice of intervention in the affairs of Alfred Nzo
      District Municipality by the MEC for Local Government and Traditional
      Affairs to the Committee for consideration and reporting. On 5 August
      2009, the Committee took a decision during the proceedings of its
      meeting to conduct an oversight visit to the above-mentioned
      Municipality during 19 August 2009.

2.    Objective of the Oversight Visits
2.1   The main objectives of the oversight visit were to determine whether
      procedural requirements have been met and also to verify whether the
      provincial executive has used its discretion appropriately before the
      Committee can approve/disapprove the intervention. Through the
      deliberations and interaction with internal and external stakeholders,
      the Committee wanted to determine how the provincial executive intends
      to restore the fulfilment of the relevant obligations and ensure
      fulfilment in the long-term. The aim being to ensure intergovernmental
      checks and balances aimed at guarding the integrity and efficiency of
      the intervention process.

3.    Composition of the Delegation
3.1   The Committee Delegation composed of the following Members of
      Parliament and officials: Hon MH Mokgobi, Limpopo (ANC); Hon AG
      Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon A Watson, Mpumalanga (DA); Mr TM Manele,
      Committee Secretary (Committee Section); Mr N Mfuku, Content Adviser
      (Committee Section); Mr M Vumazonke, Administration Assistant
      (Committee Section); Mr D Mokoena, Committee Researcher (Research
      Unit); Mr M Mbebe, Procedural Officer, (NCOP) and Adv BV Momoti, Legal
      Adviser (NCOP).

4.    Introduction

4.1   On 28 April 2009 the Eastern Cape MEC for Local Government and
      Traditional Affairs resolved to invoke section 139 (1)(a) of the
      Constitution at Alfred Nzo District  Municipality. Subsequently, the
      Office of the Chairperson of the NCOP was informed of the Provincial
      Executive Council (PEC) decision to intervene in the Municipality.

4.2   The main issues that were identified by the PEC in the Municipality
      related to critical challenges in the areas of financial;
      administrative; political and institutional instability; vacant
      position of Municipal Manager; Chief Financial Officer and Duty Chief
      Financial Officer; inability to pay employees’ salaries and
      councillors’ allowances; service delivery related problems; lack of
      proper effective billing system and low collection rate of service
      charges and certain officials of the Municipality not adhering to the
      municipal supply chain management policy.

5.    Meeting at Alfred Nzo District Municipality

5.1   On the 19 August 2009, the Committee Delegation had interactive
      engagements with the internal and external stakeholders of the Alfred
      Nzo District Municipality. The main internal stakeholders the
      Delegation interacted with at the Municipality included the Speaker,
      Mayor, Chief-Whip, the Administrator and representatives of Organised
      Labour. The main external stakeholders the Delegation interacted with
      included representatives from the South African Local Government
      Association (SALGA), the business and community forums and non
      -governmental organizations.

5.2   For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both internal
      and external stakeholders are structured on the basis of the five key
      performance areas of local government which are: Municipal
      Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Local Economic Development;
      Municipal Financial Viability and Management as well as Good
      Governance and Public Participation.

(A).  Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

5.3   Municipal Council: The submissions made by the Speaker and Mayor
      remarked on the contract of the Municipal Manager which has expired
      last year December 2008, meanwhile the CFO left the Municipality
      during allegations of financial mismanagement and maladministration.
      These were critical officials who were supposed to be investigated on
      the missing of funds. In addition, the District did not have three
      senior officials and only had one senior official in Corporate
      Services. However, the position of the CFO has been filled by two
      senior managers, and the position for the other two senior managers
      has already been advertised. The District has failed to find a
      suitable candidate for the position of Municipal Manager and has
      decided on head-hunting. This was after they realised that the rural
      nature of the District, which had no potential to attract highly
      qualified and capable incumbent for the position. According to the
      Executive Mayor, a request was made to the Department of Local
      Government and Traditional Affairs in line with the provisions of
      Section 154 of the Constitution, to assist with the filling of
      vacancies of the Municipal Manager and CFO.

5.4   The skills shortage in the District was a concern due the rural
      nature of the District which is unable to attract skilled workers at
      all levels. This situation was also exacerbated by the grading
      capacity assessment of the Municipality which it inherited from its
      locals. The highest graded local municipality is at grade 3, which
      according to the District provided very low salaries. It is due to
      this fact again that the District was unable attract highly skilled
      workers.
5.5   Caretaker Municipal Manager: He indicated that the Municipality has
      experienced severe performance deficiencies over a long period of
      time, especially in its administration, technical and corporate
      services functions. These deficiencies have resulted in failures in
      financial controls; lack of legal compliance and as a result service
      delivery was compromised. By early 2009, the situation had become
      critical and it required an urgent and extensive but carefully
      considered intervention.  In April 2009, Mr Thandolwethu Tubane was
      appointed as a Caretaker Municipal Manager and prepared a turn-around
      strategy to address the shortcomings. The turn-around strategy seeks
      to address performance and financial problem that is sufficiently
      serious and sustained, in order the Municipality could benefit from a
      financial recovery plan.

5.6   The main transformation and organisational development challenges
      highlighted in the Caretaker Municipal Manager’s report related to
      complete lack of performance management; lack of accountability on the
      part of senior and middle managers; lack of systems’ controls in
      general; lack of supervision and management of staff and the lack of
      desire to enforce discipline on staff; outstanding number of
      disciplinary matters which dated back from 2007. Based on these
      challenges, the Caretaker Municipal Manager has turned around the
      situation through the following:

      5.6.1 Review of organizational structure and human resources policies
           was underway in order to identify inefficiencies, improve
           performance and the use of municipal resources.
      5.6.2 Recruitment of competent people for critical positions to fill
           critical vacant positions (Municipal Manager; HoD for Technical
           Services; PMU Programme Managers; HoD Community Services).
      5.6.3 Development of a human resource developmental plan that includes
           elements on equity, workplace skills and performance management
           systems.
      5.6.4 Finalising of outstanding disciplinary matters and disputes that
           may be raised by the forensic audit.
      5.6.5 Establishing a record management system and appropriate IT and
           other systems for the effective management of all the municipal
           records.
      5.6.6 Developing an indigent register and conduct a survey of indigent
           people and their needs.

5.7   Organized Labour: During the engagement with internal stakeholders
      such as the representatives of SAMWU, concerns were raised about the
      Council approved orgonogram without the consultation of the labour
      union. Furthermore, there was no working relationship between labour
      and management, as a result workers were demoralised because of
      alleged cases of nepotism, corruption and mismanagement. Despite these
      challenges, SAMWU commended the changes that have been brought through
      the arrival of the Caretaker Municipal Manager.

5.8   SALGA: The Association remarked that the implementation and
      application of section 139 of the Constitution in the municipalities
      in the Province was not properly consulted by the MEC, with the
      exception of Alfred Nzo and Koukamma Municipalities. This was
      exacerbated by poor coordination and consultation among government
      sector departments. It was also noted that the District was currently
      graded equally with its locals, hence the Association proposed that
      the District Municipality be graded differently from its local
      municipalities.

(B).  Basic Service Delivery
5.9   Municipal Council: The District was experiencing serious challenges
      with the supply of portable water and connection of sanitation
      infrastructure. The infrastructure required more grant allocation to
      be upgraded, and the two grants provided for by Government did not
      provide enough funds to kickstart the infrastructure roll-out
      programme. In addition, the District has complained that the formula
      used for the distribution of local government equitable share was
      problematic. They alleged that the formula did not take into account
      issues of service delivery and infrastructure backlog that existed.
      The equitable share was also being used for the roll-out of the
      indigent policy which was not budgeted for. This remained a serious
      challenge for many municipalities in the country, which includes
      municipalities in KwaZulu-Natal, North West, Mpumalanga, Free State,
      Limpopo and Northern Cape who have also complained about the formula
      allocation to subsided poor municipalities.

5.10  Caretaker Municipal Manager: He indicated that an integrated human
      settlement plan has been developed and adopted by the council in order
      to:
      5.10.1      Improve refurbish water service infrastructure;
      5.10.2      Acquire competencies to properly manage the water schemes;


      5.10.3      Improve revenue collection;
      5.10.4      Recruit the Unit Manager for Performance Management and
             the Development of housing sector plan;
      5.10.5      Develop systems and procedures for technical projects;
      5.10.6 Review LED strategy; and
      5.10.7      Develop an internal and external communication plan and
             conducting IDP budget road-shows.

(C).  Local Economic Development
5.11  There were no economic activities in the area and people were moving
      away from the District to find employment elsewhere. The District was
      very rural in nature and needed development that will stimulate
      economic activities in keeping people employed and boosting the
      economy of the District. There was also a need for empowering the
      youth to open businesses, provision for financial assistance,
      development of economic activities and economic hubs. All these depend
      on the well functioning and well built infrastructure of the District.
      At present, the District has a challenge in providing water, proper
      sanitation, proper roads, and consistent and reliable electricity
      supply. Without this infrastructure, the economy of the District is
      far from reaching its high performance level and contributing
      positively in satisfactory employment creation.

(D).  Municipal Financial Viability and Management

5.12  Municipal Council: The Municipal Council acknowledged cash-flow
      problems confronting the Municipality and the misalignment of the
      budget with the IDP. The Council stated that the section 71 (MFMA)
      monthly reports on the statement of the municipal budget submitted by
      the then accounting officer were incorrect. The political oversight on
      the administration, implementation of programmes and projects in the
      District revealed some deficiencies. A forensic investigation that was
      instituted based on the mandate of the Council exposed that there was
      slow delivery of projects and that procurement regulations were not
      complied with. However, the Council was not satisfied with the
      forensic report since the terms of reference were revised without
      their consent. The report also revealed payment to ghost workers.



5.13  The Council reported that an estimated amount of R28 million could
      not be confirmed in the section 71 report, and the funds were reported
      as missing. As a result, 10 officials were arrested from the Project
      Management Unit and Finance including two community members.
      Furthermore, it has been identified that there was an unusual
      financial practice of tampering with budget votes.  As a result,
      officials were paid salaries out of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant
      (MIG). In overturning this practice, the Council decided to reverse
      the MIG funds from the Council discretionary fund.

5.14  Caretaker Municipal Manager: Some of the progress in respect of
      financial viability and management reported by the administrator
      included:
      5.14.1      Revision of the organogram in order to improve service
            delivery and general performance as well as the usage of
            resources adopted by the Council in consultation with staff,
            unions and labour forum.
      5.14.2      Revision of the supply chain management policy which
            included reviewing of standard tender documents; effectiveness
            of committees, procurement plans; establishment of database of
            service providers and the development of a fraud prevention
            plan.
      5.14.3      Developing a municipal performance report that deals with
            monitoring and reviewing of municipal financial performance
            every six month, in consultation with the Municipal Council.
      5.14.4      Preparation of the 2010/2011 financial year budget, as
            well as reviewing the budget process of the Municipality to
            ensure alignment to the Integrated Developmental Plan (IDP).
      5.14.5      Preparation of a draft Service Delivery and Budget
            Implementation Plan (SDBIP) in line with National Treasury
            Guidelines. This also encapsulates the development of
            performance agreements aligned to the SDBIP’s and tabled for
            Council input.
      5.14.6      Reviewing and development of draft policies including
            credit control and debt collection; asset management; budget
            and indigent policy; investment and cash management as well as
            development of an asset register.
      5.14.7      Development and implementation of an MFMA compliance
            checklist.
      5.14.8      Review and manage all grants according to conditions and
            payment schedules.
      5.14.9      Investigation of municipal loans granted to staff and
            municipal councillors.
      5.14.10     Implementation of a forensic investigation to identify and
            verify the extent and causes of previous financial
            mismanagement. The Special Investigating Unit (SIU) was
            intending to visit the Municipality during 20 August 2009, in
            order to establish the root cause of certain malpractices
            reported within the Municipality.


(E).  Good Governance and Public Participation

5.15  Municipal Council: The Council has applauded the assistance from
      community members in exposing those officials who were abusing public
      funds and implicated in the forensic audit. On the other hand, a
      number of communities do not have signal aerials and will not have
      access to the 2010 FIFA World Cup which will be taking place in the
      country. This has been raised as a serious concern given the economic
      nature of the area and lack of affordability by members of the
      community to go and watch the games in the stadiums which will be
      across the country. The Executive Mayor has appealed for assistance in
      terms assisting the community to have access to an improved aerial
      signal.

5.16  Farmers Union of Alfred Nzo District Municipality: Public
      participation was a major shortcoming of the Municipality. Commonality
      on the issues raised pertained to decisions taken without involvement
      of the community; lack of transparency in issues of engagement with
      the community; Councillors not reporting or doing their constituency
      role. The Farmers Union further raised concerns about distance
      challenges, for example, Ward 1 was in Matatiele and Ward 4 being at
      the end of Umzimvubu. That black farmers were not consulted or
      recognized by the Municipality.

5.17  Disabled People District Forum: The Forum noted that the invention
      should assist in building in-house capacity on a continuous basis.
      Furthermore, the Forum raised concerns on the way the Municipality was
      communicating to its locals. It was proposed that communication
      strategies should be reviewed and improved.

6.    Committee Observations and Opinion

6.1   The Committee Delegation observed that there were critical challenges
      experienced by the Municipality which related to critical vacant
      positions; serious concerns on MFMA and regulation’s compliance (e.g
      SCM regulation); financial mismanagement and inadequate financial
      controls; and the need for technical and financial assistance from the
      Provincial Department of Local Government and Traditional Affairs and
      National Treasury.

6.2   During the oversight visit to the District, the Committee Delegation
      noted that public education on the work of Government programmes was
      necessary. This would clarify the role confusion among stakeholders
      and therefore enhance and expedite service delivery. This was a result
      of other shortcomings raised which were beyond the scope of local
      government.

6.3   There was doubt on the existence and functionality of ward committee
      including the functionality of community development workers in the
      District. As a result, residence has complained of lack of
      consultation by the Municipality and dissemination of information.

6.4   The Municipality was struggling to raise enough funds to pay for
      their operational costs. According to the MEC, the Municipality was
      unable to pay employees salaries and allowances of Councillors. The
      Municipality was not doing much to educate and enforce payment of
      service by the public, The Municipal MFMA and the Municipal Property
      Rates Act, 2004 have been introduced to provide generally the
      municipalities and specifically, Alfred Nzo District Municipality with
      guidelines for effective system to maximise the revenue potential and
      the effective and transparent management of their finances. The
      Delegation is of the opinion that sufficient and effective management
      of available funding at a municipal level is essential to ensuring
      delivery on key developmental projects and plans. Financial viability
      is the key indicator towards sustainable service delivery in the
      medium to longer term.

6.5   The Municipality has failed a number of times to submit annual
      financial statements as required by the provisions of Section 126 of
      the MFMA. The Municipality has been submitting incorrect financial
      reports in an attempt to comply with Section 71 of the MFMA.

7.    Cross-Cutting Matters

7.1   The Committee Delegation noted during the oversight visit a number of
      cross-cutting matters that goes beyond the scope of local government
      and has critical bearing on service delivery in the District, and that
      this be referred to the relevant portfolio, committee or department:
      6.4.1 Roll-out of electricity has stopped since 2002 and the District
           was receiving electricity from another province, KwaZulu-Natal –
           Department of Energy and ESKOM.
      6.4.2 Insufficient local government equitable share allocation to
           address backlogs on infrastructure – Department of Co-operative
           Governance and Traditional Affairs to review its formula
           allocation to poor municipalities.

   8. Acknowledgement

8.1   The Committee Delegation acknowledged the varied contributions of the
      parliamentary staff who participated in the oversight visit in their
      various capacities.

9.    Recommendations

9.1   Having conducted the oversight visit to Alfred Nzo District
      Municipality and interacted with internal and external stakeholders,
      the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs recommends as follows:

      9.1   National Council of Provinces approves the intervention as
           issued by the Provincial Executive Council in terms of section
           139 (1) (b) of the Constitution.
      9.2   That National Council of Provinces endorses the six months
           period of intervention, as stipulated in the intervention notice
           tabled by the Eastern Cape MEC for Local Government and
           Traditional Affairs.
      9.3   The Caretaker Municipal Manager should urgently ensure that all
           senior and critical positions in the District are filled.
      9.4   The MEC to table quarterly progress report to the NCOP on the
           status of interventions in the Municipality, including
           challenges encountered.
      9.5   The South African Local Government Association in co-operation
           with Local Government Sector Education and Training Authority to
           facilitate training and capacity building for Municipal
           Councillors; to further deepen their understanding of the
           oversight role; legal framework and policies that govern the
           activities of the Municipality.
      9.6   The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
           Affairs in co-operation with the relevant Committee in the
           Eastern Cape Provincial Legislature, to conduct a follow-up
           visit to the Municipality after the intervention has ended.

Report to be considered.

2.    OVERSIGHT VISIT REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE
GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS TO KOUKAMMA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY – 18
AUGUST 2009


1.    Background and Overview
1.1   The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs,having considered the request by the National Council of
      Provinces (NCOP) to consider and report on the interventions notices
      in terms of section 139 (1) (b) of the Constitution in Koukamma Local
      Municipality, reports as follows:

1.2   In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or does not
      fulfil an executive obligation in terms of the Constitution or
      legislation, the relevant provincial executive may intervene by taking
      any appropriate steps to ensure the fulfilment of that obligation,
      including assuming responsibility for the relevant obligation in that
      municipality.

1.3   In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of the NCOP
      referred the notice of intervention in the affairs of Koukamma Local
      Municipality by the MEC for Local Government and Traditional Affairs
      to the Committee for consideration and reporting. On 5 August 2009,
      the Committee took a decision during the proceedings of its meeting to
      conduct an oversight visit to the above-mentioned Municipality during
      18 August 2009.

2.    Objective of the Oversight Visits
2.1   The main objectives of the oversight visit were to determine whether
      procedural requirements have been met and also to verify whether the
      provincial executive has used its discretion appropriately before the
      Committee can approve/disapprove the intervention. Through the
      deliberations and interaction with internal and external stakeholders,
      the Committee wanted to determine how the provincial executive intends
      to restore the fulfilment of the relevant obligations and ensure
      fulfilment in the long-term. The aim being to ensure intergovernmental
      checks and balances aimed at guarding the integrity and efficiency of
      the intervention process.

3.    Composition of the Delegation
3.1   The Committee Delegation composed of the following Members of
      Parliament and officials: Hon MH Mokgobi, Limpopo (ANC); Hon AG
      Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon A Watson, Mpumalanga (DA); Mr TM Manele,
      Committee Secretary (Committee Section); Mr N Mfuku, Content Adviser
      (Committee Section); Mr M Vumazonke, Administration Assistant
      (Committee Section); Mr D Mokoena, Committee Researcher (Research
      Unit); Mr M Mbebe, Procedural Officer, (NCOP) and Adv BV Momoti, Legal
      Adviser (NCOP).

4.    Introduction
4.1   On 28 April 2009 the Eastern Cape MEC for Local Government and
      Traditional Affairs resolved to invoke section 139 (1)(b) of the
      Constitution at Koukamma Local Municipality. Subsequently, the Office
      of the Chairperson of the NCOP was informed of the Provincial
      Executive Council (PEC) decision to intervene in the Municipality.

4.2   The main issues that were identified by the PEC related to the
      failure to comply by the Municipality with section 20(1)(a) of the
      Health Act (Act No. 63 of 1977); which requires that every local
      authority to take lawful, necessary and reasonably, practical measures
      to maintain its locality at all times in a hygienic clean condition.
      There was also a breach of accounting procedures in terms of Circular
      10 of 2007 of the Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA); failure to
      implement recommendations and support programmes by the Provincial and
      National Departments of Local Government; lack of reliable database of
      indigent people; failure to submit annual financial statements for
      audit purpose as required by section 126 of the MFMA; lack of complete
      asset management policy/system and strategy; absence of proper
      financial and internal controls mechanisms  as well as poor financial
      management which included cases of underspending of the Municipal
      Infrastructure Grant (MIG).

5.    Meeting at Koukamma Local Municipality
5.1   On the 18 August 2009, the Committee Delegation had interactive
      engagements with the internal and external stakeholders of the
      Koukamma Local Municipality. The main internal stakeholders the
      Delegation interacted with in the Municipality included the Speaker,
      Mayor, Chief Whip, Ward Committee Members and Councillors, the
      Administrator and representatives of Organised Labour. The main
      external stakeholders the Delegation interacted with included the
      business and community forums and non governmental organizations.

5.2   For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both internal
      and external stakeholders are structured based on the five key
      performance areas of local government which are: Municipal
      Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Local Economic Development;
      Municipal Financial Viability and Management as well as Good
      Governance and Public Participation.

(A).  Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

5.3   Municipal Council: The submissions made by the Speaker and Mayor
      indicated that the Municipality initiated the process of the
      intervention in its affairs by the PEC of the Eastern Cape. Some of
      the intervention progress highlighted, included the appointment Mr.
      Louis Scheepers by the MEC for Local Government and Traditional
      Affairs as an Administrator to assume responsibilities related to
      financial management, corporate services, infrastructure development
      and disaster management and public participation. Some of the internal
      developments since the deployment of staff from Provincial Department
      of Local Government and Traditional Affairs highlighted in the report,
      included the auditing of all existing municipal policies and
      evaluation of their relevance. This process entails the development of
      new rules of order, registry of delegation and legal compliance.

5.4   Administrator: Some of the organisational development challenges
      indicated in the report pertained to administrative leanness;
      indefinite sick leave and absenteeism since June 2008 of the Corporate
      Support Services Director; lack of support staff to committee
      services; lack of Council mail policy; and lack of record management
      system and disarray of general administration functions; redesign of
      organisational structure in order to be aligned key performance areas
      of the Integrated  Development Planning (IDP) and absence of key
      management staff (i.e. Municipal Manager, Strategic Director and
      Corporate Support Services). Lastly, there was a challenge on the
      implementation of salary wage agreement.

5.5   Organized Labour: During the engagements with internal stakeholders
      such as the representatives of organized labour and members of ward
      committee, concerns were raised related to transformation and
      organisational development. The major concern raised by South African
      Municipal Workers Union (SAMWU) pertained to the non-implementation of
      adopted institutional policies, lack of staff training and proper
      institutional plan with regard to service delivery and performance
      contract. The major concern raised by the members of the ward
      committee pertained to the recruitment and selection of unqualified
      personnel in the capacity of Chief Financial Officer to perform
      financial management responsibilities and the non- functioning of the
      Labour Forum.

   6. Business Chamber, Chamber of Commerce, Residence Association, Women In-
      Move and Vuka Uyibambe Youth Development Forum: The issues raised
      related to the municipal transformation and organisational
      development, were it was acknowledged that the Administrator has
      brought normality in the functioning of the Municipality. However,
      reservations were also raised on the dual responsibilities of Mr Louis
      Scheepers as an Administrator and Acting Municipal Manager. The main
      thrust was on reporting and being accountable to the same Municipal
      Council that was responsible for the inherent challenges of the
      Municipality.

(B).  Basic Service delivery

5.7   Municipal Council: The key service delivery challenges highlighted in
      the Mayoral Committee report related to huge infrastructure backlogs
      (ageing infrastructure, repairs, maintenance and rehabilitation),
      Hands-on technical support in Koukamma was being temporarily backed up
      by the DBSA staff (Engineers and Young Professionals). Engineers have
      also been deployed by the Department of Co-operative Governance and
      Traditional Affairs and USAID to support the bucket eradication
      programme. Despite the indicated challenges, the Mayoral Committee
      reported progress made in respect of the functionality of Project
      Management Unit (PMU), approval of business plan and expenditure of
      MIG and projects that were water and sanitation related, The current
      service delivery plan addressed challenges on Roads, Water,
      Sanitation, Electricity and Housing.

5.8   The Municipal Council further reported positive feedback from
      communities and sectors since the implementation of infrastructure
      projects. The bulk infrastructure of Koukamma is being attended and
      addressed through the MIG projects. It was reported that DBSA Board
      approved R10 million for drought relief to alleviate the impact of the
      drought in Koukamma jurisdiction. The intervention immediate results
      included clean water delivery to communities; drilling and
      commissioning of boreholes and appointment of a team to repair leaks
      and undertake urgent repairs to reticulation and other technical
      problems. The Municipal Council has also appointed a Town Planner to
      deal with the numerous complaints about land-use and rezoning
      applications. It is hoped that this would add the necessary and much
      needed revenue to the municipal reserves.

5.9   Organized Labour, Ward Committees and Residence Association: During
      the engagements with stakeholders, major concerns were raised
      pertaining to service delivery. The main dissatisfactions raised by
      the organised labour related to the lack of proper municipal plan with
      regard to service delivery. The residence association raised concerns
      pertaining to non-payment of service delivery rates and degradation of
      service delivery infrastructure. However, the residence association
      acknowledged to the Committee of the flood relief assistance given to
      them, which has brought much relief. The major concerns raised by the
      members of ward committee was with regard to the blocking of housing
      projects, poor payments of basic services such water, poor quality
      toilets installed, electricity and waste collection due to incorrect
      billing accounts prepared by the municipal officials.

(C).  Local Economic Development

5.10  Women In-Move and Vuka Uyibambe Youth Development Forum: The concerns
      raised by the stakeholders related to the lack of business
      opportunities, lack of equity in the awarding of municipal tenders,
      and lack of economic financial support to SMME’s and non-functionality
      of Local Economic Development Unit in the Municipality.

(D).  Municipal Financial Viability and Management

5.11  Municipal Council: Based on the report presented by the Mayoral
      Committee, major achievements have been registered as a result of the
      appointment of the Administrator. Part of these achievements included
      the improvement of financial management which focuses on strict
      financial control and discipline; strengthening of monitoring and
      accountability systems focusing on budget vote expenditure; high
      reduction of costs and expenditure on transport and catering during
      meetings; development and council approval of recovery plan, budget
      and all relevant related financial policies.

5.12  Despite the above-mentioned achievements, the report highlighted also
      some of the challenges confronting municipal financial viability and
      management in the Municipality. These challenges included increased
      debt and low collection rate, default billing system, incapacity in
      the Budget Office, ineffective debt collection strategies and the
      inability to implement credit control policy because of problems with
      billing systems. In an effort to address the above-mentioned
      challenges, the report indicated that a service provider has been
      appointed to rectify the problems encounter with the billing system.


5.13  Organized Labour: The major concerns raised by SAMWU pertained to
      lack of control systems in the area of supply chain management, lack
      of monitoring of the municipal vehicles and patrol consumption, abuse
      of leaves due to lack of proper monitoring and evaluation system.
      SAMWU further recommended that the Municipality to cut all unnecessary
      expenditure on travelling expenses and telephone usage.

5.14  Ward Committees: The ward committees reported their dissatisfaction
      with resource allocation for their activities, since there was no
      budget on ward committees.

(E).  Good Governance and Public Participation

5.15  Municipal Council: Despite the allegations on political interference
      in the administration and high political contestation in the
      Municipality, the report of the mayoral committee highlighted progress
      in respect to public participation, convening of regular public
      meetings by the ward councillors and the completion of Ward Committee
      Policy and Public Participation Model. While acknowledging progress in
      respect of public participation, the report raised concerns with
      regard to service payment boycott spearheaded by organises business
      and Ratepayers Associations in the area. The other challenge related
      to a lack of communication strategy to deal with wrong perceptions
      about the municipal inability to provide services.

5.16  Ward Committees and Vuka Uyibambe Youth Development Forum: Public
      participation was a major shortcoming of the Municipality. Commonality
      on the issues raised pertained to decisions taken without the
      involvement of the community; lack of transparency in issues of
      engagement with the community; Councillors not reporting or doing
      their constituency role; lack of black representation in the Mayoral
      Advisory Forum. The major concerns raised by the representatives of
      ward committees related to the absence or no provision of Community
      Development Workers in Ward 2; non-functioning of municipal standing
      committee to discuss community mandates emanating from public
      participation; non implementation of Council resolutions, and lack of
      resource such as transport and telephone allowances; and slow response-
      rate from the technical services on service delivery complaints.



6.    Committee Observations and Opinion

6.1   The Committee Delegation observed that there were critical challenges
      experienced by the Municipality which related to critical vacant
      positions; serious concerns on MFMA and regulation’s compliance (e.g
      SCM regulation); financial mismanagement and inadequate financial
      controls; and the need for technical and financial assistance from the
      Provincial Department of Local Government and Traditional Affairs and
      National Treasury.

   2. During the interaction and deliberations with all stakeholders, it was
      noted that there were contradictions between the Councillors with
      regard to their relationship with the executive management; instances
      of political interference and shortcomings were observed with regard
      to public participation. Furthermore, the Committee Delegation
      emphasized the need to work together more effectively with communities
      and key stakeholders in ensuring the Municipality carryout its
      delivery and developmental functions effectively.

   3. The dual responsibilities by the Administrator performing functions of
      an appointed Administrator in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the
      Constitution and accounting to the MEC for Local Government of Local
      Government and Traditional Affairs; as well as performing functions of
      an Acting Municipal Manager accountable to the Municipal Council of
      Koukamma was confusing.

6.4   The Committee Delegation is of the opinion that the organisational
      capacity of Municipality to perform its functions and fulfil its
      developmental role is of paramount importance for service delivery.
      This key performance area should focuses on organisational capacity
      and includes indicators such as vacancy rates among senior managers
      and the implementation of performance management system.

7.    Cross-Cutting Matters

7.1   The Committee Delegation noted during the oversight visit a number of
      cross-cutting matters that goes beyond the scope of local government
      and has critical bearing on service delivery in Koukamma, and that
      this be referred to the relevant portfolio, committee or department:

      7.1.1 Unblocked housing projects since 2002 – Human Settlement.
      7.1.2 The vastness between wards, Joubertina being almost 45KM from
           Kareedouw – Municipal Demarcation Board and the Department of Co-
           operative Governance and Traditional Affairs..
      7.1.3 Drie Kroom Farm has been bought by the Department of Rural
           Development and Land Reform for emerging farmers including
           tractors and other resources; however, there is no water supply.
           – Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

8.    Acknowledgement

8.1   The Committee Delegation acknowledged the varied contributions of the
      parliamentary staff who participated in the oversight visit in their
      various capacities.

9.    Recommendations

9.1   Having conducted the oversight visit to Koukamma Local Municipality
      and interacted with internal and external stakeholders, the Select
      Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
      recommends as follows:

      9.1.1 National Council of Provinces approves the intervention as
           issued by the Provincial Executive Council in terms of section
           139 (1) (b) of the Constitution.
      9.1.2 That National Council of Provinces endorses the six months
           period of intervention, as stipulated in the intervention notice
           tabled by the Eastern Cape MEC for Local Government and
           Traditional Affairs.
      9.1.3 The MEC to consider reviewing the occupational designation of
           Mr. Louis Scheepers to avoid confusion on his dual role as
           Administrator and Acting Municipal Manager in order to allow the
           incumbent to focus on his role in restoring normality within the
           institution.
      9.1.4 The MEC to table quarterly progress report to the NCOP on the
           status of interventions in the Municipality, including
           challenges encountered.
      9.1.5 The South African Local Government Association in co-operation
           with Local Government Sector Education and Training Authority to
           facilitate training and capacity building for Municipal
           Councillors; to further deepen their understanding of the
           oversight role; legal framework and policies that govern the
           activities of the Municipality.
      9.1.6 The Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
           Affairs to fast-track the development of ward committees funding
           model in order to ensure that necessary resources are provided
           to ward committees to perform their constitutional obligations
           of facilitating public participation, planning and decision
           making processes of the Municipality.
      9.1.7 The approved report by the NCOP to be shared with all the
           internal and external stakeholders of Koukamma whom the
           Committee Delegation interacted with during the oversight visit.


      9.1.8 The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
           Affairs in co-operation with the relevant Committee in the
           Eastern Cape Provincial Legislature to conduct a follow-up visit
           after the intervention has ended.

Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2009

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development on the Upliftment of the provisional suspension from Office of
magistrate A Bacharam, dated 13 October 2009.

Introduction

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
considered the Report on the upliftment of the provisional suspension of a
magistrate: Ms A Bacharam, an additional magistrate at Scottburgh tabled by
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, in terms of the
Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), in Parliament on 17 September
2009 reports as follows:

Background

1.    The Select Committee heard evidence from representatives of the
     Magistrates Commission concerning the matter of the provisional
     suspension from office of magistrate Ms A Bacharam on 26 August 2009.

2.    It heard evidence that a disciplinary hearing was set down by the
     Magistrates Commission for 30 May 2008 but that Ms Bacharam’s legal
     representative requested a postponement of the inquiry pending the
     finalisation of the criminal case against her.
3.    Ms Bacharam was on 13 February 2009 acquitted on the above criminal
     charge.

4.    The Magistrates Commission informed the Select Committee that it had
     subsequently reviewed the transcription of proceedings in the criminal
     case and had, on Tuesday, 25 August 2009, advised the Minister
     forJustice and Constitutional Development on the feasibility of
     proceeding with a disciplinary hearing.

5.    The Select Committee recommended waiting for the tabling of the
     recommendation from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
     Development in Parliament in order to conclude the matter.

6.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development informed
     Parliament of the upliftment of the provisional suspension of
     magistrate Ms A Bacharam. The Select Committee on Security and
     Constitutional Affairs considered the report by the Minister on 17
     September 2009.

7.    The Select Committee considered the recommendation by the Minister
     for Justice and Constitutional Development on Friday, 09 October 2009.

Conclusion
1.    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development,
     having considered the upliftment of the provisional suspension of a
     magistrate: Ms A Bacharam, an additional magistrate at Scottburgh
     tabled by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, in
     terms of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), in Parliament
     on 17 September 2009 and referred to it on 08 October 2009, reports
     that it concurs with the Minister’s decision..

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate T C
     Oliphant, dated 13 October 2009

Introduction

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
considered additional evidence relating to the report on the provisional
suspension from office of Magistrate T C Oliphant, an additional Magistrate
at Wynberg, Western Cape, tabled by the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates
Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

Background

1.    The Select Committee heard evidence from the representatives of the
     Magistrates Commission concerning the matter of the provisional
     suspension from office of Magistrate Ms T C Oliphant on 26 August 2009.

2.    Ms Oliphant was employed by the Department of Justice and
     Constitutional Development since 01 February 1994 and was appointed as
     Magistrate on 06 May 2002. Ms Oliphant was subsequently absent from
     office from 25 April 2008 to 10 November 2008.

3.    A preliminary investigation was conducted in terms of the regulations
     for Judicial Officers in Lower Courts, into allegations of Ms
     Oliphant’s absenteeism from office without leave or valid cause.

4.    The Ethics Committee of the Magistrates Commission on 25 September
     2008 considered the preliminary investigation report and resolved that
     Ms Oliphant not be charged with misconduct, but to deal with the matter
     in terms of regulation 26(4) (b) of the said regulations in that she be
     requested to appear before the Ethics Committee to be reprimanded.

5.    Contact with Ms Oliphant was attempted through various means and her
     Judicial Head was eventually able to trace her and serve a notice on
     her personally on 22 October 2008 for her to appear before the Ethics
     Committee.

6.    Ms Oliphant subsequently appeared before the Ethics Committee at
     Pretoria on 06 November 2008. She indicated that she had been suffering
     from a major depressive disorder and that she was admitted to a
     Psychiatric Clinic for the period 02 – 24 April 2008. A medical
     certificate for this period was produced. No application for leave or
     medical certificates was produced for the period 25 April – 05 November
     2008.

7.    Ms Oliphant indicated that she would resume her duties on 10 November
     2008. The Ethics Committee requested her to obtain a written report
     from her medical practitioner confirming that she had recuperated to
     such an extent that she was able to resume her duties as a Magistrate.
     She undertook to provide such a report on 20 November 2008.

8.    Ms Oliphant resumed duties on 10 November 2008 and was present until
     14 November 2008. She was then absent from office from 17 November 2008
     to date and again failed in her responsibility to report her absence to
     her Judicial Head.

9.    Ms Oliphant failed to attend a meeting scheduled for 20 November 2008
     and to produce a report from her medical practitioner on her fitness
     for duty. She again did not communicate with her Judicial Head of
     Office in this regard and all attempts to contact her were
     unsuccessful.

10.   The Select Committee noted that on 05 December 2008 Ms Oliphant was
     informed in writing that her conduct amounted to serious misconduct.
     She was further advised that should she fail to report for duty or
     fails to inform her Judicial head of her whereabouts by 17 December
     2008, she would be deemed to have absconded and that she would have
     made herself guilty of misconduct. A letter was served on her but Ms
     Oliphant was not at home at the time and the letter was left on a chair
     in the living room through an open window.

11.   Two Judicial Quality Assurance Officers, in a final attempt, traced
     Ms Oliphant to her residence in Mitchells Plain on 14 January 2009. The
     Judicial Officers met with Ms Oliphant and requested an explanation for
     her absence from office. She did not give an explanation. She was
     advised to contact her Judicial Head and report for duty. Ms Oliphant
     failed to do so.

12.   The Magistrates Commissions legal obligations required that:

     12.1.  If a Magistrate is absent without leave or valid reason from
           his/her office or duty for a period of 30 days or longer the
           following applies:
           a)    The Commission must in terms of regulation 34(1) of the
                 Regulations for Judicial officers in Lower Courts, 1994, be
                 informed without delay; and
           b)    It shall be deemed that the Magistrate has absconded and
                 made himself/herself guilty of misconduct.


     12.2.  In terms of section 13(4) (a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act
           no 90 of 1993) the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
           Development, if the Magistrates Commission recommend that a
           Magistrate be removed from office, on inter alia, the basis of
           misconduct, must suspend that Magistrate from office or if the
           Magistrate is at that stage provisionally suspended in terms of
           the Act, confirm the suspension.

     12.3.  The report in which such suspension and the reasons therefore
           are made known, must be tabled in Parliament by the Minister
           within 14 days of that suspension if Parliament is then in
           session or, if Parliament is not then in session, within 14 days
           after the commencement of the next ensuing session.

     12.4.  In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993,
           Parliament must, as soon as is reasonably possible, pass a
           resolution as to whether or not the provisional suspension of a
           Magistrate is confirmed.


13.   The Select Committee having taken into account that Ms T C Oliphant
     indicated that she had been suffering from a major depressive disorder
     and that she was admitted to a Psychiatric Clinic for the period 02 –
     24 April 2008 and having produced a medical certificate attesting to
     this, requested the Magistrates Commission to contact Ms Oliphant for
     one last time, in writing, to request that she produce her medical
     records for review by the Ethics Committee of the Magistrates
     Commission.

14.   The Select Committee expected a final report from the Magistrates
     Commission on the basis of which the Committee would finalise its
     recommendation to the National Council of Provinces.

15.   The Select Committee having heard evidence from the Magistrates
     Commission on Friday, 09 October 2009 on the attempts to comply with
     the Select Committees recommendation reported that a letter dated 27
     August 2009 addressed to Ms Oliphant was served on her personally at
     her physical place of residence the very same day at 14:40. The content
     of the letter was explained to her and she acknowledged receipt of the
     letter on a copy thereof.

16.   Ms TC Oliphant failed to comply with the request to produce her
     medical records.

Committee recommendation
The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
considered additional evidence relating to the report on the provisional
suspension from office of Magistrate T C Oliphant, an additional Magistrate
at Wynberg, Western Cape, tabled by the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates
Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports that it confirms the provisional
suspension and recommends the removal from office of Magistrate Ms T C
Oliphant.

Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development on the Protocol of Amendments to the International Hydrograhic
Organisation Convention, dated 13 October 2009

Introduction

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
considered the Protocol of Amendments to the International Hydrographic
Organisation (IHO) Convention, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
Constitution, 1996, in Parliament on 18 August 2009 and referred to the
Select Committee on 27 August 2009 reports as follows:

Background

1.    The Republic of South Africa became a Member State of the IHO in
      1967. The IHO Convention was ratified by Parliament in 1968.

2.    The IHO is an intergovernmental consultative and technical
      organization that was established in 1921 to support the safety in
      navigation and the protection of the maritime environment. Contracting
      Governments undertake to arrange for the collection and compilation of
      hydrographic data and the publication, dissemination and keeping up to
      date of all nautical information necessary for safe navigation.

3.    In particular Contracting Governments undertake, in a manner most
      suitable for the purpose of aiding navigation, to ensure that
      hydrographic surveys are carried out, to prepare and issue
      nauticalcharts, sailing directions, lists of lights, tide tables and
      other nautical publications. To promulgate Notices to Mariners and to
      provide data management arrangements to support these services.

4.    The Republic of South Africa is represented at the IHO by the SA Navy
      Hydrographer, who is also the Chairperson of the Southern Africa and
      Islands Hydrographic Commission (SAIHC).

5     During the 3rd Extraordinary International Hydrographic Conference
      held in the Principality of Monaco, a Resolution was adopted on 14
      April 2005 to amend the Preamble as well as 19 Articles of the IHO
      Convention (1967 version) in accordance with Article XXI thereof.

6.    The objective of the Protocol of Amendments is to improve the scope,
      objectives, capacity and effect of the IHO Convention. Approval of the
      Protocol of Amendments to the IHO Convention is an indispensable pre-
      requisite for the modernization of the IHO.

7.    In the four years since the approval of the Protocol of Amendments,
      twenty-three Member States have indicated their approval of the
      Protocol of Amendments. Thirty-one more approvals are needed before
      the Protocol of Amendments can come into effect.

Committee recommendation

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
considered the Protocol of Amendments to the International Hydrographic
Organisation (IHO) Convention, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
Constitution, 1996, in Parliament on 18 August 2009 and referred to the
Select Committee on 27 August 2009 recommends approval by the National
Council of Provinces.

Report to be considered.

                         WEDNESDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

               1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
           Region of the People’s Republic of China concerning Mutual Legal
           Assistance in Criminal Matters, tabled in terms of section
           231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
           of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Hong
           Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of
           China concerning Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters.


        c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
           Region of the People’s Republic of China concerning Surrender of
           Fugitive Offenders, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
           Constitution, 1996.


        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
           the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
           Republic of China concerning Surrender of Fugitive Offenders.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The President of the Republic

    a) Report and Financial Statements of The Presidency for 2008-2009,
       including       the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


2.    The Minister of Higher Education and Training


    a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Student Financial
       Aid Scheme for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
       2008-2009.

                          THURSDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 15 October 2009:


          a) Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Amendment Bill [B
             12 - 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
             Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs of the National
             Council of Provinces.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT TO THE FIRST REPORT OF THE JOINT RULES
      COMMITTEE, 2009

The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, as co-chairpersons of the Joint Rules Committee,
present the Supplementary Report to the First Report of the Joint Rules
Committee, 2009, dated 13 October 2009, as follows:

The Joint Rules Committee, having on 18 June 2009 considered proposed rule
amendments in respect of the co-chairpersons for joint committees,
recommends the following amendments to the Joint Rules:


(1)   Joint Subcommittee on the Funding of Represented Political Parties

      That Joint Rule 81 be substituted as follows:


      Chairpersons
      81.   A member of the Assembly component elected by that component and
      a member of the Council component elected by that component are the co-
      chairpersons of the Joint Subcommittee.

(2)   Constitutional Review Committee


      That Joint Rule 101 be substituted as follows:


      Chairpersons
      101.  A member of the Assembly component elected by that component and
      a member of the Council component elected by that component are the co-
      chairpersons of the Committee.

(3)   Joint Standing Committee on Defence
      That Joint Rule 120C be substituted as follows:


      Chairpersons
      120C. A member of the Assembly component elected by that component and
      a member of the Council component elected by that component are the co-
      chairpersons of the Committee.

(4)   Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests

      That Joint Rule 123 be substituted as follows:


      Chairpersons
      123.  A member of the Assembly component elected by that component and
      a member of the Council component elected by that component are the co-
      chairpersons of the Committee.

Report to be considered.


__________                                   ____________
M V Sisulu                                   M J Mahlangu
Speaker of the National Assembly                   Chairperson of the NCOP

National Council of Provinces



1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations on the
Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic of
Germany for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on
Income and on Capital, dated 14 October 2009:

The Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations, having considered the
agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic of
Germany for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on
Income and on Capital, referred to it in terms of section 231(2) of the
Constitution, reports that it recommends that the Council approve the said
agreement.
Report to be considered



2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations on the
Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the United Mexican
States for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, dated 14 October 2009.

The Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations, having considered the
agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the United Mexican
States for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, referred to it in terms of section
231(2) of the Constitution, reports that it recommends that Council approve
the said agreement.


Report to be considered



