---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 June 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-06-09
---

TUESDAY, 9 JUNE 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14.05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish to acknowledge the presence in the
gallery of the Prime Minister of Kenya, The Right Honourable Raila Odinga,
and his delegation. [Applause.] Namkelekile. [A warm welcome to you all.]

                 COMMENCEMENT OF THE FIFA CONFEDERATIONS CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House -
  (1) notes that on Sunday, 14 June 2009, the Fifa Confederations Cup will
        officially start;


  (2) further notes that the Confederations Cup is a warm-up for the main
        event planned for 2010 and should provide an indication as to how
        well planning and construction activities have progressed;


  (3) believes the most important thing in sport is not to win but to take
        part, just as the most important thing in life is not the triumph
        but the struggle, and the essential thing is not to have conquered
        but to have fought well, and


  (4) welcomes the soccer teams that have converged on our shores and wishes
        them well in their stay in our country.

Thank you, hon Speaker.

Agreed to.

         PRESIDENT’S REPLY TO DEBATE ON STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker of the National Assembly, the hon
Prime Minister of Kenya, Mr Raila Amolo Odinga, Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, hon members, one of the most wonderful things about being a
South African is our very progressive Constitution.
It allows a multiparty constitutional democracy, which enables the
government of the day to benefit from debate. All of us know that we were
part of crafting a framework which allowed South Africa to become one of
the countries in the world that is governed by a good Constitution. Our
constitutional democracy makes all of us benefit from the views and
opinions of many political parties. This enriches the work of government.

In the presidential inauguration address we called for a partnership for
reconstruction, development and progress.

We believe we moved one step closer to that goal during the debate on the
state of the nation address, which was our first interaction since the
inauguration. Parties were given the opportunity to respond to that
statement.

The debate has been both instructive and encouraging. It has demonstrated
that all parties in this House, without exception, are earnest in their
commitment to this country and to harmonious relations amongst its people.

Regardless of our differences as political parties, I believe that we have
a common goal, which is to make South Africa a greater country. We take all
contributions to the debate in that spirit.

We have noted too that this House will seriously hold the executive
accountable. As hon Thaba Mufamadi said, this will be a “strong, activist
Parliament”.

As the national executive, we welcome increased oversight to assist us to
achieve our target of effective and efficient government. We will work
harder and smarter and the South African people will be the beneficiaries
of this constructive, robust role of Parliament.

It is when we are able to work together in that manner that South Africa
will be more united and prosperous.

When opening the debate, the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, hon Mathole
Motshekga, reminded us to focus on that which makes us human.

He referred to the call by former ANC President, Rev Z R Mahabane, for “the
recovery of the humanity of all people”.

That has been a guiding tenet of the ANC for the many decades of its
existence. It will be a central feature of our shared efforts over the term
of this government, because we know that working together, we can do more
to build a great South Africa.

Decent work and a steadily improving quality of life are essential for the
recovery of the humanity of all our people. So too is empowerment through
access to quality education and skills development. Safe water, affordable
energy, decent shelter, and cohesive, secure and vibrant communities are
similarly all important for the recovery of this humanity. To be treated
with respect and dignity by one’s fellow citizens, and by those who have
the responsibility of providing a public service, is important for the
recovery of our humanity.

Central to this recovery of our humanity is also the need for access to
economic opportunities and to earn a living. That is why we are determined
to lessen the impact of the economic downturn on the most vulnerable.

We can draw some encouragement from the fact that, as South Africans, we
have not experienced the worst effects of the global downturn due to the
prudent macroeconomic policies that had been followed.

From the Ready to Govern document of the early 1990s, the pursuit of our
objectives has always been based on the maintenance of a stable
macroeconomic environment. This is not going to change.

Hon Kenneth Meshoe has raised a concern about whether or not we would have
sufficient funds to bail out companies in distress during the downturn. You
will be pleased, hon Meshoe, to hear that there is no intention on our part
to utilise the fiscus for general company bailouts. [Applause.] As we
indicated, we are working with development finance institutions, such as
the Industrial Development Corporation, to identify such companies and,
where appropriate, mobilise assistance.

The hon Ryan Coetzee is correct in saying that the steps we take now must
not undermine our ability to take advantage of the upturn.

It is also important for us to ensure that the interventions we make do not
distract us from our longer-term socioeconomic objectives.

We must also keep the productive capacity of our economy intact so that it
can respond in a timeous fashion to the revival in demand as the global
economy recovers.

It is important that our manufacturing, agriculture and mining sectors are
ready for the recovery. That means we must do our best to retain skills and
labour.

Hon Patricia de Lille summed up what should be our approach as a nation to
this problem when she said:

   The global recession means that we need a plan around which all South
   Africans can rally; a plan that can tap into our collective patriotism,
   skills and wisdom, and bring us together as a nation.

Hon members, a number of speakers made reference to the targets we have set
with respect to the second phase of the Expanded Public Works Programme.

I reiterate that we intend to create about 500 000 work opportunities this
year, as part of our goal of creating about 4 million such opportunities by
the end of this five-year term.

Let me emphasise that these measures are not a substitute for the permanent
jobs that must be created and sustained in the economy.

The key sectors of the Expanded Public Works Programme are as follows:

Firstly, there is the infrastructure sector programme. Key programmes are
road construction, water reticulation, sewerage and waste water management.

The second programme is the social sector, aimed at creating work
opportunities through the provision of public social services. The key
programmes in this sector include the Home and Community-based Care
programme, which entails provision of care and support for those infected
and affected by HIV and Aids, as well as personnel required for the
expansion of the Early Childhood Development programme.

The third EPWP intervention is in the environment and culture sectors.
Programmes include Working for Water, Working on Fire and Land Care. New
initiatives on waste management, including the Food for Waste programme,
will be expanded.

This is one of the measures that government has put in place to alleviate
poverty and provide income, work experience and skills development to many
who are unemployed.

The Minister of Public Works, hon Geoff Doidge, will provide more
information during the department’s budget speech.

Hon members, as part of the war against poverty, government has also
committed itself to specific goals concerning the development of a
comprehensive social security system. The new system seeks to ensure access
to social security as provided for in Section 27 of the Constitution.

We are working on reforms in the areas of retirement provision, national
health insurance, unemployment insurance, compensation for injuries and
diseases on duty, and road accident insurance.

Hon Bantu Holomisa, we have noted your emphasis on the need to deliver
quality services in the rural areas. We are fully committed to change the
face of rural areas.

We must heed the clarion call of the Minister of Rural Development and Land
Reform, hon Gugile Nkwinti, who said “phezukomkhono” [we must get busy],
“vukuzenzele” [stand up and take the initiative], “siyazondla” [we feed
ourselves], imploring all to swing into action to make the Comprehensive
Rural Development programme a reality. For the benefit of those who do not
understand isiXhosa, when he said “phezukomkhono” he meant that we must
work. [Applause.]

There has been a lot of interest in our new national planning process. In
the coming two months, the Presidency should have completed work on the
systems and structures to deal with this matter. This will form the basis
of a Green Paper for public discussion in Parliament and by the nation at
large, as explained by the Minister in the Presidency responsible for
national planning, hon Trevor Manuel.

We are also encouraged by the universal support for the monitoring and
evaluation system. It should be emphasised though, as also pointed out by
hon Matladi of the UCDP, that the monitoring and evaluation system will not
be aimed at punishment. This is not a trap-and-catch exercise. The
intention is to improve service delivery.

The monitoring and evaluation system will include an early warning system
to assist us, working with the affected departments, in ensuring that
urgent corrective action is taken when weaknesses are identified.

We are trying not to wait until the Auditor-General produces a report and
only then realise that there are problems. This is often misleading because
that report could reflect a time two years before. So, we want to be in
step with the activities and correct the weaknesses that would otherwise be
detected two years later.

There are no super-Ministries, but just colleagues who will be working
together to find new ways of doing things more effectively. [Applause.] In
other words, we are not saying that these departments will then be
“indunas” [overseers]; no, not at all. We are creating a collective working
together of the colleagues.

Hon uMntwana wakwaPhindangene, raised various critical issues. Shenge also
raised issues related to the elections. Our confidence in the Independent
Electoral Commission is unwavering. [Applause.] The men and women of the
IEC have never been found wanting with regard to delivering free and fair
elections.

This always reminds me of 1994, when I was in the opposition in KwaZulu-
Natal after the IFP won the elections. I was not convinced that it was free
and fair. [Laughter.] I thought that going through the processes would take
me too long. I wanted to be certain of the results and I went to the then
head of the IEC, Justice Kriegler. I argued with him until he found the
room very small. I was trying to prove to him that something was wrong. I
returned to KwaZulu-Natal, still unhappy. I came back for the second trip
and he thought that he should hand me over to his deputy, who was Justice
Moseneke. But, at the end, the IEC delivered the results and, in the
context of the province, I was a loser, and I lost with a smile.
[Laughter.]

Of course, at that time we were serving under the interim Constitution. We
worked together very well. I still have to see in the world elections that
almost every citizen would say were free and fair. There is always somebody
who complains. Elections are the only activity in the world that has to be
guaranteed by that statement, ie that it was free and fair. All other
activities do not need such a statement. That indicates the challenge posed
by managing an election.

However, bearing all of that in mind, we still believe that our IEC has
been able to deliver. This is not so just because they are smart and
wonderful; because I think South African citizens are very good. They are
wonderful, they respect elections and I think, each time, we have the most
peaceful elections. Of course, the party agents and everybody else look
around and see papers walking their way, and they jump. It is a natural
thing for politicians, I think. It would be something else if there were no
political party that complained. For example, I had to take a plane to
Johannesburg to tell the chairperson that that election was not conducted
properly. He said that it was. He said that zip-zip machines were used and
that they worked fine, as did everything else. You know, that judge was
very impressive.

This illustrates the IEC’s handling of complaints when problems were
brought to their attention.

I also wish to thank uMntwana for his counsel on the economic situation. I
continue to hold uMntwana in very high regard. He is a tried and
accomplished elder statesman of our nation. [Applause.]

The IFP and the ANC have come a long way, and he has been part of that
journey. Working together under extremely difficult conditions, we managed
to bring about peace and stability nationally, and, in particular, in
KwaZulu-Natal.

We must respect the will of the electorate, and work together to improve
the lives of our people, especially the poorest of the poor.

We fully agree with hon Dr Pieter Mulder that the Public Service belongs to
all South Africans, and it should serve all South Africans, regardless of
party-political affiliation.

We have also noted the comments of hon Dene Smuts on the judiciary.

Amongst the key principles contained in the Constitution is that of the
separation of powers between the legislature, the executive and the
judiciary, with appropriate checks and balances to ensure accountability,
responsiveness and openness.

When we speak about the pace of transformation in the judiciary, hon
members, it is not because we want to infringe on its independence, which
we uphold and will always defend. The transformation of the judiciary
entails, amongst other things, having a court system in which the people of
South Africa have confidence.

Obviously, as part of this, we need to ensure that judicial officers
reflect the demographics of our country. If the numbers of women and black
people acting as attorneys or advocates are low, we cannot avoid looking
for the obstacles that hamper their representation.

The transformation of the judiciary is, however, more than just a question
of the composition of the Bench. It is also about ensuring an integrated,
accessible and affordable court system. It is about judicial training and
ensuring that we have judicial officers who are steeped in and reflect the
progressive values of our Constitution. [Applause.] It is about ensuring
that all people have access to justice, both in the criminal and the civil
courts.

I would like to assure hon Smuts and the House that, when the President
exercises his powers when it comes to the appointment of judicial officers
in terms of the Constitution, he will act in the best interests of the
country. [Applause.]

Hon members, we noted the call by the Minister of Police, hon Nathi
Mthethwa, to the youth to join the fight against crime. This being Youth
Month, we trust that the youth will join the Minister and government in
this national duty. We agree with the Minister that we should all be part
of the effort to “reclaim our peace, security and comfort”.

In my address, I stated our concern at the deterioration of the quality of
health care, aggravated by the steady increase in the burden of disease in
the past decade and a half.

The Aids epidemic is among the conditions chiefly responsible for the
latter. Hon Sandy Kalyan feels I should have said more about HIV and Aids.
The hon member has been outspoken for years about health care in our
country, and her concern is well known.

Government is firmly committed to the full implementation of the Aids plan,
which offers a comprehensive response to this grave epidemic. Importantly,
the targets described in this plan are not merely government targets. They
were set together with our social partners after extensive consultation.
The targets require a properly functioning public health care system to
which all our people have access.
That is why we have emphasised our plans to construct and rehabilitate
public health care facilities, improve management and other systems, and
address with urgency the working conditions and remuneration of health
practitioners and professionals. This includes finalising all matters
relating to the Occupation Specific Dispensation, particularly proposals to
address all the remaining categories.

We are pleased that all the parties share our commitment to education. We
have started to step up our efforts aimed at providing resources and skills
to our schools. For example, to bring our educators into the 21st century
we intend to introduce a teacher laptop initiative. [Applause.] The project
will be phased in over a two-year period starting from 1 July 2009.
[Applause.] Our aim is to ensure that by 2012 every teacher has access to a
laptop computer and the Internet. [Applause.] I am sure that this will
contribute immensely towards motivating our educators to improve the
standard of teaching and learning in our schools.

Hon Narend Singh underscores the point that we must act now to ensure that
our natural resources are protected for future generations. We will
strengthen our capacity to investigate and prosecute environmental crimes,
enforcing a zero tolerance approach to illegal and unsustainable
exploitation of resources.

A critical starting point is to ensure that all organs of state themselves
comply with environmental legislation.

Hon members, our arts, culture and heritage define our national identity.
During the election campaign I had the opportunity to engage with our
creative arts fraternity. I was informed of the challenges faced by
artists, and they requested government to intervene to transform the
industry.

After the state of the nation address, I received an email from Eugene
Mthethwa of the popular kwaito music group Trompies.

He expressed disappointment that I, in my address, emphasised sport as a
unifying force, to the exclusion of arts and culture. I would like to
assure Eugene and all in the creative industry sector that we remain fully
committed to supporting the development of our country’s arts and culture.

Music, including kwaito, helps us to bridge barriers and is one of the most
unifying elements of our arts and culture. Kwaito may have started as a
township art form, but today attracts a steady flow of young people from
across the racial divide. [Applause.]

We reiterate also that the artists must organise themselves without any
delay, so that government can interact with them as an organised formation.
The Department of Arts and Culture is planning to meet with the artists
soon to take these matters forward.

Isn’t this wonderful, that members of the public are participating in our
debate? It is absolutely wonderful. [Applause.]

Some of the speakers lamented the lack of extensive detail in the state of
the nation address on these matters.

Naturally, a state of the nation address immediately after an election
deals with the transition of the election mandate into a five-year
government programme.

As such it becomes almost impossible to go into detail on each issue. As I
indicated last Wednesday, the Medium-Term Strategic Framework and the
detailed programme of action will be published.

In addition, the relevant Ministers will elaborate on these issues during
their Budget Votes this month. Therefore we should not worry about the lack
of many details. I think the address gave a direction and highlighted ten
points of priority and I think sufficiently indicated where we are going. I
think the departments will come with the details. [Applause.]

Hon members, I cannot ignore the fact that our country is abuzz with the
forthcoming kick-off of the Confederations Cup on Sunday. The growing
confidence within Bafana Bafana and the arrival of visiting teams has added
to the soccer mood all over the country.

We welcome all our visitors and wish them an excellent stay in our country.
A warm welcome to Fifa Secretary-General, Jerome Valcke, and Danny Jordaan,
CEO of the Local Organising Committee, and to our special guests who have
brought the Confederations Cup trophy which is on display in Parliament
today. These officials I have just mentioned are present here today. It
should inspire all of us to fill the stadiums, beginning this very coming
Sunday. [Applause.]

May the best team win. [Applause.] Of course, no one can blame us for
believing that that team should be Bafana Bafana. [Applause.] Let us all go
out and support the beautiful game.

Ladies and gentlemen, let me reiterate that the debate on the state of the
nation address has made me optimistic that it is possible for us to find
issues on which we can interact constructively as elected representatives.
It has reminded us of the need to recover our humanity, which transcends
political differences. I am convinced that we are going to work very well
together as parties represented in Parliament.

Our view is that we are now gravitating towards identifying issues of
national interest – that which is good for all of us – that will make us
come together as citizens of this country, even if we belong to different
parties. Unity, reconciliation, constructive and decent engagement, and
tolerance are emerging as common issues about which we all feel strongly. I
wish we could keep this because it makes all of us as South Africans feel
good.

The recession and the 2010 Fifa World Cup are some of the issues that are
beginning to bring us together.

It is not an easy period, given the economic climate. We are given strength
by the warm words of many colleagues in the Opposition benches.

Hon Athol Trollip – Leader of the Opposition in Parliament – remarked that,
due to the recession, it is not the best time to become President. Perhaps
we should hope that this adversity will draw out the best in all of us as
citizens.

Thank you to all for the words of encouragement. Working together, we can
and will do more to build a great South Africa!

I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded

The SPEAKER: Order! I wish to thank the hon President for his response to
the contributions made by members of this House during the debate. That
concludes the debate.

Hon members, I wish to inform you that after I have adjourned the House the
CEO of the Local Organising Committee and a representative of Fifa will
join the President in the Chamber for a presentation and a photo
opportunity with the Confederations Cup. Members are requested kindly to
remain – I repeat remain – in their seats during the presentation.

The House adjourned at 14:53.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             MONDAY, 8 JUNE 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Proclamation No R.36 published in Government Gazette No 32205
        dated 6 May 2009: Commencement of sections 2 and 3 of the Criminal
        Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 68 of 2008).

    (b)     Government Notice No R.513 published in Government Gazette No
        32205 dated 6 May 2009: Regulations under the Criminal Procedure
        Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


    (a)     Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space
        Objects, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on International
        Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects.


    (c)     Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer
        Space, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on Registration of
        Objects Launched into Outer Space.


3.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
        Fisheries for 2009/10.


4.    The Minister in The Presidency (Mr O C Chabane)

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Media Development and Diversity Agency
        (MDDA) for 2009-2012.


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
        2009/10-2011/12.


    (c)     Strategic Plan of the Government Communication and Information
        System (GCIS) for 2009-2012.


5.    The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for
        2009/10–2011/12.


6.    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Rural Development and Land
        Reform for 2009-2012.


7.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Report of the Central Drug Authority (CDA) for 2007-2008 [RP 10-
        2009].


8.    The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of International Relations and
        Cooperation for 2009-2012.

National Assembly

The Speaker

 a) Request by the Minister of Science and Technology, dated 15 April 2009,
    for approval by the National Assembly of a shortlist of candidates for
    appointment to the Board of the Human Sciences Research Council in
    terms of section 5 of the Human Research Council Act, 2008 (Act No 17
    of 2008).


    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology for
    consideration and report.


                            TUESDAY, 9 JUNE 2009


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Trade and Industry for 2009-
        2012.


