---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 08 July 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JULY
month_slug: Jul
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2009-07-08
---

WEDNESDAY, 8 JULY 2009
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 12:03.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                         CELEBRATION OF MANDELA DAY

                           (Debate on Mandela Day)

The ACTING PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC (Mr K P Motlanthe): Hon Speaker, hon
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon Deputy Speaker of the
National Assembly and Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon premiers, hon
members, representative of Salga, directors-general and other leaders of
the Public Service, distinguished guests, comrades and friends, fellow
South Africans, I thank you most sincerely for giving me the privilege of
addressing this special Joint Sitting of Parliament on the occasion of
celebrating the life of the esteemed Member of the Order of Mapungubwe,
internationally decorated Nobel Peace Laureate, Isithwalandwe Seaparankoe,
and former President of our Republic, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.
[Applause.]

On this occasion we celebrate the 67 years of his life that Madiba has
given to building a better South Africa and a better world. Understanding
only too well that, like everything in life, progress and change require a
great mobilisation of social forces, Nelson Mandela involved himself in all
forms of struggle in communities wherever he lived.

As a student, Madiba struggled to improve the conditions at Fort Hare
University and later, through the ANC and in government, he strove to
address the challenges facing the youth of our country.

As you are aware, Madiba was an avid boxer in his younger days. In later
years he did much to highlight the importance of sport in building national
unity. Who can forget Madiba holding the Rugby Webb Ellis Trophy above his
head when the Springboks won the Rugby World Cup for the first time in
1996, or the excitement on his face when we won the right to host the 2010
Fifa World Cup? These were indeed defining moments of our nation.

Madiba the lawyer placed himself at the disposal of the disadvantaged
people who were suffering from the injustices of apartheid. Madiba marched
in the front line as the ANC was forced to embark on new forms of struggle
– from the mass action of the Defiance Campaign against Unjust Laws, the
drafting of the Freedom Charter at the Congress of the People in 1955 and
the Treason Trial which began in 1956, to the formation of uMkhonto
weSizwe.

Faced with the apartheid regime which was incapable of hearing the cries of
the black majority and which responded with increasing violence and
repression, uMkhonto weSizwe launched the armed struggle. The manifesto of
uMkhonto weSizwe, published on 16 December 1961, stated, and I quote:

   The time comes in the life of any nation when there remain only two
   choices: submit or fight. That time has now come to South Africa. We
   shall not submit and we have no choice but to hit back by all means
   within our power in defence of our people, our future and our freedom.

[Applause.]

For their part in this, Madiba and his comrades, who included uBaba Andrew
Mlangeni, an hon member of this House — Isithwalandwe — were sentenced to
life imprisonment. [Applause.] We all know that Madiba toiled in prison for
27 years for leading the struggle against the inhumane apartheid system.

His fortitude and integrity during this difficult period inspired millions
of oppressed people and peace-loving democrats all over the world. The way
he conducted himself during his incarceration represented not only the
irrepressible human spirit in the face of adversity, but also the
possibility of a refreshing new dawn in human society.

Even from his prison cells on Robben Island, and in the Pollsmoor and
Victor Verster Prisons, he played a crucial part in achieving a peaceful
transition from the apartheid state to a democratic South Africa.

His persona gives meaning to the multitudes of people who aspire to and
share the vision of a world free of oppression, exploitation, hunger and
disease.

As the first President of our Republic to be elected by all the people of
South Africa, he steered us through those difficult years of transition,
forging a new nation from the divisions of the past.

His imprisonment meant that Madiba, as a father, was not able to give his
own biological children the affection and attention they deserved. His love
of children is well known and he has extended this love to children all
over the world. He has given particular attention to improving the lives of
children through his foundation, the Nelson Mandela Children’s Fund, and
has focused attention on those infected and affected by HIV and Aids.

Madiba the moral leader has on the international stage continually been
called upon to resolve disputes all over the world and to give inspiration
to the people of our planet. Madiba has made the world a better place.

Let us emulate his confidence, his humility, his determination, his
strength and his vision. Today we honour this extraordinary being, a sage
of our age whose life represents the triumph of human will for justice,
equality, democracy and progress.

Next week, on 18 July, when Madiba celebrates his birthday, we are called
upon to spend at least 67 minutes of our time doing something useful in our
communities. The 67 minutes relates to the 67 years Madiba spent in public
life. During this allocated time, when the world celebrates the life of a
legend, we shall find meaningful expression in a minimum contribution of 67
minutes to those less fortunate.

On this seminal day, when we respond to the call to contribute to the
welfare of those in need, we need to be imbued with the values, principles
and ideas that inspired Madiba’s life. Our actions should be motivated by
the vision that drove Madiba’s life, a life dedicated to social
transformation.
We need to remember that the struggle for human equality that Madiba
personified was not consummated by the achievement of freedom and democracy
in April 1994 because, by definition, freedom means the recognition of
necessity, and democracy means, in the words of the Freedom Charter, that
“The people shall govern!”

And no government can claim authority unless it is based on the will of the
people. [Applause.] As South Africans we have a host of accumulated
disabilities that we have to grapple with: the stubborn problem of poverty,
underdevelopment in many areas of our country, ignorance, disease and
unemployment. For many, freedom, justice and democracy remain a mirage that
keeps shimmering tantalisingly on the horizon.

The fight for freedom all over the world continues to find nourishment in
the legacy of this wonderful leader of our people. Many of us continue to
draw inspiration from the life of this exceptional human being, facing the
challenges of our generation with the firm confidence that we will achieve
during our generation what Madiba and his comrades achieved during their
generation.

So, these 67 minutes of giving our time to help others out is a way of
reminding ourselves that in our working together a new world is possible.
It is a way of promoting the spirit of helping others even as we face our
own challenges.

Equally, we are confident that these 67 minutes of free contribution to
communities on Madiba’s birthday will reach a critical mass, which will
bring about a new consciousness that leads to a culture of working for the
improvement of human life.

Indeed, the best way to honour Madiba’s life is by injecting this spirit of
sharing into the bloodstream of our daily lives, so that even the mere
thought of poverty and homelessness, unemployment and disease, among other
ills, makes us sleepless at night and spurs us to act at all times. The
distress of others should continue to be a source of discomfort to all of
us, and drive us to act for change.

 “Working together for the common good of our nation-‘’the theme of today’s
Joint Sitting — demands that we see each other as potential partners in the
fight for a better life for our people. [Applause.]

All of us gathered in this Chamber — Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
premiers and MECs, hon members and MPLs, mayors and councillors — need to
ensure that we spend at least 67 minutes of our time on Madiba’s birthday
engaging in meritorious activities.

We hope that through our actions we can inspire others to do the same. We
trust that public servants, traditional leaders, the religious fraternity,
sportspeople, musicians, artists, businesspeople, workers, students, the
youth and the aged will join hands in this event to improve the lives of
the vulnerable in our communities. We should therefore act in concert as
social partners, in a quest to bring about change for our people.

This debate takes place in the midst of a global recession more severe than
anything we have seen for a long time. Like the rest of the world, we find
ourselves affected by the global economic downturn which has demanded of us
that we devise a common national response that will place us back on the
road to improving the lives of all our people for the better.

We need to take strength and inspiration from the life of Nelson Mandela
even as we wade through this economic crisis, enhanced by our ability to
help others. Following Madiba’s example, we should work more closely
together as government, nongovernmental organisations, community-based
organisations, labour and business, ensuring that we bring our collective
weight to bear on the achievement of the common good for our nation.

On 18 July all of us are called upon to respond to a moral imperative. In
those 67 minutes, each one of us should involve ourselves in reawakening
the spirit of human solidarity — genuine human solidarity, not phoney or
pretentious solidarity. And here, hon Speaker, may I share with you the
story that is often told of two friends who were walking through a game
park when all of a sudden they saw a lion about to attack them. One friend
knelt down to fasten his boot laces, ready to run away. The second friend
said to him, “Why are you preparing to run away? We cannot outrun the lion,
but if we attack it — I will attack it from the front and you attack it
from the back — we can overcome it.” The friend who had knelt down to
fasten his boot laces said, “I have no intention of outrunning the lion,
because it can feed on only one of us. I will outrun you!” That is not the
kind of solidarity we are speaking of. [Laughter.]

We should all regard the 67 minutes as the beginning of a much longer
effort. It is through helping others that our ability to deal with our own
problems and challenges will be enhanced.

In each and every one of us resides the potential to fashion a united and
cohesive society in which all can stand proud as one family under the sun.

In conclusion, let us draw from Madiba’s rich contribution to our world
outlook. I quote from his inaugural address in 1994 when he said, “Out of
the experience of an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long,
must be born a society of which all humanity will be proud.” I thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President,
hon members, in his message to the World Social Forum in Mumbai in 2004
former President Nelson Mandela remarked that, and I quote:

  We owe a huge debt to future generations in the form of a better world.
  It has to be a better world, one in which the rights of every individual
  are respected, one that builds on past aspirations for a good life, and
  one that enables every individual to optimally develop their potential.

It is therefore very fitting that our Parliament has decided to provide
leadership regarding this celebration of our legacy of advancing humanist
and moral values which the honourable Nelson Mandela, as the leader of the
ANC and our nation, championed with distinction.

The ubuntu values and principles embodied in the person of Nelson Mandela
are rooted in our glorious past ... [Applause.] ... as African people who,
under his leadership and that of many others, successfully fought for our
freedom and independence, and equality for all.

Nelson Mandela joined the ANC at the height of World War II and banded
together with other young people under the leadership of Anton Muziwakhe
Lembede. These young people set themselves the formidable task of
transforming the ANC into a mass movement deriving its strength from the
unlettered millions of working people in the towns and countryside,
peasants in the rural areas and professionals.

Nelson Mandela and his comrades, like the founders of African democracy,
notably W E B du Bois and Marcus Garvey, espoused a radical African
nationalism, grounded in the principles of national self-emancipation and
self-determination.

Together with David Bopape, Walter Sisulu, O R Tambo and others, he
composed the ANC Youth League subcommittee that drew up the 1949 Programme
of Action. This programme was aimed at the attainment of full citizenship,
as well as direct and democratic parliamentary representation for all South
Africans.

In policy documents he co-authored, the ANC Youth League paid special
attention to the redistribution of land, trade union rights, education and
culture. The ANC Youth League aspired to achieving free and compulsory
education for all children, as well as mass education for adults.

Having been admitted as attorneys who established a law firm, Tambo and
Mandela rose to professional status in society. However, every case in
court, every visit to prisons to consult with clients, reminded them of the
humiliation and suffering experienced by their people. Mr Justice
Ramsbottom refused to strike Nelson Mandela off the roll of practising
attorneys on the grounds of his conviction under the Suppression of
Communism Act. The learned judge found that Mandela had been moved by a
desire to serve his black fellow citizens and nothing he had done showed
him to be unworthy to remain in the ranks of this honourable profession.
[Applause.]

During the early 1950s Nelson Mandela played an important part in leading
the resistance against the Western Areas removals and the introduction of
Bantu education. He also played a leading role in popularising the Freedom
Charter, which was adopted by the one and only Congress of the People in
1955. [Applause.]

After the collapse of the Treason Trial in 1961, Nelson Mandela delivered a
keynote address at an All-In African Conference in Pietermaritzburg. In
this electrifying address, which anticipated the Constitution Act of 1996,
which gave birth to the Constituent Assembly and, in turn, gave birth to
our current Constitution, Mandela challenged the apartheid regime to
convene a national convention, representative of all South Africans, to
thrash out a new constitution based on democratic values and principles.
Our icon believed in peace and development, and only encouraged violent
forms of political struggle when the regime left him with no other choice.

In his pursuit of the struggle, our beloved icon appreciated the role of
international solidarity. While in Ethiopia in 1962 he addressed the
conference of the Pan-African Freedom Movement of East and Central Africa
to solicit international support for the struggle for liberation and
freedom in South Africa.

Mandela anticipated the transformation of the judiciary that President Zuma
called for in this House in his address to the top judges of our country on
Monday, 6 July 2009. Answering a charge of having left the country without
a passport, Mandela replied that he considered the prosecution a trial of
the aspirations of the African people. Thereafter, Mandela decided to
conduct his own defence and applied for the recusal of the magistrate on
the grounds that in such a prosecution a judiciary controlled entirely by
whites was an interested party, and therefore not impartial.

He also argued that he owed no duty to obey the laws of a white parliament
in which his people were not represented. Mandela prefaced his defence with
the affirmation: “I detest racialism, because I regard it as a barbaric
thing, whether it comes from a black man or a white man.” [Applause.]

After his conviction for leaving the country illegally, Mandela made a
historic, antidomination statement, and I quote:

  I have fought against white domination, and I have fought against black
  domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society
  in which all persons live together in harmony with equal opportunities.
  It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to see realised. But ... if
  needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.

[Applause.]
Hon members, we sit here now because that ideal has been achieved. Pat
yourselves on the back. [Applause.]

Upon his release on 11 February 1990, Mandela wholeheartedly devoted his
life and work to striving to attain the democratic values and principles
which the founding fathers and mothers of the ANC set out to achieve
decades ago.

Mandela has never wavered in his devotion to democracy, equality and
learning. Despite terrible provocation, he has never answered racism with
racism. His life has been an inspiration in South Africa and throughout the
world to all who are oppressed and deprived, and to all who are opposed to
oppression and deprivation.

In a life that symbolises the triumph of the human spirit over man’s
inhumanity to man, Nelson Mandela accepted the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize on
behalf of all South Africans who suffered and sacrificed much to bring
peace to our land. The progressive values and principles that Mandela
embodied became abundantly evident in his 1993 Nobel lecture. First and
foremost, he acknowledged other recipients of the award, including F W de
Klerk, Chief Albert Luthuli, Archbishop Desmond Tutu and Martin Luther King
Jr. He pointed out in particular that Martin Luther King grappled with and
died in an effort to make a contribution to, the just solution of the same
grade of issues of the day that we have had to face as Africans.
Madiba summed up these issues in a more definite and emphatic way. He went
on to declare, and I quote:

  We stand here today as nothing more than a representative of millions of
  our people ... These countless human beings, both inside and outside our
  country, had the nobility of spirit to stand in the path of tyranny and
  injustice, without seeking selfish gain. They recognised that an injury
  to one is an injury to all and therefore acted together in defence of
  justice and a common human decency.

Hon members, we must be proud today as we sit here that the hon President,
Jacob Zuma, has been able to link the humanity that Nelson Mandela called
for to the priorities that this government has set for itself. In his state
of the nation address and in response to the debate, President Jacob Zuma
ably said that we cannot fully recover the humanity of all, unless there is
decent work for all, unless there is quality and affordable education for
all, and unless all of us can live in peace and security in our houses.

So, we as the ANC are pleased to see that the agenda that Nelson Mandela
set for our nation is the agenda that this House has set for itself and the
agenda that we are going to pursue together, working together. I think that
the call that the Deputy President, Kgalema Motlanthe, has made in regard
to 18 July is a call that all of us will pursue.

In conclusion, I am pleased to say that in our Chief Whips’ Forum all the
parties undertook to work for this same common good that Nelson Mandela set
out to work for. I want to thank you, hon members, for the opportunity to
address you on this important day. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, hon members of the Joint Sitting,
it is indeed my honour to pay the respects of my party, the DA, to Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela.

Bawo, uhlobo oyichaza ngayo indlela okhule ngayo eQunu iyayichukumisa
intliziyo yam njengommi waseMpuma-Koloni. [Sir, the manner in which you
describe the way you grew up at Qunu village touches my heart as a resident
of the Eastern Cape.] Your colourful description in Long Walk to Freedom of
growing up in a rural village resonates with many of us, and I quote:

   I was born free — free to run in the fields ... free to swim in the clear
   stream that ran through my village, free to roast mealies under the stars
   and ride the broad backs of slow-moving bulls.

This showed an innocent naivety which soured when you later came to learn
that this freedom was an illusion under colonial and apartheid repression.

You, Sir, were able to turn circumstances designed to degrade and destroy
you and your people into a triumph over adversity. You taught us also that
the oppressor needs to be liberated just as much as the oppressed, that a
man full of hatred is a prisoner behind the bars of his prejudice and has
been robbed just as surely of his humanity.

It is a matter of national importance that we as members of this House
continue to strive to set an example by adhering to the moral direction
that has been your lodestar. We have all observed you display unique
humanitarianism even at your venerable age by showing devoted care for
those less fortunate than us, by establishing funds and homes for your
beloved children, and by your unconditional love of those infected and
affected by HIV and Aids.

Nelson Mandela means so much to all of us. To me he exemplifies
reconciliation. To my son, who went to school in 1994, he represents true
freedom and democratic hope. My colleague the hon Dr Wilmot James, who co-
edited the book Nelson Mandela: From freedom to the future, says he adores
and respects the man because he lives by his word and embraces others with
love.

I could go on and on, but rather the symbolically significant 67 DA members
of the National Assembly and our 10 colleagues in the National Council of
Provinces will pay our collective respects to Nelson Mandela by committing
ourselves to dedicating at least 67 minutes every 18 July to assisting and
providing extraordinary care and support to the needy communities in our
constituencies, with special attention to institutions caring for children
and the aged in our society. [Applause.]

You said that you were moved to serve by the tales of valour of your
ancestors who fought wars in defence of your fatherland, by people like
Dingane, Bambatha, Hintsa, Makana, Ndlambe and Sekhukhuni. We, too, are
moved to serve by your example of service and reconciliatory nation-
building.

However, allow me to remind this Assembly of what we actually need to do to
pay honest tribute to Nelson Mandela and to succeed as a country. We would
be fooling ourselves if we thought 67 minutes a year was enough to bring to
fruition Madiba’s dreams. We, and the ANC in particular, must honour and
implement Madiba’s philosophy and ideals every day of the year.

The DA believes in an open opportunity society for all, where people can
reach their full potential by improving their skills to allow them to
follow their dreams. Let me illustrate that former President Mandela, too,
believes in an open opportunity society for all, but that the actions of
the current ANC represent the opposite. [Interjections.]

About human rights he says the following, and I quote:
   South Africa’s future foreign relations will be based on our belief that
   human rights should be the core concern of foreign relations ... South
   Africa will not be indifferent to the rights of others. Human rights will
   be the light that guides our foreign affairs.

At the moment our foreign affairs policy is guided by political solidarity
with former liberation movements and anti-Western sentiments, the
consequence of which is that human rights take a back seat to appeasement
and compromise. This happened constantly under former President Mbeki’s
watch. Now, too, under President Zuma, our failure to condemn the African
Union for ignoring the International Criminal Court’s warrant of arrest for
President Omar Al-Bashir is an indication of unacceptable tolerance for
violators of human rights. [Applause.]

About providing opportunities Madiba says:

   Let there be justice for all. Let there be peace for all. Let there be
   work, bread, water and salt for all. Let each know that for each the
   body, the mind and the soul have been freed to fulfil themselves.

That is the essence of the open opportunity society.

If the ANC could just, once again, embrace the ideals that our iconic
Nelson Mandela embodied, it would achieve much and honour him
appropriately.

The wonderful thing is that we can meet today in this country, as the hon
Chief Whip said, and pat ourselves on the back because we had an exemplary
leader in Nelson Mandela; somebody who is glorified and held in the highest
esteem all over the world. We were indeed fortunate as a country to have
somebody like him at a time when we needed him more than ever before. So,
we were lucky, and it is an honour to pay tribute to Nelson Mandela. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Rev H M DANDALA: Speaker, hon Acting President, hon members, we as South
Africans have been truly blessed to be a country that has brought forth
this great child of the universe. I say this because Nelson Rolihlahla
Mandela belongs to all of us.

He belongs to the Mandela family and to all South Africans, whose freedom
mattered to him so much that he gave up his own freedom. He also belongs to
the many countries of this world and its people, who have honoured and
recognised him, naming streets and institutions after him long before we as
a country could. This made sure that the name Mandela was not forgotten
when he was still on Robben Island.

It is also worth recognising today the role of Mrs Winnie Madikizela-
Mandela who steadfastly stood by him and suffered a great deal for doing
so. [Applause.]

We ought to be grateful that we are the primary beneficiaries of this
monumental sacrifice spanning 67 years to liberate this country. He is now
the icon of peace, resilience, reconciliation and nation-building, a true
example of the good that can come out of extremely difficult circumstances;
hence Cope welcomes a global day celebrated in his honour.

Our new democracy is called upon to emulate his life and his shining deeds.
It must emulate his values of humanity, human dignity, moral uprightness
and freedom in order to succeed. We have to ask ourselves pointedly: What
is it that we are doing to build on this legacy?

This is about upholding the institutions of our democracy. It is about
fighting the poverty that our poor people are enduring. It is about respect
by the young and old alike in our society today, as well as transparent and
clean governance across our country, tolerance of divergent views and
respect for democracy. We are indeed celebrating an extraordinary gift to
our land today.

I will personally forever fondly recall an event at a peace rally in
Vosloorus in 1995. I had been asked to lead the prayers for the rally. I
had prepared hard for the meeting. Chief Buthelezi came in, and Mr Mandela
came in, accompanied by Mr Pik Botha. I wasn’t sure what to do because I
had not expected Mr Pik Botha to be there. I decided that I would stick
with the prayers that I had prepared. At the end of the prayers I heard
somebody stepping forward and he tapped me on the shoulder. It was Mr
Mandela. He said to me: “I am here with Mr Pik Botha, a leader of the
largest white tribe in our country. Could I ask you to pray for him too?”
[Applause.] And so I took time and prayed for Mr Pik Botha. All those who
were there and heard the story said: “What an extraordinary gift we have in
Mr Mandela.”

So, as Cope we will encourage ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order! Allow the speaker to be heard.

Rev H M DANDALA: On 18 July we will encourage our communities to reach out
to each other across the racial and class divides in honour of the
reconciliation project that embodies our own Nelson Mandela. If all we do
on this day is to reach out to even one member of a community that is
different from our own, we as South Africans will have succeeded in
honouring this icon of our people.

We ask our leaders across the country today: How are we emulating his ways
of humility — where he was prepared to listen to people, prepared to
respect the courts of this land, and prepared to respect the institutions
of our democracy? His honest and genuine manner of reaching beyond his
party is what we must carefully study, if his legacy is to be observed.
Sometimes we feel it is sorely missing. His ability to see criticism not as
an attack on the soul of his party is something many of us are yet to
learn.

To Madiba, Cope says: May you see many more birthdays. You are an
inspiration to all of us to defend the Constitution for which you fought
and sacrificed so much to bring into being. Your wisdom and leadership will
always light the way for many across the entire universe. A global day
named after you is a well-deserved accolade for you and, in turn, the
people of South Africa and Africa. You are proof that this continent is the
mother continent and the future of all humanity. May you live long!
[Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Xhamela, hon Speaker, hon Deputy Speaker, hon
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon Ministers, hon MECs,
hon members, all comrades, today we have come to celebrate the life not
only of the most famous icon of our time but, more importantly, of a man, a
husband, a father and a grandfather too, whom we love and cherish very
deeply. It has been one of the greatest privileges of my life to have known
Madiba and to be able to call him a friend of many decades.

Madiba will always be remembered for the way he gave expression to
reconciliation in the truest meaning of the word, as has been said so
eloquently by other members. He concluded that ultimate liberation can only
be accompanied by liberating the oppressed as well as the oppressor.

So, is this not a man who now on his 91st birthday remains a man of our
time? Yes. And in a 100 years’ time, too. I have no doubt that Madiba was
the right man to lead a stricken country like ours. His words and actions
transformed the consciousness of a nation. Recalling the lyrical heights of
Roosevelt’s famous cry, he taught us that “The only thing we have to fear
is fear itself.” Don’t we all, including America’s first African-American
president, Barack Obama, walk in the light of Madiba’s creed of
nonracialism?

We pay tribute to Andrew Mlangeni and all the others who shared his
incarceration with him. [Applause.] At the end of the day a tribute to this
icon is a tribute to all of us whom he inspired to play one role or another
in the liberation struggle of our people.

Many in this House will have their favourite memories of Madiba, but we
have a beautiful lady — a very beautiful lady — in our midst, Mrs Winnie
Nomzamo Madikizela-Mandela ... [Applause.] ... who knows Madiba better than
any one of us. Today we honour the mother of the nation as well. Her
sacrifices were no fewer than those of her beloved Madiba, which he made
for all of us. [Applause.]

When Mrs Mandela and I bumped into each other by chance at the airport
yesterday, we recalled that there was much laughter in Madiba’s home, which
I had the privilege of visiting many times before his incarceration. You
will remember that on the last occasion I came to this podium, hon members,
I recalled the delicious meals that she prepared on those visits.
[Applause.] I have news for you: This wonderful lady can cook. [Laughter.]
I do believe the laughter still continues, and I know the lady will bring
some of this to this House as well.

We are also fortunate to have Inkosi Mandla Mandela, Madiba’s grandson, in
the House, who is the heir to his grandfather’s legacy. We wish him well in
this great task. Aah Zwelivelile!!! [Applause.]

Each precious memory and story here today will contain a unifying theme.
Madiba has always treated every one of us with equal respect and does not
distinguish between the so-called “ordinary” and the “great” in his
dealings.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I regret to tell you that your time has expired.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Can I request ...

The SPEAKER: Okay. Just conclude, hon member. [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Thank you, Xhamela. Could we not on this day perhaps
lay aside grandiloquent thoughts and, instead, strive to make former
President Mandela’s old-fashioned manners fashionable again? Did the Chief
Whip of the Majority Party not say this about Acting President Kgalema when
we speak in this House? As true Africans we cannot say “Kgalema” like that
to the President. [Interjections.]

The finest way we can honour Madiba’s legacy is not with towering
monuments, but by how we emulate his grace in our daily lives. It falls to
few to lead nations, but it falls to each one of us to build the nation.
Xhamela, with your permission, can I ask all the male hon members to rise
to their feet so that we can, in true African tradition, pay tribute to
this great man. [Applause.] Men only! Men only! [Interjections.] Aah!

HON MEMBERS: Aah!

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Dalibhunga!

HON MEMBERS: Dalibhunga! [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Hon Speaker! Mr Speaker! On
a point of order: I did not think that was allowed in this Chamber. We are
all hon members of equal status here. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, please take your seats. I did not ask you to
stand up, hon members. [Laughter.] Remain seated until I tell you to stand
up. Continue, hon Greyling.

Mr L W GREYLING: Speaker, the ID wholeheartedly endorses the concept of
Mandela Day. We believe that this is a fitting tribute to an icon who has
given so much to this country.

During our early years as a new-found democratic nation, when we were still
trying to find each other as South Africans, former President Mandela led
the way in showing us how to overcome our fears and centuries-old
divisions. He literally embodies the values which we as a nation are still
striving to inculcate in the fabric of our society.

Whenever we feel oppressed by the horror of what is now, we can look to the
example of Nelson Mandela and draw strength from the hope of that which is
still being built in this country. His remarkable nature is testimony to
the remarkable spirit of this country and the fact that by following his
example of compassion and an overwhelming sense of humanity, we can
overcome any challenge as a nation.

The ID believes that this should not just be expressed on Mandela Day, but
should rather become the spirit which continually drives all of us as we
build a prosperous and united South Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Mr Speaker, Deputy President, Members of Parliament, there
is no doubt about the appropriateness of paying tribute to the honourable
Nelson Mandela, a man who contributed well and wisely to the welfare of
humanity. But we need to be very careful that the institution of a Mandela
Day does not trivialise the man and his extraordinary legacy.

We also need to take into account Madiba’s views. He has often said that he
does not want to be placed on a pedestal and regarded as a saint.
Therefore, we owe it to him to celebrate him in ways that replicate his
courage, his humility, his intellect, his willingness to sacrifice, his
capacity to forgive and his wisdom in acknowledging the humanity of others.

Madiba has dedicated much of his time to the advancement and upliftment of
all South Africans. Therefore, celebrating such a day must not be merely
about saying to our children that Nelson Mandela was a great South African
who led us to greater heights, but also about saying to our children that,
just like Nelson Mandela, they too can be great South Africans. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Speaker, this is quite a fascinating debate. It was
interesting to me to hear the hon Leader of the Opposition trying to
convince us that Mr Mandela was actually a closet DA supporter! [Laughter.]

The Acting President referred to the example of the lion. Now, it is said
that the way to survive in the current difficult economic and political
times of 2009 is to be a firm believer in human rights. If any human,
stronger or richer than you, says something, you say: “Right.” [Laughter.]

This is not the kind of value that we would like to instil when we
celebrate Mandela Day. Mandela Day is an annual celebration of former
President Mandela’s life, and is a global call to action, for people to
recognise the individual’s power to make an imprint and change the world
around them.

Dit is besonder belangrik dat mense sal besef dat hierdie dag nie net kan
gaan oor die herdenking van mnr Mandela en sy lewe nie, maar dat dit juis
sal gaan oor waardes van baie dieper, waardes wat elke individu sal laat
besef dat, as persoon, jy op die regte oomblik en die regte tyd ‘n
wesenlike verskil kan maak in die lewens van almal rondom jou.

As ons dit in Suid-Afrika verstaan, aanvaar en uitleef in elke dag van ons
bestaan, dan kan ons werklik ‘n verskil maak en sal daar werklik sin kom
uit die herdenking van Mandeladag op 18 Julie. Ons sal daaraan deelneem.
Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is extremely important for people to realise that this day is not only
about commemorating Mr Mandela and his life, but that it is actually about
much deeper values — values that will make every individual realise that as
a person, at the right moment and at the right time, they can make a
substantial difference in the lives of everyone around them.

If we in South Africa understand, accept and accomplish this every day of
our lives, we will really be making a difference and there will be true
meaning in the commemoration of Mandela Day on 18 July. We will participate
in this. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, the ACDP wholeheartedly supports the call by the
Nelson Mandela Foundation for 18 July to be recognised as an annual
international day of humanitarian action in celebration of Madiba’s life
and legacy.

This day will also serve as an annual celebration of the life of Mr Mandela
and as a call to action, for people to recognise their individual ability
to make a difference where they are. We will be honouring a humble, yet
great man who will forever be known as a champion of nation-building,
reconciliation and peacemaking, a man who dreamed of a better life for all
and who has spent his life trying to make this dream a reality.

On Mandela Day, we believe that, among other things, old age homes should
be visited to give back a smile to the many grandparents who have been
abandoned by their families.

Even though Mandela Day may come around only once each year, cultivating
the good habit and culture of caring is a positive investment in our
society and will help to channel the energy of our young people into doing
something constructive in their schools and communities.

The ACDP wholeheartedly supports the call to individuals to give at least
67 minutes of their time in service to their communities in whichever way
they choose. We will also continue with our involvement in activities to
uplift the poor, needy and vulnerable in our communities and make them feel
loved and very special. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Mr Speaker, in world history the Lord has chosen a few
people to walk this earth to suffer. And this suffering has resulted in
peace, unity and reconciliation. Madiba can be regarded as being at the top
of the list of icons in the world since the world was created.

We are very proud of Madiba’s impeccable leadership and proud to be with
him so that he can always point us to the path of high endeavour. We must
never forget the wonderful foundation he has built for a truly democratic
South Africa.

The MF salutes Madiba. We remember his sacrifices as a young boy, and we
remember his sacrifices and his commitment to his comrades as a young man.

South Africa has progressed from the dark days of apartheid and oppression
into the light of democracy and development because of Madiba’s astounding
personality and remarkable leadership. We have no doubt — we know — that we
will celebrate his 100th year.

The MF wishes Madiba beautiful thoughts, and sends wonderful wishes for an
abundance of prayer and good health, and a long life. [Applause.]

Mrs N W A MICHAEL: Hon Speaker, hon Acting President, hon members of this
Joint Sitting, it is my pleasure to be here today to discuss what Mandela
Day means to South Africans, and especially what it means to young South
Africans.

On 27 April 1994 there was nothing that I wanted to do more than vote in
our first democratic election. However, at the time I was 15 years old and
had to watch in envy as my family cast their votes.

My life was just beginning and although things such as the murder of Chris
Hani, the raids in Bophuthatswana, the attack on the Codesa building, the
unrest in Boipatong stirred up by the so-called third force and mass
stockpiling before the election scared me, one constant, one man, gave me
hope and one man kept me calm: Nelson Mandela. [Applause.] I was safe in
the knowledge that he would protect us all, regardless of race or creed. He
was my hero.

There exists a phenomenon known as “Madiba magic”. We saw this on his
inauguration day when all South Africans embraced each other. We saw this
at the 1995 Rugby World Cup when Madiba wore the number 6 jersey, and we
see it every time Madiba walks into a room.

Even at my then young age, I realised that this man was not just a
politician; he was the hero that united our nation. Young people became
colour-blind and Madiba taught us that the greatest lesson we could learn
was forgiveness.

As young people, but more especially young politicians, we learnt great
lessons from Madiba, the father of our nation: Be humble at all times and
never forget that you are the servants of the people; listen to what all
have to say because you will never stop learning; only through forgiveness
can you attain true freedom; love and look after each other, as we are all
part of a big South African family; and, finally, do! Millions of South
Africans depend on what we do in this House and all our actions must have
only their best interests in mind.

What an honour for us that Madiba is South African. What an honour for us
that we can celebrate his life. And what an honour that he dedicated his
whole life to bettering ours. Sixty-seven minutes to do good in Madiba’s
name may not seem like a lot of time, but let us honour this hero by always
doing good, just as he has taught us to do.

Allow me to conclude with a quote from a prophet: “Never be a man who does
nothing because you think you can only do a little.”

Morena boloka, Madiba. [God preserve you, Madiba.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: OVERSIGHT AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT (Mr R J Tau):
Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President of the Republic, hon Chairperson and
Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, comrades, it is
not always easy for my generation to stand up and speak of an icon that our
revolution and movement produced, nurtured and put into the world to look
up to.

For our generation, reading about Comrade Mandela and listening to Radio
Freedom at the time were illegal acts that could land you in trouble with
the apartheid regime. However, we had courage. We had no fear, because the
apartheid system to us was illegitimate. We continued to listen, we
continued to read, and we continued to sing the song: “UMandela wethu,
sizomlandela!” [We will follow our Mandela.] We did that fully
understanding that his struggle was for real democracy, and that it would
not turn us into refugees of democracy.

He spent 67 years under the banner of the ANC, making the world a better
place. I feel very privileged and honoured to have been offered an
opportunity to look back and see the worth of the 67 years, and the fact
that all of us can do our bit in only 67 minutes is thanks, of course, to
the ANC. [Applause.] Whilst this is an easy challenge, it still remains
fundamental that Comrade Mandela was prepared to translate those minutes
into years, years characterised by pain and loss, all for the love of
humanity.

The call to celebrate Nelson Mandela’s birthday on 18 July as Nelson
Mandela Day is reported, of course, to be gaining a lot of momentum.
Parliament must, I think, be congratulated for its decision. [Applause.]
This can start small, but will certainly contribute to the lives of those
less fortunate than we are. It will, indeed, allow for there to be giving
to a cause already nurtured by our own leaders.

When Comrade Mandela spoke of ubuntu, he meant exactly what we should be
doing in those 67 minutes. To us, and many South Africans, Nelson Mandela
Day is a global clarion call to all people to follow in Mr Nelson Mandela’s
footsteps, by doing well inside and outside their own communities.

It begins with us in this august House, where we commit ourselves to
legislation that seeks to improve and better the lives of the people who
have given us the platform to serve them. Amongst other things, the day
that we will be celebrating should, of course, have a particular focus on
human rights, and fighting hunger and poverty, poor education and
illiteracy, and poor health and economic development.

Needless to say, these challenges do not differ from the challenges that
were on the doorstep of South Africa during the rule of the apartheid
regime. Even today, our democratic government, under the leadership of the
ANC, finds itself battling to address some of these problems.

A revolutionary of the generation of Comrade Nelson Mandela, Comrade Walter
Sisulu, in an essay written in prison in 1976 and published in Reflections
in Prison, said:

  Furthermore, in evolving solutions we should avoid that style of thinking
  that gravitates towards “final solutions”. There are no final solutions.
  Solutions must always be open to modification and adjustment on the basis
  of experience and fresh evidence — sometimes they may even have to be
  discarded.


Today the world is changing, and therefore we must always strive to find
creative solutions, unlike the one-size-fits-all solution the DA espoused
earlier. It is in this spirit that an attempt is being made here to isolate
and examine certain problems that are important to our struggle. The same
approach must be applied by the opposition as we engage today, and they
should not use such an important day to score political points in the name
of Madiba. [Applause.]

I am reminded of the period when the imperialists were preparing to take
each other on regarding the control of the world and its resources,
obviously driven by greed. This was commonly known as the Second World War.
At that time a group of young Africans came together and, remembering that
they had a responsibility to the cause of our people in the 1940s, formed
the ANC Youth League. Among them, under the leadership of Anton Lembede,
were William Nkomo, Walter Sisulu, Oliver Reginald Tambo, Ashby Mda, and
Nelson Mandela himself. It was at this juncture that the Youth League was
formed, consisting of only 60 members. It is important that young people
should sustain the legacy of the likes of Comrade Nelson Mandela.

Comrade Nelson Mandela soon impressed his peers by his discipline, hard
work and consistent effort and was, as a result, elected secretary and
later president of the ANC Youth League. This is a lesson for our youth
today to learn — to be disciplined and dedicated to the betterment of the
lives of our people.

Despite the challenges, which include unemployment amongst the young, the
spirit of leadership and patriotism in the country can still be enhanced so
that when we meet these targets, we are able to have confidence in the
leadership of our future.

It is no coincidence that this year we are talking of a “Nelson Mandela
Day”. The work done and commitment expressed by Comrade Mandela and his
colleagues in the struggle have contributed to the freedom we celebrate and
enjoy today. I am encouraged to view this freedom as a further mandate to
have a positive outlook regarding the challenges presented by the global
economic meltdown.

While we celebrate in action, let us use the 67 minutes to think carefully
about the means to reconcile economically, socially, politically and
otherwise. However bad things may look now, the life of Comrade Mandela
serves as a consistent reminder that we can still do more, but only when we
are united.

Based on the above, I am sure that if this icon had been in his 20s today,
he would have been at the forefront of a campaign to create decent work
opportunities and sustainable livelihoods. Central to that campaign would
have been ensuring that measures are introduced to promote beneficiation
programmes that would make sure that the natural wealth of the country was
shared and developed locally and to accelerate the creation of decent job
opportunities in the manufacturing services.

No doubt, with his upbringing in Qunu as a village boy and schooled and
nurtured by the ANC, Comrade Mandela would have used his energy and his
robustness in his early life. He would have galvanised all young people
behind a programme to intensify land reform to ensure that more land was in
the hands of the rural poor, and encouraged them to acquire technical
skills and financial resources to use the land productively to create
sustainable livelihoods for all of us.

I further believe without a shadow of doubt that as a student he would have
been at the forefront of mobilising young people to register and do well in
their studies. He would have ensured that he worked tirelessly in his
community to wipe out illiteracy through the Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy
Campaign, and for the expansion of no-fee schools.

As a charming and healthy — looking young man, I am sure Comrade Rolihlahla
would have made it his responsibility to motivate and encourage,
irrespective of class or standing in society, the implementation of the
National Health Insurance System, which in the main will ensure that all
South Africans have access to better and quality health care, irrespective
of where they stand socially.

Our icon laid the foundation for nation-building. He made it his
responsibility to ensure that our country was saved from the racial divide
that had characterised South African society for many decades.

While a lot still needs to be done, let us not forget that the struggle for
greater heights is important. The poverty gap is too wide. For us to say we
are a united South Africa, we need to inculcate a spirit of economic
reconciliation beyond racial reconciliation.

In conclusion, allow me to pose a question to all of us gathered here this
afternoon by referring to the book Long Walk to Freedom, and I quote ...
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: OVERSIGHT AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT (Mr R J Tau):
Thank you very much, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Speaker of the National Assembly adjourned the Joint Sitting at 13:13.


