---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 October 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-10-21
---

                         WEDNESDAY, 21 OCTOBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

                Transformation of Bretton Woods institutions

9.    Mr M B Skosana (IFP) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   With reference to the government’s call for the transformation
          of the Bretton Woods institutions, what specific institutions
          were referred to;


      (2)   what specific transformation is required of these institutions;


      (3)   what is envisaged to be the financial and economic impact of
          such transformation on the poor and developing nations of the
          world; and


      (4)   whether the government is required to reciprocate the
          transformation of these institutions by simultaneously
          transforming its current economic system; if not, why not; if so,
          what are the relevant details?                 NO2119E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members, hon M B Skosana, the
call for the transformation of the Bretton Woods institutions refers
directly to the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund, the
IMF, which were established as specialised agencies of the United Nations
in 1944.

The reforms that South Africa is calling for relate mainly to the following
areas. Firstly, they relate to the review of the quota shares. This call is
aimed at realigning the quota shares held by countries to reflect current
global realities. The realignment will result in countries with higher GDPs
having more shares, thus changing their relative weight in the
institutions.

Secondly, the reforms relate to improving governance systems to enhance the
voice of developing countries. The aim in this regard is to increase the
representation of developing countries on the boards and to increase
diversity at management and staff levels.

Thirdly, the transformation we are calling for is likely to improve the
financial and economic conditions of developing countries. Already, some
reforms were agreed to at the leaders’ summit in Pittsburgh in September
2009 regarding the quota shifts of 5% at the IMF and 3% at the World Bank.
A quota shift to developing countries gives us, as a group, more voting
power and additional resources to draw from as each country’s voting power
and access to financing is determined by its quota share.

We have also secured an agreement on increased representation in decision-
making bodies such as the IMF’s International Monetary and Financial
Committee and the World Bank’s Development Committee. This gives developing
countries an opportunity to exercise greater influence on global, economic,
financial and development governance.

No member country of the World Bank or the IMF, including South Africa, is
required to change its economic policies and systems as a result of
transformation at these institutions. The planned reforms will impact on
South Africa’s quota shares, which are expected to be realigned accordingly
as underrepresented countries get more shares. South Africa will, however,
have an increased voice as reforms are implemented. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Thank you, Deputy President, for your reply. Your
Excellency, if my assumption is correct, I think we are also calling for a
new world economic order, and we are calling again for a review of
continental economies. We are calling for a review of regional economies
and a review of national economies, including that of South Africa.

My question then, Your Excellency, is: How are we preparing for these calls
for reform at legislative and executive level? I am also interested in
seeing how we deal with the idea propounded by the Minister of Economic
Development, Minister Patel, on the recovery of African economies in terms
of his support for the institution of social economies, community-based
economies and co-operative economic ventures. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker and hon M B Skosana.
The review of the world economy is a matter that is on the agenda of the
leaders’ summit, particularly at the G20.

These institutions, particularly the Bretton Woods institutions, the World
Bank and the IMF, were identified as key in terms of ensuring that the
current economic recession is transformed into an opportunity. This is
because these institutions have been dealing with developing countries for
an extended period of time and their transformation should be speeded up to
equip them for better utilisation to the benefit of developing countries.

So, that review is meant to be buttressed by the review of regional
economies, as you would no doubt know that the Economic Community of West
African States, Ecowas, SADC and the East African Economic Community also
held a summit precisely to streamline themselves for better participation
in the world economy.

In terms of the legislative and executive processes, it is still early
days. These processes, on the African continent, are being led by Ministers
of Finance as well as governors of central banks, and they are under the
chairpersonship of the African Development Bank. I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Hon Deputy President, in addition to what you said regarding
the Bretton Woods institutions, the ACDP believes that there is also an
urgent need to transform the global trade regime in order for developing
countries to use trade to address developmental challenges.

In particular, hon Deputy President, would the speedy conclusion of the
Doha Round of negotiations at the World Trade Organisation not be a major
step towards releasing the full potential of international trade? And,
therefore, should developed countries not do everything to unlock the
deadlock that exists at the moment to deliver on its developmental
promises? Would this step not place South Africa and the international
community as a whole in a better position to meet the targets set in the
Millennium Development Goals? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Swart. That is indeed the way to go,
and that is the route we are following. The Doha Round of negotiations has
also received attention and the support of the G20; in fact, these
negotiations should be concluded sooner than yesterday, precisely because
of the understanding that this is the only way in which the current global
economic meltdown can be turned into an advantage.

Of course, as you know, the European Union member countries, including the
United States of America, have also committed themselves to oppose any form
of protectionism. That augurs well for the conclusion of these
negotiations. We are quite optimistic that indeed the conclusion would be
one that enhances global trade and particularly promotes more meaningful
participation by developing countries. I thank you.

Dr P J RABIE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon Deputy President, in
your reply you referred to the Bretton Woods institutions. You said that
emerging countries would get additional quota shares. You also referred to
the fact that the rising GDP would also play a role in that they would get
a higher quota.

My question to you, hon Deputy President, is: What will the developing or
emerging countries do with their increased leverage within the Bretton
Woods institutions? Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon member. Well, the developing
countries will ensure that these Bretton Woods institutions – the World
Bank and the IMF – do not go back to their old habits and that, in dealing
with developing countries, they are more supportive and completely abandon
their know-it-all attitude and also seek to interact and engage with
developing countries as equal partners.

I found that the attitude and spirit of the leaders of these institutions
were very positive. This is one of the benefits of the shock that hit all
of us when the financial institutions suffered losses that were primarily
as a result of these rather fancy products they were trading in. So,
there’s a soberness that is most welcome in these institutions.

With the additional votes, the developing world, which of course includes
some economies that are quite sizable now and are growing, will be able to
utilise these institutions in a more productive manner. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, I must say that
I highly appreciate the information that the Deputy President is sharing
with us. It does actually give us some optimism with regard to these
institutions.

However, my fear, Deputy President, is whether we are not seeing a
superficial transformation at a structural level and even at a technical
level rather than at a philosophical and content level with regard to these
institutions aligning themselves in addressing poverty in the world.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Ngonyama. Well, I suppose the
developing countries should not be passive in this matter. I think we also
have the responsibility to participate - as I indicated - as equals and to
identify our own strengths and guide these institutions accordingly.

The general thrust of the thinking within the regional economic communities
on the continent is that these institutions should be invited primarily to
invest in bulk infrastructure development so that trade within the
continent itself can happen without the current difficulties. If you go
through the Central African Republic, which I did a few weeks ago, their
access to any seaport is through Cameroon, and yet there isn’t even a
decent tarred road linking the capital of the Central African Republic to
the seaport.

So, if these institutions could be directed to invest in the development of
such infrastructure, that in itself would enhance the capabilities on the
continent so that the developing countries don’t present themselves as
weak, without ideas and without understanding their own countries and
economies. They should participate more as masters of their own situations.
Thank you. [Applause.]

       Attendance at, and outcome of, meeting called by the President

10.   Mrs P de Lille (ID) asked the Deputy President:


      Whether he attended a certain meeting (details furnished) that was
      called by the President and to which the chief executive officer of a
      certain company (details furnished) was invited; if so, (a) what were
      the reasons for the meeting and (b) what was the outcome of the
      meeting?                          NO2118E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon member should be aware
that information regarding whether the Deputy President held a meeting with
a person and, if he did, what was discussed at the meeting is not usually
provided in reply to parliamentary questions. This is done in order to
ensure the confidentiality of the meetings that the Deputy President has.

However, notwithstanding this, I would like to inform this House that I
have already instructed my legal representatives to demand a retraction
from the Financial Mail as the allegations contained in their article are
devoid of any truth. At the time I was unaware of the ITWeb article that
contained similar allegations until this question was tabled. I have now
instructed my legal representatives to follow the same course of action in
this regard. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Deputy Speaker, unfortunately hon De Lille is at the
Judicial Service Commission, JSC, therefore, I’ll take the follow-up
question. The debacle of the Congress of South African Trade Unions,
Cosatu, and the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa,
Icasa’s, urgent court application to prevent the Vodacom deal from going
through, have proved to be a great embarrassment and costly to the country.
The rand loss of 3% of its value and the cost of the unsuccessful court
application was alleged to have been in excess of R10 million.

Icasa’s low credibility sunk even lower as a result of a sudden about-turn
and surprising stance on this issue. The ID therefore believes that it is
imperative that we know the truth around who bears the ultimate
responsibility for this entire charade.

I know that in your response you have stated that you weren’t at this
meeting, but given that you signed off on the deal when you were President,
it stands to reason that President Zuma would have consulted you on this
matter. Are you therefore aware of anyone in the Presidency facilitating a
meeting between Icasa and Cosatu in order to bring such a court
application?

Can the Deputy President also explain why - given that it was in your
previous capacity as President that you originally signed off on a deal -
reservations were held by this new administration about this deal? Does
this have anything to do with the fact that some members of Cope stood to
benefit financially from this deal?

Finally, will the government be formulating a policy outlining the stance
that the government will be taking towards the foreign listing of companies
so that we can avoid embarrassing debacles like this in the future?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Greyling. Cabinet’s position
with regard to this matter is very consistent. The Cabinet’s decision has
not changed. Even during that court application, the Minister of
Communications had instructed lawyers to oppose the stance adopted by Icasa
and Cosatu. I don’t know how the rumour that is in the newspapers and so on
has anything to do with Cabinet. Cabinet’s position is very consistent in
that regard. Thank you.

Mr N J VAN DEN BERG: Madam Deputy Speaker and Deputy President, we all know
that the Vodacom transaction, not only in South Africa but even worldwide,
has attracted a lot of attention to South Africa. I want to hear from the
Deputy President whether he does not feel that interfering in private
business transactions is creating the image among possible international
investors that the South African government imposes undue political
influence on the outcome of private business transactions. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Van den Berg. I am unaware of any
interference in private business transactions. As I have already responded
to hon Greyling, with regard to the Vodacom transaction in particular,
government’s position has been very consistent. We promote the advancement
of private business. We facilitate rather than retard and/or interfere in
any business transaction.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Deputy President, in your response you emphasised the
point that interference with the Chapter 9 Institutions is a problem and
that government thus takes that into account, but I want you to be clearer
about whether we are going to see less interference by government in the
Chapter 9 Institutions.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a new question and is
unrelated to the question we are dealing with. But, nonetheless, it is
worth stating that we respect the independence of the Chapter 9
institutions. I want to place that on record. We will not interfere in any
manner with those institutions. On the contrary, government’s
responsibility is to lead the nation in ensuring that everyone respects the
Chapter 9 institutions. Thank you. [Applause.]

  Plans to collaborate with civil society in instilling patriotism, nation-
                            building and respect

11.   Mr M L Fransman (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


      Whether the government has any plans to collaborate with civil society
      to instil patriotism, nation-building and a sense of respect for the
      unsung heroes who contributed to liberating South Africa; if not, why
      not; if so, what plans?           NO2116E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, hon Fransman, one of the ways in
which government is endeavouring to instil patriotism, nation-building and
a sense of respect for the unsung heroes and heroines who contributed to
liberating South Africa is through the national legacy projects of the
Department of Arts and Culture. These projects specifically support the
development of new commemorative structures in the form of museums and
monuments such as the Freedom Park Museum that consists of a memorial,
interactive museum and Garden of Remembrance.

The Garden of Remembrance coherently narrates the journey of our humanity,
survival and struggle for freedom and dignity. It reminds us of our
struggle for land and resources, and of how these struggles have shaped our
economic, political, social, cultural and historical landscape as a nation.
The Freedom Park memorial facilitates the communal process of commemorating
the pain and celebrating the victories of the past.

The Wall of Names, that accommodates a total of 120 000 names, currently
has 75 names of fallen heroes and heroines inscribed on it. The Eternal
Flame comprises a circular wall within which is nestled a flame surrounded
by water. This flame symbolises eternity, and therefore, the monument pays
tribute to the eternal remembrance of the heroes, both male and female, who
perished without their names being recorded.

By preserving the memory of the fallen victims of previous wars, slavery,
colonialism and racism, and by honouring the heroes and heroines of the
apartheid struggle, we are essentially strengthening our unity as a nation.
We are acknowledging our heritage, and this park is a reflection of the
sacrificial achievements of our nation, thus ensuring that our children
never forget those who gave their lives so that we could have our rights,
freedom as well as social and cultural diversity.

Civil society comprising ordinary South Africans, political organisations,
civil society groups and community organisations played a role in the
memorial, particularly in identifying the names of the fallen heroes and
heroines. However, more can be done, particularly at local, provincial and
municipal level in commemorating our unsung heroes and heroines. It is,
however, important that we use this process to build unity and to
commemorate a shared history which we are all part of. I thank you.

Mr M L FRANSMAN: Deputy Speaker, Deputy President, thank you for actually
highlighting the sterling work that government and South Africa, in
particular, is doing around making sure that young people understand what
happened in the past. A specific issue that we are concerned about,
however, is that if 16 to 24-year-olds represent seven million young people
in South Africa, will the government also just consider, through the
Presidential co-ordinating council, reflecting on specific strategies at
local, municipal as well as provincial level, to also take this forward?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, yes, indeed, the task of nation-
building is the responsibility of all institutions, including this august
institution of Parliament, and we must all engage in civic education and
ensure that the facts are known and disseminated, so that none of us
should, in future, slide back into those challenges that divided our
nation. So, lest we forget, it is important for all of us to do our bit to
ensure that we know who we are and where we come from, always remembering
the past we inherited and the future we have the capability to create.
Thank you.

Mr D A KGANARE: Deputy Speaker, hon President, we are on the same
wavelength as regards acknowledgement and appreciation of our heroes, but
surely you’ll agree with me that those who joined the ANC during the floor-
crossing period do not automatically qualify as heroes of the struggle;
similarly, those who left the ANC do not automatically get disqualified as
heroes.

The insults hurled at Prof Asmal cannot and will never obliterate his
enormous contribution to the struggle for freedom. Therefore, the Deputy
Minister of Police’s comments are merely indicative of badly brought-up
children in the leadership of the ANC.

Deputy President, we believe that people like Prof Asmal, Archbishop Tutu,
Dr Mamphela Ramphele, Chief Buthelezi and Robert Sobukwe also qualify to be
regarded as unsung heroes. Can you inform this House whether or not the
government has a database of the unsung heroes of the struggle and the
criteria utilised to compile it, including the period covered? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, hon Kganare, as government, we confer
honours on a number of prominent South Africans as well as members of other
nations, and national orders, and the procedure for nomination is open to
all South Africans. All South Africans, without exception, have a right to
make submissions and motivations as to who should be honoured.

Therefore, the government does not have any database of heroes of our
people. That rests with the people themselves, and that is why nominations
have to come from the people. [Applause.] Political affiliation should play
no role. If we speak of esteemed members of any of the national orders,
that should be regardless of political affiliation. Thank you.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, you’ve dealt
with issues of history, but I would like to discuss the question of
patriotism and nation-building in hon Fransman’s question. When prominent
members of the ANC leadership are heard in public using language that is
racist, sexist and that threatens others, and when they’re seen to do so
without any kind of censure from the ANC, the government can’t, here today,
claim to be committed to instilling patriotism and nation-building in South
Africa, when its actions so clearly run counter to this ideal.

When the ANC Youth League refers to the Western Cape Premier as “a fake
racist girl”; when the uMkhonto weSizwe Military Veterans Association
issues a press release claiming that the Leader of the Opposition has “a
wild whore libido”; when Nehawu, a Cosatu affiliate, threatens to
“mobilise” its members against the University of Free State rector,
Jonathan Jansen; when the Youth League President publicly states that if a
rape victim asks her attacker for taxi money it means that she “had a nice
time” and lastly, when a Cabinet member, the hon Mbalula, refers to a
respected elder statesman as “a bitter old man” and “a raving lunatic”,
these actions do nothing to enhance nation-building and social cohesion in
South Africa, but instead, they do everything to tear this nation apart.

Does the government have any plans to end this divisive public rhetoric
which undermines nation-building by bringing those within the ANC
leadership to account for their irresponsible utterances? If not, why not;
and if so, what are the details? [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Deputy President, clearly some of the questions are
not supposed to be posed to the government as they are the ANC ... Order!
They are the ANC’s, but I’ll leave it up to you to decide if you want to
answer them or not.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, thank you very much. Hon Mazibuko,
patriotism by definition means that one loves the piece of ground on which
one lives, and therefore, to instil a particular conduct, among other
things, would mean that you keep it as hygienically clean as possible.

The ANC government understands that there are uneven levels of
consciousness and understands that generally speaking, there are many
people who are conservative in the sense that they cling to the truths of
yesterday and do not want to move with the times. The responsibility of all
of us, regardless of political party affiliation, who commit ourselves to
the noble goal of uniting all of our people into a nonracial society, carry
the responsibility at all times to raise issues in a manner which points
society in the direction of the creation of a nonracial society and,
through our pronouncements and our actions, always strive to break down the
barriers of division, so that we unite our people.

Of course, if we are prophets of doom, we will accept that aberrations in
society represent all of us. Those of us who are committed to the principle
of nonracialism carry the responsibility, at all times, to ensure that this
is what we promote in our actions, in practice and by word of mouth. If
anyone among us speaks out of turn, we also bear the responsibility to take
them by the ear, pull them into line and through debate and by dint of
superior arguments persuade them that the route to go is a nonracial one.

There are also other factors to be taken into account, because government
as government has to accept that there is freedom of speech and that in the
exercise of this freedom of speech, many people will say things that we do
not agree with, but it is also a measure of our own political consciousness
and maturity to defend their right to say what they say, otherwise if the
ideas are simply embedded in their heads, we will never get to know who we
are or where we are in this journey towards a nonracial society.

That is why rather than shooting down those who speak out of turn, be they
to the left or to the right, it is our responsibility at all times to
engage them and ensure that we present to society the efficacy and the
nobility of nonracialism. A saint by definition is a sinner who continues
to mend his ways. [Applause.]

We bear the responsibility to correct. That is why even the institutions in
which known convicts, those who have been tried and convicted in courts of
law, are kept are no longer called jails or prisons. They are now called
correctional services, because we believe we have an abiding ability to
correct each other and hopefully we can only abandon the most incorrigible.


We can only give up on those who when a piece of stone is cooked in one pot
and they are cooked in the other the stone gets ripe first. We abandon
those ones, but otherwise it is our responsibility; it is our burden to
continue trying all the time, because if we do give up then there is no
hope. I thank you.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, your Excellency Deputy President,
I’m pleased by the response that you have just given now. In your two
previous lives, your Excellency, one as secretary-general of the ANC, you
were part of a three-a-side between the IFP and the ANC which produced a
document that spoke about the role of the IFP and Prince M G Buthelezi in
the liberation struggle. And also in your life as the former President of
this country, at the funeral of the late hon Cleopas Nsibande in Benoni,
you spoke about the role of, particularly, Prince M G Buthelezi in the
liberation struggle. What is it that government is doing to engage young
people in this role in order for them not to cling to yesterday’s lies that
the IFP was part of the system? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, hon Mpontshane, as I’ve already
stated, we all carry the responsibility to ensure that the history that we
inherit is presented as factually as possible. It is not easy to write
contemporary history, because the temptation to embellish one’s role is
always looming large.

However, it is important that the facts are always presented for what they
are without suffering from false consciousness. In other words, we should
always guard against living in the past, because that also carries certain
dangers.

Government, through the Department of Arts and Culture and other
departments, tries, within the limits of what it can do, to ensure that due
recognition is given to those who played a prominent role in our country.
That does not mean that that is only measured in terms of one’s involvement
in the struggle for liberation, because the development of a society is a
function of all contributions.
When we participate in an election and register, such as one party that is
not with us here, the Keep It Straight and Simple party, it was called the
Kiss party, I think, that played an important role in our democracy,
because they made their own effort to participate in the elections and even
campaigned. The fact that they did not garner sufficient support does not,
in any way, detract from their contribution, and that must be the attitude
that guides us in recognising the roles of those who contributed in shaping
our democracy.

We, in government, regard uMntwana kaPhindangene, one of the elder
statesmen of our country, as one of the doyens of the struggle for freedom
and for our parliamentary politics as well; we do. I thank you.

  Query regarding return of exorbitantly priced vehicles in the face of the
                                  recession

12.   The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the Deputy President:


      Whether, in light of his statement (details furnished) that it does
      not make economic or ethical sense for the government to be
      spendthrift with its financial management in the face of the
      recession, members of the Cabinet who have spent exorbitant amounts of
      money on purchasing vehicles will be requested to return those
      vehicles; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        NO2112E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition the hon
Trollip, I stand by my statement that at a time of an economic crisis, when
finances are under pressure, we all need to be careful about our expenses.
Major commitments of government have to be considered very carefully in the
light of the current economic conditions and the conditions of the poor and
the unemployed.

To my knowledge, the vehicle purchases by members of Cabinet were all
undertaken within the regulations set by the Ministerial Handbook, which
sets out the benefits and privileges applicable to members of Cabinet,
provincial executive councils and presiding officers of Parliament and
provincial legislatures.

While some may hold the view that certain purchases were inappropriate in
the current circumstances, these purchases were in fact planned and
budgeted for. The purchases were not unethical in that they were not
illegal or underhanded. For these reasons, we do not intend to request the
return of the vehicles. In any event, as the hon Leader of the Opposition
is aware, a used car is a used car. It has far less resale value than a new
car, so returning the cars and buying cheaper ones would result in
significant losses. While that may sound good, it is not particularly
practical.

On 29 July this year, Cabinet agreed that a task team be constituted to
prepare recommendations on developing measures for fiscal prudence, with
specific reference to curbing wasteful expenditure, establishing cost-
cutting measures and reviewing procurement practices. Furthermore,
consideration will also be given to the possible adjustment of the existing
guidelines for purchasing official vehicles for political office-bearers,
as reflected in the Ministerial Handbook. This task team will report back
to Cabinet in due course. I thank you. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I thank the hon Deputy
President. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Ministerial Handbook and
your response, I’d like to point out that the continental adjudicators of
the Mo Ibrahim award have embarrassingly decided not to award this
prestigious award to the 11 qualifying candidates, including our own former
President Thabo Mbeki.

Considering the public appeals by the President, the Deputy President and
various Cabinet Ministers – past and present – to all public figures to
lead by example of frugality in these times of economic difficulty, and
further considering that Kenya, which notoriously figures far worse than
South Africa on Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index –
with South Africa placed 54th and Kenya 147th – and that Kenya has
instructed all its Cabinet members to return for resale all excessively
expensive ministerial vehicles and has placed a ceiling on vehicle engine
capacity of 1800cc or 1,8 litres for all Ministers, is the ANC government
going to allow the successive display of conspicuous consumption to
continue unchecked or is it going to reverse this display of greedy
avarice? Even if we get less for a second-hand motorcar, it would be a
wonderful example to the people that are suffering under poverty in this
country.

Can we have a timeframe, hon Deputy President, regarding when these
recommendations are going to be made by this task team? Thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Trollip. My understanding of
an economic recession is that the levels of demand come to a standstill.
Therefore, those who engage in commodity production end up with the
commodities stacked up in their warehouses and/or on the shelves of their
stores, without people buying them because consumption is a function of
liquidity. That is why governments are called upon, when you are in a
recession, to revive the economy by ensuring that demand ...
[Interjections.] ... I will give you an opportunity to speak here. I think
it would be helpful for you not to interrupt.

I’m just making a simple point, that government is not an individual. In a
recession, governments are called upon to intervene to ensure that the
wheels of the economy continue to turn. Once people who live by earning
wages are laid off, it means that they will not be able to buy anything.
That is why, in certain instances in history, governments have been known
to employ people to dig a trench up a street and the following week others
have been employed and paid by the same government to fill up the trench
just so that they have liquidity. That’s how you deal with a recession,
according to my understanding of a recession. [Applause.]

Now, let us deal with the issue of the calls for moderation, because that
is the message we have received as government. That is why government has
agreed to establish a task team to look at excesses, wastages and all of
those things. This task team will be looking at the totality of expenses
that may require review. Those excesses range from the procurement of
vehicles right up to this expensive practice of having Parliament in Cape
Town, when government is in Pretoria. [Applause.]

Cumulatively, there’s more wastage in the manner we have located the seat
of government and Parliament. That is why the old Nationalist Party
government used to spend half the year in Cape Town and half the year in
Pretoria. Now, there is a lot of commuting and Ministers have two houses
when they should be living in one house. That would be a major saving.

So, these are a range of wastage areas and linkages that this task team
will be looking at and reporting on to Cabinet. Cabinet will then take a
decision on those matters.
You see, in South Africa there are people who are wallowing in riches – who
can afford all kinds of toys and so on – which are privately owned. What we
are concerned about is the public kitty. What is the public kitty used for?

The moral of this question is that we must not elevate poverty into virtue.
Our thrust must be to empower the poorest of the poor not to live on alms,
but to be able to eke out a decent living on their own. These, I think, are
matters that we should make time to discuss so that at least there’s a
common position that we adopt as Parliament rather than seeking to score
points on little matters. I don’t think that helps us.

As I said earlier on, South African society is who we are. There are many
classes and stratifications in this society and our role is not to put
watertight fences around these, but to try and unite our people and give
them a sense of pride and belonging as South Africans. By so doing, we can
deal with the disabilities accumulated over the years. I think it is
important to adopt that approach.

As for the resale of second-hand vehicles, I know that in a recession in
particular, if you buy a car for R1 million and you drive out in that car,
and in a week’s time you try to find a buyer for it, you would struggle to
find a buyer who is willing  to pay R600 000 for that vehicle.

I don’t know the economics of the Kenyan government or the management of
finances ... [Applause.] ... but I think this is not a good example to
follow. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, about two months ago President Zuma
pledged to curb excessive government spending in the wake of the scandal
over ministerial cars. That has, unfortunately, not happened.

About two months earlier, on 24 June to be exact, during the debate on the
Presidency Budget Vote, the hon Deputy President made a statement that
appears in today’s Question Paper, in essence, correctly saying that
excessive government spending does not make economic and ethical sense. We
agree with him that financial mismanagement by government is unethical,
wrong and insensitive to millions of South Africans who struggle to put a
decent meal on the table.

What we want to know is whether the above statements by both the President
and the Deputy President were discussed with the Cabinet. If yes, were
there any agreements and what were the agreements about these statements?
If not, why not, because the public outcry is loud and clear as a result of
the difficult economic conditions they find themselves in? And as the
Deputy President correctly said, they want to see moderation in government
spending. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Meshoe. As I have already stated, yes
indeed, we stand by those statements. This is work in progress, and I’ve
tried to illustrate the range of areas that the Cabinet task team is going
to look into and report back to Cabinet on. Once Cabinet receives that
report, it will be able to take decisions and act on the basis of those
decisions. I thank you. [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, His Excellency the Deputy
President, hon colleagues, I want to speak as a mediator today. [Laughter.]
I think that His Excellency the President and the government, meaning the
Cabinet, are not surprised that people from the opposition parties are
raising this issue. I’m sure if they were in the same position, they would
do the same.

However, I think the point has been made. If we look and think back to the
days when our people were oppressed and consider the vehicles that were
used by government then, I don’t know how much fuss came from that.
[Applause.]

My fellow opposition leaders mustn’t say that I’m spoiling their case, but
I think the point has been made. But, at the same time, I think we should
balance these things, look at what happened in the past and compare the
poverty and oppression that our people suffered at that time. We should
also look at the money per capita that was spent on white children and
black children. [Applause.]
In other words, I’m not saying that the point should not have been raised,
but that this cow has run dry; we have been milking it and milking it. I
think the point has been made, but I don’t think that we should really do
this as if we didn’t live in South Africa before.

My former colleagues in the Cabinet, such as Minister Manuel, Minister
Sisulu and others will know that I, as Minister, used the cars that I had
used as chief minister right through in Cape Town. So, I have a very clear
conscience. However, I don’t want to be judgmental to the extent that I
forget about the past and overreact on the matter we are dealing with now.

So, I’m speaking as a mediator now. This point has been made and we are
tired of it. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Deputy President, that was a comment.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, yes, it was not a question.

Siyabonga, Shenge. [Thank you, Shenge.] [Applause.]

Adv T M MASUTHA: Hon Deputy Speaker, I would like to concur with hon Shenge
on this point. I think, from where we stand as the ANC, whilst it is okay
for people to ask questions about any policy decisions of government, what
is of critical importance to us is that that should not deflect us from the
primary task of focusing on service delivery and on the better life that
the rest of our people have long been waiting for.

In that regard, I’d like to ask the Deputy President if he will ask the
Ministers to assure him that they’ve chosen the best and most reliable cars
that will take them more quickly and more reliably to where our people are
who need the services that the Ministers need to provide. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Masutha. The Ministers have heard the
message and that is why Cabinet has this task team to look at where it can
make savings in order to redirect them towards service delivery. The task
team will also look at wastage, to ensure that we get value for money and
that money that is allocated is expended for the purposes for which it was
intended. That message has been heard loud and clear. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Deputy President.

Undijamele uMnu Trollip apha. Ndiyabona ukuba akakoneli. Undijamele, kodwa
bendimnikile ithuba lokuba abuze umbuzo. Uyazi ukuba bane qha abantu
ekufuneka bebuze imibuzo. Ngoko, ukuba akakoneli, uya kuphinda athethe
noSekela-Mongameli ngelinye ixesha. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)
[Mr Trollip is staring at me here. I can see he is not yet satisfied. He is
staring at me, but I’ve given him the opportunity to ask a question.  He
knows that there are only four people who are supposed to ask questions.
Therefore, if he is not satisfied, he can talk to the Deputy President some
other time.]

                               SOCIAL SERVICES
                                  Cluster 2

MINISTERS:

  Plans to ensure no disruptions at schools during exam preparation period

189.  Ms N Gina (ANC) asked the Minister of Basic Education:


      Whether any plans are in place to ensure that schools are not
      disrupted by service delivery protests at this critical period when
      learners need to prepare for examinations; if not, why not; if so,
      what plans?                                  NO2095E

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Deputy Speaker, the reply to the question
is that indeed provinces have taken all reasonable and necessary steps to
ensure that learning and teaching take place without disruptions in our
schools. As the department, we share the concern that service delivery
protests may already have impacted negatively on school activities. We
advise that in areas affected by service delivery protests, provincial
departments put measures in place.

For instance, in Limpopo, Moutse, two camps were established to accommodate
learners. Boys were moved to the Makhado multipurpose community centre in
the Vhembe region and girls were moved to the Tivumbeni multipurpose
community centre in Mopane. Since the establishment of these camps the
committee has also expressed its commitment to supporting learners in
writing their exams. However, in case there are any disruptions, the
provincial department will set up a writing centre outside Moutse and
provide learners with transport to the centres.

In Mpumalanga, again, where we had reports of disruptions, the circuit
managers are on high alert to move learners to other schools within the
circuits in case there are any disruptions. The provincial legislature was
briefed yesterday about the details of planned interventions in order to
afford learners an opportunity to write their exams. Thank you.

Ms N GINA: Chairperson, there is no follow-up question. I just want to
thank the Minister for all the efforts she has made. Thank you very much,
Minister. [Applause.]

Dr J C KLOPPERS-LOURENS: Chairperson, the DA is of the conviction that
under no circumstances should schools be disrupted by protest action during
final examinations. Learners should also not be prevented from attending
school and writing their exams.

We know that the ANC leadership made promises regarding the improvement of
municipal service delivery, the filling of critical vacancies, the
correction of underspending and the rooting out of incompetent and corrupt
officials. But, Minister, is the ANC government also prepared to keep these
promises and, more importantly, take action against its alliance partners,
the SACP and Cosatu, who are in most instances organising these service
delivery protests or dictating the destructive and violent ways in which
these protests are conducted?

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, I fully agree with the DA that
schools should not be disrupted or disturbed. On the next matter I think
the member is being opportunistic and is raising things that have nothing
to do with the question – the ANC and its commitment to service delivery. I
think she should refer the question to the ANC. I was asked a question as a
Minister on whether we have made plans in this regard. We have indeed made
plans. But on matters of what the ANC has done and wants to commit to, I
can give you the address of Luthuli House. You can then refer this to the
ANC because I can’t answer that. [Applause.]

Ms A MDA: Hon Minister, I do concur with you about the commitment of the
ANC to making sure that schools are provided with education and when
education is provided to learners that no disruptions occur.

I want to draw your attention to last year’s experience in Khutsong and
Merafong where students were taken out of the province as a result of the
protests and taken to the Northern Cape, the issue never having been
resolved. Assuming that the ring leaders of the protests currently taking
place may not be arrested as soon as you think they will, what measures are
in place to ensure that under no circumstances will examinations be
interrupted or not written as a result of the protests? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: I assume the member is referring to the
North West and not the Northern Cape. I just want to correct that. For the
rest -

... angithwasi. Angilona ithwasa. Angazi ukuthi yini ezokwenza ukuthi
abantu bangabhali. Angikwazi ukuqinisekisa ukuthi ngeke kube nezidubedube
angazi ukuthi iLungu lifunani kimina. Angikwazi ukuqinisekisa ukuthi
akuzuba nezidubedube eziphazamisa izingane ukuthi zibhale ukuhlolwa
ngaphandle uma ngingathwasa. Angithwasi mntanami, angithwasi nkosikazi!
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... I am not a sangoma. I won’t know what will cause people not to write
their examinations. And I cannot guarantee that there will not be any
protests. I do not know what the hon member wants from me. I cannot
guarantee that there will not be any protests which will disturb the
learners when they write their examinations unless I become a sangoma. I am
not a sangoma, my child, I am not a sangoma, madam! [Applause.]]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Minister, teaching time has not only been lost
through service delivery protests, but through other factors as well. For
instance, prior to the 2009 elections, teachers, especially those aligned
to Sadtu, abandoned their classrooms to campaign for the ruling party.
Would the Minister know how much time was lost through such actions? I
thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): That is a new question, hon
Mpontshane. But I will allow the Minister to respond if she feels like
responding.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: I was going to ask the member to put that
question to me in writing.

Bengizocela iLungu lingibhalele lo mbuzo ngizoyofuna impendulo ngoba
lombuzo awuhambisani nalokhu esikhuluma ngakho. Enye into yakudala le. [I
would ask the hon member to put that question in writing so that I can go
and look for an answer because that question is irrelavant to what we are
talking about here. That is something else that happened a long time ago.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: I will do so.

  Query regarding whether calendars accord with government’s plans for 2010
                      Fifa World Cup Soccer tournament

182.  Mrs C Dudley (ACDP) asked the Minister of Higher Education and
      Training:


      Whether calendars issued by his department to Members of Parliament
      indicating only one extra day of holiday during the 2010 Fifa World
      Cup Soccer tournament is in accordance with government’s plans for
      school holidays around this event; if not, what is the position in
      this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                       NO2081E

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, the school
calendar is the responsibility of the Minister of Basic Education,
therefore the question should be redirected to the Department of Basic
Education.

However, I think this is a reflection of a problem and a challenge that
this Parliament will have to deal with at some stage. Firstly, I don’t
understand how a member of this Parliament would not know that this is not
a question for higher education.

We need to look at a number of these questions, some of which are really a
waste of time because they are inappropriately asked. Some of them have
very little to do with what they are purported to be about. However, I’m
sure that the member will be able to direct the question to the Minister of
Basic Education. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Minister. Hon
Dudley is not well, so I was informed that hon Swart will ask a follow-up
question.

Mr S N SWART: House Chair, firstly, may I apologise on behalf of Mrs Dudley
for her absence today, owing to illness. Clearly, if a question is directed
to the wrong Minister, the questions office could also redirect it.

In any case, Minister, the reasoning behind closing schools for five weeks
during the Fifa World Cup followed concerns relating to, inter alia,
additional strains on infrastructure and transportation, and absenteeism.
The proposal was widely supported by hospitality stakeholders, teachers’
unions and the national Department of Transport, and we, as the ACDP,
support this proposal as long as the actual time spent in classrooms is not
affected.

Now, the follow-up question is whether, hon Minister, you have been
engaging universities to adopt a similar calendar as surely similar
considerations will apply, albeit on a smaller scale. Or do universities’
calendars in any event accommodate the five weeks during the Soccer World
Cup? This should make sense as university students could then try to earn
extra money during the Soccer World Cup and hostel rooms could be utilised
for accommodation, again, clearly, as long as academic standards are not
compromised during this position.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Surely, Chair, we appreciate
being asked and answering questions, but, we can’t change tack in the
middle of a question and ask something new about universities.
Nevertheless, as the hon member ... [Interjections.]

Angixakwa nje imibuzo ephuma kwilunga kwilungu eliphikisayo uTrollip
nangelilodwa ilanga. Angiyenqeni nemibuzo yenu le eniyibuzayo. [I have
never been puzzled by the member of the opposition hon Trollip’s questions,
not even for a single day. So, I am not avoiding the questions that you are
asking.]

Anyway, you know that universities set their own calendars each year.
Perhaps what you are raising is an idea that is well worth considering,
that in the light of the 2010 Soccer World Cup, maybe we should engage
universities around some kind of synergies so that university students can
get some holiday or vacation jobs and be able to earn a little bit of
money. I think that is a very good idea, hon member; it’s something that we
will consider as a department. [Applause.]

Dr W G JAMES: Hon Chairperson, there are 199 school days in 2009. In 2010
there will be 196 days, or 195 days if a public holiday is added. The
school year begins a week earlier in 2010. Mid-year there is a five-week-
long holiday and schools close a week later in December.

The top public secondary schools in the country have leaders who believe
that it is ludicrous to have a five-week break in the middle of the year. A
Naptosa, National Professional Teachers Organisation of SA, spokesperson is
more understated. Still, she says that it is not, I quote: “... ideal that
teachers and learners down tools for five long weeks as this may have a
paralytic effect on their learning”. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, hon Swart has
admitted that the question was directed to the wrong Minister.
Nevertheless, I will allow the hon Minister to say something, if he wants
to.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you, Chairperson. I
think that this issue of the 2010 Soccer World Cup and schooling is
something that my colleague, Minister Motshekga, would be happy to engage
around. Therefore, it would be proper that, as I’ve said, this question is
actually redirected to her so that we are able to deal with these matters
better. Thank you.

 Query regarding (i) progress made iro a single coherent school sport system
                and (ii) civil body representing school sport

198.  Mr C T Frolick (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:


      (1)   What progress has his department made in the (a) establishment
            and (b) implementation of a single coherent school sport system;


      (2)   which body in civil society (a) is recognised by his department
            as the legitimate representative of school sport and (b)
            represents South African school sport at international forums?
                                        NO2105E

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, we will now proceed
to Question 198 that was put by the hon Frolick to the Minister of Sport
and Recreation. I have been informed that the hon Minister has requested
that the question stand over. Therefore, hon Frolick, we will proceed to
the next question.

      Identification of reasons for worsening maternity mortality rate
178.  Mr M Waters (DA) asked the Minister of Health:


      (1)   What was the maternal mortality rate in (a) 1995 and (b) 2008;


      (2)   whether his department has indentified the reasons for the
            continuing worsening of health indicators such as the maternal
            mortality rate despite rising expenditure on public health care;
            if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the
            reasons?               NO2077E

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Hon Madam Chair, the maternal mortality rate is
typically measured every few years. The best baseline estimate of maternal
mortality that we have post-1994 is that recorded in the first ever
demographic and health survey conducted in South Africa in 1998. The
maternal mortality rate in 1998 was estimated at 150 per 100 000 live
births. We do not have any figures for 1995.

The most recent estimate for the maternal mortality rate provided by
Statistics SA was 124 per 100 000 live births for 2002. The recently
released triennial report for the period 2005 to 2007 by the National
Committee on Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths estimated that the
health-facility-based maternal mortality rate is 140 per 100 000 live
births.

These figures are significantly lower than the estimated 400 per 100 000
live births used by the United Nations Statistics Division, the 2008 global
progress report on the Millennium Development Goals and the report on
maternal and child health published in the international medical journal,
The Lancet, in August this year. The difference between the facility-based
maternal mortality rate and the estimate by the UN Statistics Division is
that the UN-based figures take into account maternal deaths that occurred
in communities that did not attend our health facilities, whether private
or public. We do not have such figures.

Whatever figures you take, whether from Statistics SA, our own confidential
enquiries into maternal deaths, or from the United Nations, we are not
satisfied with the maternal mortality rate and we are going to do something
about it. That is why, when I received the report on the confidential
enquiries, I convened a national summit on August 25. It was a national
summit of national and provincial practitioners responsible for maternal
health, and of representatives of health professional organisations,
especially those that represent doctors and nurses and other stakeholders.
We called them together to discuss the maternal, perinatal and under-five
mortality rates.

This summit reviewed all the ministerial reports and put forward a series
of recommendations. We have processed these recommendations and shared them
with provincial managers for action. We have also started a process of in-
service training for doctors and midwives in the essential steps in the
management of obstetric emergencies, which the National Committee on
Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths found to be weak in some of our
hospitals.

In addition, during this month I met with representatives of the SA Society
of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists before an international conference
which was held in Cape Town two weeks ago. I also met with the Society of
Midwives of SA and we are developing partnerships on what to do. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Thank you, House Chair. Minister, I thank you for your
frank answer. South Africa has made very little progress and, really, we
are not going to be able to reach the Millennium Development Goals of
reducing the maternal mortality rate by three quarters. In September,
ministers of health worldwide met at the United Nations to discuss the poor
progress.

I would like to ask the hon Minister: What is your new commitment to
meeting the goal with specific reference to providing and sustaining
antiretrovirals for HIV-positive pregnant women, especially in view of the
recent statement by the Department of Health that at least three provinces
in our country are in danger of not having an adequate budget to provide
antiretroviral treatment?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Indeed, that is so. But I must also add that it is
not only South Africa which is in danger of not reaching the Millennium
Development Goal on maternal mortality. This fact was discussed very
thoroughly at the World Health Organisation Regional Office for Africa in
Kigali in August, where all the ministers of health in Africa met. We
accepted this fact and that we needed to do something about it. We are
doing something about it.

In South Africa, I must also agree with you that of the big five causes of
maternal mortality, HIV and Aids is number one at 43,7%. It is definitely
number one. To this extent, I have submitted very clear plans to Cabinet
and we will make an announcement very soon. It is not just three provinces
in South Africa that are likely to run out of antiretrovirals before the
end of the financial year, but in fact eight provinces.

We are doing something about it, and we will make sure that that does not
happen. If we do not act, yes, it is going to happen in eight provinces
except for the Northern Cape. But because we are taking particular action,
we believe that it is not going to happen. Thank you.

Ms M J SEGALE-DISWAI: Chairperson, hon Minister, how is the Department of
Health ensuring that national maternal health protocols, guidelines and
strategies that are given to health facilities are not only put up in the
halls, filed or shelved but are used to prevent maternal deaths? Thank you.


The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Indeed, hon Chairperson, when I was given the
statement for the first time, before it was submitted as a question, I
alluded to the fact that the report from the professors involved in the
national confidential enquiries did mention that one of the reasons for
high mortality was the fact that some of our health facilities did not
follow the normal protocols.

I have already said that I have met with the people who are responsible for
that. I have met the gynaecologists and the midwives. I also intend to meet
all the clinical managers and the CEOs of the hospitals because, indeed, it
is true: These protocols do exist and people have been ignoring them. We
want to make them accountable. Thank you.

Mr D A KGANARE: Hon Minister, the maternal mortality rate is an
international barometer to evaluate the efficacy of any public health
system. Today we are celebrating Africa Human Rights Day, and our
Constitution confers the right “of health care services, including
reproductive health care”. But the government is expected to guarantee
this. In light of the masses of our mothers who are dying like flies, do we
have a new reason to celebrate Africa Human Rights Day?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I am sure we have not been talking
about two things that are completely unrelated. I have been talking about
the rate of maternal mortality and what we are actually doing about it, on
the whole continent, and that ministers of health met in Kigali because
there is maternal mortality in all the countries on the continent and we do
not accept that. As to whether, in light of this, we should not be
celebrating, I will leave that up to the rest of the leaders on the
continent to decide. I don’t think it is for me to answer. Thank you.

       Query regarding the impact of Dinaledi schools as well as their
                         identification and support

169.  Mr D A Kganare (Cope) asked the Minister of Basic Education:


      (1)   Whether any assessment has been done on the impact of Dinaledi
            schools; if not, why not; if so, when;


      (2)   whether she will make the findings available to the public; if
            not, why not; if so, when;


      (3)   whether there is a programme to increase the number of Dinaledi
            schools; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
            which criteria will be applied to determine which schools
            qualify as Dinaledi schools;


      (4)   whether provinces play any role in identifying schools; if not,
            why not; if so, what are the relevant details; and


      (5)   whether her department or provincial departments provide any
            support to ensure the success of these schools; if not, why not;
            if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        NO1294E


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, with regard to follow-
up questions I appeal to you that they be within the context of the
question asked on the Question Paper.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, the preliminary assessment of the
impact of Dinaledi schools has been positive. We have 500 Dinaledi schools,
which are principally based in rural and township areas with a learner
population of approximately 7%. These schools contribute almost 24% of
passes, which is about 50% in matric. This clearly indicates a positive
result. Furthermore, there has been an increase in the participation of
girl-learners in the learning areas of maths and science, which, again, was
one of the objectives of Dinaledi schools.

Given the positive results of Dinaledi schools, the department has embarked
on an in-depth study to ascertain the positive aspects which contributed to
the success of Dinaledi schools and the extent to which they could be
expanded.
The answer to the next question is: Yes, the results of the study will be
made available to interested parties and stakeholders when the study has
been concluded.

The department has decided to keep the number of Dinaledi schools at 500
and to increase the support for these schools. We will increase the number
after we have completed the assessment.

The choosing of the Dinaledi schools is done in collaboration with
provinces. The national department only sets the criteria and, jointly,
with the provinces, we choose the schools.

The Department of Education provides support and oversight over these
schools. It monitors them, keeps a database of support for the schools and
has provincial co-ordinators in different provinces. These schools are
given extra textbooks, study guides, scientific calculators and science
kits - and the teachers in those areas are trained in content knowledge
which has, ostensibly, impacted positively on the results.

Learners from Dinaledi schools are also made to participate in the
Mathematics Olympiad. Approximately 250 of these schools have been adopted
by the private sector and parastatals, and this initiative has also
impacted positively on and contributed to the success of the Dinaledi
schools.

Mr D A KGANARE: Thanks, Minister, but I won’t say for the comprehensive
response. The focus of the Dinaledi School Project was to enhance the
performance of young South Africans in maths and science.

Yesterday we had the family of Ché Guevara and the ambassador of Cuba in
the House. Cuba revolutionised their country’s standing in maths and
science within a matter of two years. My understanding is that it is not
the job of revolutionaries only to sing praises to Cuba, but also to learn
lessons from them. I want to know whether the department and the government
have embarked on a programme to learn from Cuba.

We cannot have a pilot project forever. The number of Dinaledi schools has
been frozen at 500, and this is therefore no longer a project because it
has been running for five years now. Is there any programme to ensure that
the teaching of maths and science is revolutionised along Cuban lines?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mhlonishwa Kganare uyayilahla
manje. [Hon Kganare, you are out of order.]

I will allow the Minister to respond if she wishes to do so, because in
this question there is nothing that relates to Cuba.

LETONA LA THUTO YA MOTHEO: Ntate Kganare, bonnete ke hore o bua nnete empa
se teng ke hore dikolong tsena, thutadipalo ha e etswe feela dikolong tsa
Dihodi-naledi, e etswa dikolong kaofela. Kahoo, hore ha di a ata ho ba
makgolo kapa sekete ha se tsietsi hakaalo mme dinaledi re e etsa dikolong
tsa batho ba kobo di mahetleng mme palo ya makgolo a mahlano ha o e bapisa
le dikolo tse ding tse ikgonang tseo di ntseng di etsa thutadipalo, o tla
fumana hore ha re a ema hampe hakaalo.

Seo re sa batleng ho se etsa, ke hore re atise lenane la dikolo tsena re e
so tebe ho fumana dintho kaofela tseo re di hlokang lenaneng lena. Kahoo le
tla teba, re sa ntsane re etsa diphuputso re utlwisise hore di kgonneng
jwang ho atleha. Ha re se re fumane maele ana kapa tsebo eo, lenane le tla
ata ka tsela e nepahetseng. O se ke wa kgathatseha, le tla ata ntate.
[Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Hon Kganare, what you are saying is true,
but maths is taught in all the schools and not only the ones that are part
of the Dinaledi Schools Project.  So, whether they do not increase to
hundreds or thousands is not really a problem, because we carry out this
project at previously disadvantaged schools with poor resources. If you
look at the figure of 500, as compared to that of well-resourced schools
that also do maths, you will find that it is really not that bad after all.

We don’t want to increase the number of schools without knowing exactly
what is needed in the project. We are still conducting research to
understand how others have succeeded and then the project will expand. It
will expand accordingly once we have received the necessary advice or
knowledge. It will expand, sir, don’t worry. [Applause.]]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, of the 500 schools in the 9 provinces that
are part of the Dinaledi Schools Project, only schools from four provinces,
that is the Western Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng and Limpopo, made it onto
the list of the 10 best state schools.

In the assessment that was done on the impact of Dinaledi schools, I want
to know from the Minister whether any reasons were found why, in general,
schools in the Western Cape are achieving better results than schools in
other provinces, and whether her department is going to provide more
support and resources to the schools in the other five provinces to ensure
that there is a drastic improvement in matric results, so that very soon we
have schools in all nine provinces appearing on the top 10 list.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEMFUNDO EYISISEKELO: Sihlalo, ubuke washo nje. Baba Mfundisi
noma lungu,izikole eziyikhulu eziphezulu azihambelani neDinaledi, manje
umhlonishwa uthatha ufaka into nje engahlangani neDinaledi uyayihlohla nje
indaba yezikole eziyikhulu ezihamba phambili, azihambelani. Uma ufuna
sixoxe ngezikole eziyikhulu asixoxe ngazo, uma ufuna sixoxe ngeDinaledi
asixoxe, singazihlanganisi zingahlangani. Baba ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, like you said before,
Reverend or hon member, the top 100 schools have nothing to do with the
Dinaledi Schools Project. The hon member is just confusing the issues. The
top 100 performing schools have nothing to do with the Dinaledi Schools
Project. If you want us to talk about the top 100 performing schools, let
us do that, and if you want us to talk about the Dinaledi Schools Project,
let us do that. Let us not confuse two issues that do not go together.
Thank you.]

Mr D C SMILES: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, with regard to
performance in maths and science, I would like to agree with what the hon
Meshoe said about the top 10 schools.

As the department provided the Sunday Times with that information to make
those results known, I would like to ask the Minister whether there is any
evidence from the department to say that the Dinaledi Schools Project is
successful. Secondly, I would like to know whether the Maths911, which is
also contributing to the improvement of maths in schools, isn’t a
duplication of the Dinaledi project.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, perhaps the member didn’t
understand because I was speaking in isiZulu. I said the top 100 schools
have nothing to do with the Dinaledi School Project. The reasons those
schools succeeded have nothing to do with the fact that they are part of
the Dinaledi School Project. Those are separate issues that have to be
addressed differently with regard to schools that work and succeed.

The Dinaledi Schools Project specifically targets rural and township
schools - I don’t think even 10 of those 100 schools are township and rural
schools. That is why I am saying that those are separate issues.

The Dinaledi Schools Project is meant to address rural and township schools
where maths and science uptake has been very low. It is a special programme
to intensify areas we would not have been able to succeed in had we not
made the necessary interventions.

Hon member, you are quite right to say that it is important that we have
maths and science. Unfortunately, you are linking two things which are not
linked. If you want to talk about the 100 schools survey, then let’s talk
about it, but let us not link the issues because they are not linked.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Chairperson, on a point of order: The Minister says
schools that are part of the Dinaledi Schools Project are not part of the
100 top schools survey. Mbilwi High School is in Limpopo and it is part of
the Dinaledi project. So, I don’t think it is correct for the Minister to
say that none of those schools in the top 100 are part of the project.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Meshoe, I didn’t hear anyone
mentioning that school.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chair, if you listened carefully to what she said, you
would recall that she said that none of the 100 top schools was part of the
Dinaledi Schools Project. And this school I am referring to is part of the
Dinaledi project.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, the Minister has
responded to those questions. Therefore let us proceed.

Mrs F F MUSHWANA: Chairperson, the ANC cannot ignore the fact that the
Minister responded appropriately to all the questions posed by the hon Mr D
A Kganare, and it must be noted that we applaud the Minister’s well-
informed leadership.

However, we note that all our schools could be transformed and be of
Dinaledi quality if the textbooks and study guides supplied could replace
the unnecessary duplication of the three levels of lesson planning, which
overburden our educators, something the Minister also alluded to in her
interaction with education departments.
Does the Minister have any timeframes within which the supplied textbooks
and study guides could be accepted as sufficient resources for teaching so
as to enhance quality contact time and ensure timeous assessment of
learners by educators? When can the department expand its supply of
scientific calculators and science kits to all our rural schools and not
just to Dinaledi schools? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, indeed, we intend to expand the
resources that we are supposed to provide schools with. The Presidency has
already given us more than R500 million to top up schools and make sure
that we provide schools with textbooks and deal with all the problems the
member has raised. In January we will be able to top up schools in order to
provide more textbooks to 60% of all our poor schools to solve the problems
those schools are experiencing. We are working on it. In January, when the
schools reopen, we’ll be ready with those textbooks and other resources for
the 60% of our schools in poor areas.

 Steps taken to remove the burden of the cost of education and to transform
                                  the NSFAS

191.  Mr Z S Makhubele (ANC) asked the Minister of Higher Education and
      Training:


      (1)   What steps have been taken to remove the burden of the cost of
            education from poor families, especially in the light of the
            underspending by the National Student Financial Aid Scheme
            (NSFAS); and


      (2)   to what degree is the further expansion of the services and the
            transformation of the NSFAS receiving priority?
                                              NO2097E

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, the National
Student Financial Aid Scheme has requested institutions to provide
information on underspending in order to redistribute funds to needy
students within the current academic year, that is those funds that have
not been spent. The Department of Higher Education and Training has also
been monitoring this matter very closely. Secondly, as I have pointed out
before, I appointed a review committee to look into the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme in July 2009, and I expect the report before the end
of this year.

The overall purpose of the review is to assess the strengths and
shortcomings of the current scheme and to be advised on the short, medium
and long-term needs of student financial aid in order to promote the twin
goals of equity of access and the provision of free undergraduate education
for students from working class and poor communities who cannot afford
further or higher education.

The review will evaluate different modules of student financial aid and
make recommendations on the policy and operational changes required to
ensure the effective and efficient achievement of these goals, which will
enable South Africa to produce graduates with the qualifications and skills
required to build our developmental state. Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

Mr Z S MAKHUBELE: Chairperson, hon Minister, we thank you for the response
given. However, we want to emphasise that the ANC has identified education
as one of its priorities in its manifesto, and access to higher education
by deserving students, in particular, is its main focus.

We urge the department, accordingly, to prioritise this matter in order to
ease the burden on poor households regarding the overall cost of higher
education. The portfolio committee’s recent oversight visits to the areas
of Giyani, Muyexe, amongst other areas, exposed the members to the urgent
need for us to attend to this challenge facing our students.

Higher education institutions should be monitored closely to ensure that
the implementation of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS, is
fair, consistent and efficient, as is required. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, hon member
Makhubele, thanks for that comment. We fully agree with you. And as I have
said, we are indeed monitoring very closely how the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme is performing.

In addition, once the report and its recommendations reach my office - much
as we are aware that we need to move fast on this matter - I will make
sure, nevertheless, that we publish that report and try to provide an
opportunity for the public, especially the affected constituencies, to be
able to comment on those recommendations and to enrich them so that we are
able to ensure that what Mr Makhubele is concerned about is addressed.
Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, hopefully my question this time around
won’t be ruled a new question. Hon Minister, many universities, if not all
of them, require registration fees to be paid upfront, which many students
can’t afford. And, often, financial aid comes too late to assist these
students. What plans does the Minister have to assist such disadvantaged
students? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Sihlalo, ngiyabonga baba
uMpontshane, cha ngizokuphendula, awuphambuki. [Chairperson, thank you, hon
Mpontshane, I will respond to you, and yes, you are on the right track.]

I would like to mention two things. The matter that you are raising is a
very valid matter. For instance, we are concerned as a department that many
students, including poor students, sometimes have to apply to eight or nine
institutions with each requiring an admission fee. That is where the
problem starts.

That is why my department, amongst other things, is seriously exploring the
question of having a central admissions office so that students can apply
to one centre, and we then send those applications to different
institutions.

Secondly, coming directly to the question that you are asking, one of the
things that we want the review of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme
to look into is precisely the problem of many institutions requiring
registration fees that are not covered by the financial aid scheme, and for
very poor students, that rules them out because that becomes a condition
for actually accessing a loan. We would like the review committee to look
into all that in order to ensure that poor students who are deserving and
capable are not, by any means, excluded through this upfront demand for a
registration fee when they cannot afford it. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A MDA: Thank you, hon Minister. I think it is a well-known fact that the
current financial aid that is provided to students, more especially the
underprivileged and needy ones, continues to be even more of a burden than
it is to access financial aid, because in terms of the number of students
that have accessed financial aid until now, the system has not been able to
provide a clear track record of those students that are qualified and
obtained their qualifications as a result of having obtained this financial
aid. After having obtained this financial assistance, they continue to be
burdened by having to repay the loan without having qualified.

I want to check with the Minister if there are any plans in place to design
a mechanism to be more flexible and better able to make sure that these
students, after they have attained this assistance, are able to be tracked
and that they get their qualifications and get to repay their loans.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Sihlalo, cha Anele ubuza
kahle ke namhlanje ntombi, engathi nokho kuyazamazama kona, uyakhula
ntombi. Siyabonga. [Ihlombe.] [Uhleko.] [Chairperson, Anele, you asked a
good question today, my girl. You are getting better and better, and that
is a sign of maturity, my girl. Thank you. [Applause.] [Laughter.]]

The question that you are asking is very important in the sense that one of
the things that we are looking at is to further capacitate the National
Student Financial Aid Scheme to be able to track students – those who
complete their studies and those who drop out. We do that, but we do
recognise that the information system still needs to be strengthened.
Secondly, on the issue of the burden, I just want to say that part of the
review committee’s work is precisely to look into all those things. For
instance, let me give you an example which you might not have mentioned. I
know of a case of a student who was assisted 10 years ago by the National
Student Financial Aid Scheme. She was given a loan of R3 000 and now she
owes R16 000.

Firstly, it is illegal to charge interest on the original capital that you
had actually loaned. We are also looking at blacklisted students to find
out the reasons for that blacklisting, and that is one of the tasks that we
have actually given to the review committee. But we are not waiting for the
review committee to finish. Where we pick up problems, we will deal with
them in such a way that if there are any specific issues or problems that
you want to raise ...

... hhayi, umnyango waloMnyango Wemfundo Ephakeme ntombi uvulekile.
Siyabonga. [Ihlombe.] [... our doors at the Department of Higher Education
and Training are open, my girl. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr W G JAMES: Chair, I think the Minister is hiding behind his review
committee. He is unresponsive to the needs. The question is: Why doesn’t he
take emergency measures and change the current threshold by making a simple
change in the regulations or by proclamation. The current income threshold
levels do not meet the needs of the working class or the lower middle
class.
The English poet Edward Young once said that “Procrastination is the thief
of time.” In the case of the hon Minister’s slow response to the student
financial aid question, Carl Marx would have added that “Procrastination in
the action of the bourgeoisie state denies the working class.” Of course,
Marx had Catholic habits. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chair, Catholics usually
make good communists like Chris Hani, because of the discipline of the
Catholic Church and its commitment to the working class and the poor.

Hon James, I think that it’s unfair to actually say that we are
procrastinating. We are also singling out the issue of a R120 000 threshold
being too low. You may well be right, but in our wisdom, we said there are
many challenges that are facing the National Student Financial Aid Scheme.

We can’t act in a fragmented manner and say we are now going to raise the
R120 000 threshold – to whatever figure, and on the basis of whatever
assessment of the nature and extent of the need that we are facing. This is
because I need to get that from the review committee.

For instance, there are other dilemmas that we are faced with. Do you give
financial aid to as many poor students as possible but cover between 50%
and 90% of their needs, or do you focus on fewer students and provide
complete loans or complete bursaries? All those are issues that we have to
deal with. I can’t be accused of procrastinating. I am expecting a report
in early December.

Let’s deal with the problem in its totality, and once the report is out, as
I have said, you will be able to engage with it and add your views and all
that. This committee was appointed precisely because we have identified
that there are a number of problems. So, I can’t be forced to just act
rationally, and so on. Rather, give yourself a bit more time in order to
provide a better solution. Thank you. [Applause.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G G BOINAMO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the need to establish well-resourced schools and
  FET colleges for poor and disabled persons and come up with possible
  solutions.

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the serious threat illegally imported and exported
  goods pose to the South African economy and come up with possible
  solutions to curb this trend that results in serious loss of revenue and
  loss of jobs.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Madam Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I intend
moving the following motion on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the recent exorbitant purchase of vehicles by
  certain Cabinet Ministers and the appropriateness of these purchases in
  these difficult economic times, as well as the benefits of amending the
  Ministerial Handbook to curb such wasteful expenditure in the future.

                      BEST WISHES FOR 2009 MATRICULANTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House-


   (1)      notes that 26 October 2009 will mark the official commencement
         of the 2009 National Senior Certificate Examination;
   (2)      further notes that acquiring the Senior Certificate represents a
         very important qualification for young people in that it gives them
         the option of going to a university or Further Education and
         Training (FET) College where they can pursue various careers and
         contribute to building a successful country and economy;


   (3)      recognises that many of the Grade 12 learners have been learning
         under the most trying circumstances, but the fact that they are now
         preparing for this examination says much of their character and
         determination;


   (4)      reminds all Grade 12 learners that their parents, families and
         communities support them and stand by them as they prepare for the
         examinations;


   (5)      urges the Grade 12 learners not to take their eye off the ball
         but to stay focused and use the final few days to go over subject
         areas they are unsure of and be proud of the fact that they have
         made it this far and have confidence in their ability to overcome
         this last hurdle; and


   (6)      wishes 2009 matriculants and tertiary students success in their
         examinations.

Agreed to.

 CONGRATULATIONS TO NEWLY ELECTED PRESIDENT OF BOTSWANA, PRESIDENT IAN KHAMA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House–


  (1) notes that Ian Khama has been elected as Botswana’s President;


  (2) congratulates him and his Botswana Democratic Party most warmly on
         their victory in the elections, which have been widely praised for
         being peaceful and transparent;


  (3) wishes President Khama strength and confidence in the exercise of his
         duties; and


  (4) trusts that the cordial relations between our two countries will be
         maintained and strengthened during his term in office.

Agreed to.

   CONGRATULATIONS TO TEAM SA ON THEIR PERFORMANCE IN FINA/ARENA SWIMMING
                           SHORT COURSE WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House-

   (1)      notes the terrific performance of Team South Africa during the
         Fina/Arena Swimming Short Course World Cup at the Kings Park
         Aquatic Centre in Durban on 16 and 17 October 2009;


   (2)      further notes the superb performances of Roland Schoeman,
         Heerden Herman, Darian Townsend, Cameron van der Burgh, Kathryn
         Meaklim, Jessica Pengelly and George du Rand who all won gold
         medals in their respective events;


   (3)      congratulates these athletes and the rest of the team that
         managed to secure several more second and third places on their
         sterling performances and for doing the country proud; and


   (4)      wishes them well during the rest of their season and trusts that
         they will continue to do the country proud in the exceptional way
         they have over so many years.
Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Mr P O Moloto)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:

  That the House-

   (1)      notes with shock and profound sadness the passing away of Mr
         Pape Otukile Moloto on 8 October 2009 after a short illness;


   (2)      recalls that his political career started at Fort Hare where he
         was studying for a BSc degree, joined the South African Student
         Organisation (Saso) as a student activist and was expelled while
         participating in various projects initiated by Saso, especially the
         adult learning project;


   (3)      remembers that towards the end of 1974 he left for exile in
         Botswana where he joined a small Black Consciousness Movement
         group, went for military training in Libya in 1975, returned
         briefly to Botswana, joined the ANC and left Botswana for Lusaka in
         1977;


   (4)      further remembers that Mr Moloto returned to South Africa
         following the unbanning of the Liberation Movement and, as a member
         of the MK Veterans Association, was appointed a Rear Admiral in the
         South Africa Navy Reserve, chaired the Military Bargaining Council
         and in 2009 was briefly deployed as a Member of Parliament for the
         African National Congress; and


   (5)      conveys its heartfelt condolences to his wife, Motlalepule, his
         children and sisters.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                           (The late Mr M Mphehle)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, with leave, I wish to
move the draft resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, with
amendments, as follows:

  That the House-


 (1)  notes with profound sadness the untimely death on Sunday, 4 October
       2009, in the Eastern Cape, of former South African ambassador to
       Morocco, Mr Mtutuzeli “Ginyizembe” Mpehle;
 (2)  further recalls that Mr Mpehle, a qualified teacher, fled the country
       in 1962 to join the exiled ANC and its military wing, uMkhonto
       weSizwe;


 (3)  further remembers that he and his then wife Joy left Ghana for Zambia
       in 1965 where he became involved in the political education of young
       cadres in Lusaka, was later the ANC’s chief representative in
       Zimbabwe and India, returned to South Africa in 1993, worked at the
       Department of Foreign Affairs until 1995, became a Member of
       Parliament and from 2001 to 2006 was the South African ambassador to
       Morocco;


 (4)  recognises that at the time of his death Mr Mpehle had been widely
       regarded as one of the ANC’s respected elders;


 (5)  believes that he has discharged his responsibilities with dedication,
       discipline, diligence and humility; and


 (6)  conveys its condolences to the Mpehle family, the African National
       Congress and the South African Communist Party.

Motion, as amended, accordingly agreed to.

                           AFRICA HUMAN RIGHTS DAY

                                  (Debate)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon House Chairperson and hon
members, let me start by welcoming and saluting Mesdames Nonceba Molwelwe
and Mahlomola Mabote, Chief Whips from Johannesburg and Ekurhuleni, and
their delegations. [Applause.]

We are sharing insights on co-operative governance in the legislative arm
of the state and the doctrine of the separation of powers at municipal
level and we are looking forward to further interactions, which should
contribute to the turnaround strategy that the hon Sicelo Shiceka, the
Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, is
developing.

Twenty-three years ago, on 21 October 1986, the African continent witnessed
the coming into force of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights,
which was adopted on 27 June 1981 by member states of the Organisation of
African Unity as a solemn undertaking to promote and safeguard freedom,
justice and equality and human dignity in Africa.

The creation of the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights will
strengthen the hand and complement the mandate of the African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights established in terms of the charter. Moreover,
the anticipated synergy and collaboration between the court and the
commission should enhance the promotion and protection of peoples’ rights
and freedoms as enshrined in the charter.
Today, as the peoples and nations of Africa celebrate African Human Rights
Day, we must remember that everyone’s human rights in the modern world were
born out of selfless and protracted struggles for the recovery of human
dignity and its inherent values of freedom, equality and justice for all.
These human rights did not come to us like manna from heaven.

Our failure and/or neglect to recall the heroic struggles waged by the
founding mothers and fathers of our democracy for the recovery of our human
and peoples’ rights opens the door for narrow and sometimes ridiculous
interpretations of the concepts of law, justice and human rights.

The African concept of the rule of law cannot be divorced from the Pan-
African ideal that gave birth to it. The African quest for freedom and
justice manifested itself in the resistance of Africans and native Indians
to slavery and in the slave rebellion which led to the liberation and
creation of the state of Haiti and the defeat of the fascist Italian army
by the Ethiopian forces at Aduwa in 1896. This quest for freedom led to the
first Pan-African Conference in London from 23 July to 26 July 1900.

In his address to the nations of the world, W E B du Bois, the African
American revolutionary intellectual, observed that:

  In the metropolis of the modern world, in this the closing year of the
  nineteenth century, there has been assembled a congress of men and women
  of African blood, to deliberate solemnly upon the present situation and
  outlook of the darker races of mankind. The problem of the twentieth
  century is the problem of the color line, the question as to how far
  differences of race - which show themselves chiefly in the color of the
  skin and the texture of the hair - will hereafter be made the basis of
  denying to over half the world the right of sharing to utmost ability the
  opportunities and privileges of modern civilization. To be sure, the
  darker races are today the least advanced in culture according to
  European standards. This has not, however, always been the case in the
  past. And certainly the world’s history, both ancient and modern, has
  given many instances of no despicable ability and capacity among the
  blackest races of men.


It is this glorious African past that inspired Dr Pixley ka Isaka Seme to
call for the regeneration of Africa and the creation of a unique
civilisation for Africans.

The Pan-African Conference in London had been attended by people of African
descent from three continents. At this conference, strong attacks were made
on the desire of the English capitalist to re-enslave the black man,
especially in South Africa, and on the Boer atrocities against Africans in
the Anglo-Boer War of 1899 to 1902, also known as the South African War. In
this war, Africans fought on both sides hoping that, in the event of
victory, civil and political rights would be granted to them.

Instead, the racial ideology of Cecil John Rhodes and capitalist interests
brought the Boers and Britons together to conclude the Treaty of
Vereeniging in 1902, which legalised the colour bar foreseen by Du Bois in
1900. This colour bar found definite and emphatic expression in the South
African Act of 1909 which established the racist and white supremacist
Union of South Africa.

At the end of the first Pan-African Conference in 1900, delegates from this
conference arrived and settled amongst coloured people here in Cape Town,
strengthening the settlement of officials of the African Methodist
Episcopal Church led by Bishop Coppin. The delegates from this conference,
notably the Ghanaian-born journalist F Z S Peregrino and Henry Sylvester
Williams took the message of Pan-African pride and political awareness into
the interior of Southern Africa.

The Ethiopian Church of South Africa and the AME Church – the African
Methodist Episcopal Church - also became the vehicle for Pan-Africanism,
also known as Ethiopianism in Africa. Ethiopianism was the first national
movement which linked African colonies and interior republics even before
South Africa was united by British conquest.

This Pan-African or Ethiopian ideal inspired the formation of the African
People’s Organisation, APO, here in Cape Town, as well as native congresses
which came together in 1912 to form the African National Congress for the
defence of civil and political rights of African people.

The fundamental tenets of the Pan-African and Ethiopian movement were self-
worth, self-reliance and freedom.

According to our icon, Nelson Mandela, the Ethiopian movement culminated in
the formation of the ANC in 1912. “It is in this sense,” said our icon,
“that in the ANC we trace the seeds of the formation of our organisation to
the Ethiopian movement of the 1890s.”

The influence of the Pan-African ideal on the ANC found expression in the
description of this glorious movement as a Pan-African organisation in its
1919 constitution.

The teachings of Marcus Garvey during the interwar years and the 1935
invasion of Ethiopia by fascist Italy gave impetus to the spirit of Pan-
Africanism. Pan-African leaders Sol Tshekisho Plaatje, Kwame Nkrumah and
Mnandi Azikiwe – the first President of Nigeria – were profoundly
influenced by Marcus Garvey, the author of the slogan “Africa for Africans”
- “Mayibuye iAfrica”.

More specifically, these leaders were impacted upon by the Harlem
Renaissance, which was inspired by the teachings of Marcus Garvey. The
Harlem Renaissance drew attention to the glories of ancient Africa to
validate African achievements.

Under the influence of the Harlem Renaissance, Azikiwe wrote a book in 1937
entitled Renascent Africa, which was another landmark in the gradual
recovery of a history that had been forcibly denied and therefore forgotten
during the same period when massive exploitation of the continent’s human
and natural resources went hand in hand with a refusal to honour and
respect its cultural achievements.

Azikiwe, who had studied in the United States of America when the Harlem
Renaissance was in full swing, and who later became the Federal Republic of
Nigeria’s first President, refused to accept that Africa’s future had been
blighted forever by the impact of European colonialism. According to him,
the wellbeing of Africa depended firstly on reactivating a spiritual
balance through respect for others; secondly, on the achievement of social
regeneration through the triumph of democracy; thirdly, on mental
emancipation through a rejection of racism; and fourthly, on striving for
economic prosperity through self-determination.

William Nkomo, one of the founders of the ANC Youth League, told a women’s
conference in the 1930s that Africans are not a subhuman race and that they
too desire the right to self-determination.
During World War II, the defence of the right to self-determination and
human rights of peoples and nations became the grounds upon which the war
by the Allied forces was justified. However, the Atlantic Charter that
guaranteed these rights in the event of victory denied Africans these
rights, despite the fact that they fought on the side of the Allied forces.
This act of naked racism forced Kwame Nkrumah to declare that, after the
war, Africans would demand nothing less that the right to
self—determination and human rights.

Even before the end of the war, the ANC national conference held on 16
December 1943 adopted the Africans’ Claims in South Africa in response to
the Atlantic Charter. This was the first home-grown human and people’s
rights charter on the African continent.

The African Claims document preceded the UN Charter and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Human and Peoples’ rights in Africa received
impetus from the Freedom Charter and the Bandung Conference resolutions of
1955.

At the 1958 Pan-African Conference held in Akra, Ghana, the right to self-
determination and human rights of African peoples and nations became the
principal driving force. African jurists realised that the Bill of Rights
incorporated in the constitutions of newly independent African countries
sought to preserve minority rights to land, natural resources and
privileges.
Thus, in 1961, the African Commission of Jurists developed the concept of
the rule of law in the African context. The adoption of the African Charter
on Human and Peoples’ Rights stemmed from the home-grown African concept of
law and justice. It represents a movement away from liberal concepts of
human rights which place the individual above collective or people’s
rights. In the African context, with its legacy of apartheid, colonialism
and exploitation, the liberal concept of human rights entrenches class,
gender and racial divides and impedes social and economic transformation.

As we celebrate this Africa Human Rights Day, we must recall the words of
President Jacob Zuma who told us in the state of the nation address that we
could only recover the humanity of all South Africans through the creation
of decent jobs and the provision of quality education and health care
services.

Here, the President made it abundantly clear that the realisation of the
socioeconomic rights of the historically disadvantaged black communities
who lived in shacks and other degrading and dehumanising conditions was
extremely urgent.

In his address to the judges, the President also called for the
Africanisation of the law to embody the philosophy of ubuntu and its
underlying values of human, social and international solidarity. Many of
the English and Roman Dutch common laws and their underlying legal
philosophies negate the humanity of black people and need urgent
transformation.

It is hoped that this Parliament will develop a transformation agenda in
line with the 10 strategic priorities of President Jacob Zuma’s
administration which have been adopted by this Parliament.

Let us take this opportunity to congratulate Justice Ngcobo on his
appointment as the Chief Justice of the Constitutional Court and to call on
him to lead the Africanisation of the law and transformation of our
criminal justice system to make it accessible to the poor and downtrodden.

We have the fullest confidence in Chief Justice Ngcobo and his colleagues
and have no doubt that they will move our courts away from the liberal
interpretations of the concepts of law, justice and human rights which
negate the humanity of the majority of South Africans, impede the
realisation of the socioeconomic rights of black people and seek to make
South Africa an outpost of Europe on the southern tip of the continent.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K S MUBU: House Chairperson, hon members, the Organisation of African
Unity’s Assembly of heads of African states and of governments met in July
1979 in Monrovia, Liberia, to discuss a preliminary draft on the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. Two years later, in July 1981, they
adopted the draft document and exactly 23 years ago today, on 21 October
1986, the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights came into force.

This noble idea of a charter came with the promise of hope for the
promotion of human dignity for the peoples of Africa. It was supposed to be
the onset of a new dawn for the protection of human rights, freedom,
justice and equality on a continent that had experienced some of the most
deplorable and atrocious violations of human rights the world had ever
seen.

Ironically, the host country for those preliminary discussions of the
charter, Liberia, several years later, was to be the scene of one of the
most brutal civil wars ever seen in Africa, which claimed the lives of
thousands of people and maimed and displaced several thousand others within
and outside the borders of that country. Today, as we all know, the
instigator and architect of that atrocity, Charles Taylor, former President
of Liberia, is facing various charges for crimes committed against humanity
at the International Criminal Court at The Hague.

In article 2, the charter of the then OAU promises to eradicate all forms
of colonialism from Africa, to co-ordinate and intensify co-operation and
efforts to achieve a better life for the people of Africa and to promote
international co-operation, having due regard to the UN charter.

Two decades later, can we rightly say that the charter has changed the
lives of the people of Africa? In my view, the answer is a resounding “no”.
This is because very few of the countries on this continent can claim to
have lived up to the promise to uphold the rule of law and to respect
people’s rights. If anything, in my view, the charter was a false promise
to the millions of Africans who have perished over the years and for those
who today continue to suffer at the hands of those who profess to be their
leaders.

In a number of cases, human rights violations arise because of the failure
of the state to provide adequate security and protection to its own
citizens, which results in these violations. However, in most cases, it is
actually the state itself that is the perpetrator of serious human rights
abuses and violations.

In 2003, the UN Commission on Human Security observed that the state
remains the fundamental purveyor of security, but often fails to fulfil its
security obligations and at times has even become a source of threat to its
own people.

Ultimately, such a state has characteristics that define it as a “failed
state”. A “failed state” is one that has failed to provide some of the
basic conditions and responsibilities of a sovereign state.

Noam Chomsky, in his book of 2006 called Failed States: The Abuses of Power
and Assault on Democracy, identifies four characteristics that define a
failed state, namely: One, the loss of control over its territory; two,
erosion of legitimate authority to make collective decisions; three, the
inability to provide reasonable public services such as education, health
care and other public amenities; and four, the inability to interact with
other states as a full member of the international community. Other
conditions include widespread corruption, criminality, refugees or
displaced persons and involuntary movement of people and a sharp economic
decline.

In 2007, the Mo Ibrahim Foundation recognised that there is a connection
between good governance and sustainable development and introduced an index
which ranks the performance of sub-Saharan countries. These are graded on
factors such as security, levels of corruption and respect for human
rights. This view is supported by the former Prime Minister of Portugal and
current President of the European Commission, who says that “Sustainable
development requires states to be legitimate in the eyes of their citizens
and to deliver the core functions of states.”

According to the Mo Ibrahim Foundation, in 2009, seven of the 10 failed
states of the world were found in Africa. These include Somalia, Zimbabwe,
Sudan, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and Guinea. On the other hand the foundation listed Mauritius, the
Seychelles and Botswana as the best governed countries in Africa. [Time
expired.]

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Chair, I am who I am because of each one of you.
Today, as we focus on Africa Human Rights Day, let us put the spotlight on
the importance of the humanity of each of us so as not to diminish our own
humanity or reduce our own ability to enjoy unfettered fundamental human
rights. How often, as human beings, have we trampled on our fellow beings
on account of race, religion, gender, economic competition or blind pursuit
of political power? Umntu ngumntu ngabantu. [No man is an island.]

The African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights underscores the point that
every human being shall be entitled to respect for his life and the
integrity of his person, and that no one may be arbitrarily deprived of
this right. Albert Einstein bemoaned the fact that unfortunately our
technology has exceeded our humanity. Thus today we can oppress and kill
brutally on a massive scale, and despoil our environment to the extent of
endangering all human life.

Speaking of technology, geneticists tell us that we are the descendents of
one mitochondrial Eve who lived in Southern Africa. Our skin colours may be
different, but our mitochondrial genes are the same. Under the skin, we are
the children of one common mother. This is an astounding revelation with
major implications for the cohesiveness of humanity. That is why Cope
advocates the realisation of one common national identity to overcome all
manner of prejudices, bigotry and discrimination. Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu.
[No man is an island.]

On this Africa Human Rights Day, let us also recognise South Africa as the
cradle of humanity. This places on us a great responsibility for ensuring
that human rights flourish everywhere in Africa and the world. Thus we will
pay fitting homage to that great ancestral mother who gave life to all of
us.

We have a steep challenge. After the exciting years of Mandela and then of
former President Mbeki, who famously pronounced on what being an African
meant, we demeaned ourselves through pockets of infamous xenophobic attacks
and intolerance. These took away the gloss of that historic declaration, “I
am an African”, and stigmatised us after the first years of our early
democracy. It also took much from the credibility of our struggle.

On this day we humbly apologise for the loss of life and for the harm that
befell the victims. It was then that we failed as South Africans to be our
brothers’ keepers. We say, “Motho ke motho ka batho.” [No man is an
island.]

Just last week Cope’s president, Mosiuoa Lekota, was prevented from
addressing a party meeting in Humansdorp, which was his constitutional
right. How would our struggle heroes have reacted to this? The gain of the
mob was short-lived, but the loss to the country is incalculable. Does
government condone this?

On this Africa Human Rights Day, we must also share the anguish of our
brothers and sisters in Zimbabwe. When we were in chains, they were
enjoying their new-found liberty. Today we are free, whilst they are
languishing. Let us give them encouragement and support so that they can
reclaim their lost rights and freedom. The need to extend the frontiers of
human freedom is always a task that we must take on collectively as fellow
Africans.

On account of practising ubuntu, leaders such as Nyerere, Lumumba, Mandela,
Nkrumah and Machel, among others, strode over Africa like giants sowing
seeds of humanity. ’n Mens is ’n mens deur ander mense. [No man is an
island.]

For ubuntu to manifest in every walk of life, we need to see an activist
state with an agenda supporting citizen democracy. From this honourable
podium we say, muthu ndimuthu nghavhato. [No man is an island.] [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Prof C T MSIMANG: Hon House Chair, hon members, the 21st day of October,
Africa Human Rights Day, is an important date in the promotion and
protection of human rights in Africa.

On this particular day we remember the year 1986 when the African Charter
on Human and Peoples’ Rights came into effect. The charter is more than a
statement of rights; it is a signpost for what Africa aspires towards. It
entrenches the right to life, liberty, protection from slavery and
degrading punishment; the right to trial by impartial courts and freedom of
conscience; and the right to receive information; and the right to
participate freely in government business.

In our view as the IFP, the charter remains a leading document that
guarantees the virtues of ubuntu. The challenge is always to ensure that
the commitments on paper are matched in practice. The premise of this input
is that there are more debilitating challenges than success stories. Africa
remains poverty-stricken and beset with disease in spite of the hot air
coming from African leaders in the G8 promising poverty reduction.

Millions of Africans live as refugees or internally displaced persons,
often without the bare necessities of life and without hope. It’s
impossible to accurately quantify routine patterns of abuse. All this
happens despite African Union member states having ratified the charter.

The recent tragic outbreak of xenophobic killings on our own soil and the
continued ill-treatment of African foreigners remain a mammoth challenge
for the South African government in this regard. Respect for human rights
goes deeper than free and fair elections. It is directly linked to the
question of good governance.

A human rights culture cannot flourish on a continent that is beleaguered
by improper governance, corruption and lack of service delivery. More
importantly, if Africa is to succeed, the attitude towards corruption has
to change - stripped from partisan politics - and presented to society not
only as a moral illness but as an infringement of the right to development
of the African people.

We therefore call on civil societies and activists across Africa, including
those who are raising their voices – whether in calls for a new
constitution for Zimbabwe, a firmer response to HIV and Aids, service
delivery in South Africa or the violation of human rights in Kenya – to
celebrate Africa Human Rights Day with honour and dignity. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Chairperson, Africa Human Rights Day is an opportunity to
take stock of the progress we have made since the adoption of the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights in 1986. If we are honest with
ourselves today in terms of the charter's guarantees of civil, political
and socioeconomic rights, we must be sufficiently bold to admit that we
have not done enough for the people of our continent.

But the ID believes that today we must also reflect on the poor treatment
meted out in public to some of our continent's greatest sons and daughters
by international bodies like the International Association of Athletics
Federations, the IAAF. The ID would like to reiterate that until we stand
united against racism, fellow Africans like Caster Semenya will continue to
have their rights violated. I thank you.

Ms H H MALGAS: House Chairperson, hon Ministers – I see two of them are
still here – Deputy Ministers present, hon members, I greet you. I am
humbled but at the same time it gives me great pleasure to participate in
this important debate today as we celebrate Africa Human Rights Day, which
was a recommendation by the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
in April 1986. The Chief Whip of our party, the ANC, spoke ably about the
historical background.

But I must indicate that as far back as 1943, the ANC played a leading role
in the development of the African Charter and the drawing up of a bill of
rights for the African continent which promoted democracy; development;
respect for human rights; fundamental freedoms, including the rights of
women and children; and the elimination of conflicts which have a negative
effect on both sexes, particularly women.

In South Africa, being an integral part of Africa, it is like the saying
goes: “Charity begins at home.” We at the southern tip celebrate Human
Rights Day on 21 March annually. To reflect on that day, which has a long
history of apartheid, is of critical importance to all South Africans. That
day is associated with atrocities; massacres; oppression; and the banning
of the liberation movements, including the ANC and the consequent
devastation of the lives of all South Africans.

Women’s rights are human rights. Black women in South Africa, regardless of
their status in life, experienced triple oppression. They faced oppression
not only because of their race, but also because of their gender. Women
received lower wages than their male counterparts and they were always the
first to be retrenched. As opposed to men who played a productive role,
heading households and determining the status of women, the traditional
role of women was that of being a reproductive being, rearing children and
working in the homestead.

With the dawn of the new democracy in 1994, the interim Constitution of
South Africa made the discriminatory roles and some of the legacies of
patriarchy a thing of the past. A legal framework was put into place. The
Bill of Rights of South Africa’s Constitution to me is but an extension of
the Freedom Charter which was adopted at the true congress of the people on
26 June 1955. The Bill of Rights is in line with the objectives as spelt
out in the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights.

The African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights was adopted on 27 June
1981 by member states of the Organisation of African Unity. It is in line
with the ANC’s quest for a better Africa and a better world, namely, that
there shall be peace and friendship.

Looking at postcolonial Africa, it has always been subjected to
dictatorships, armed conflict, ethnic wars and genocide resulting in the
displacement of our people. Wars and armed conflict in Africa continue to
make women vulnerable to rape and violence, HIV and Aids, starvation and
slavery. Furthermore, because of cultural practices like Sharia law, women
are sometimes perceived to bring dishonour to their families and can be
murdered. This happens in spite of the fact that there is a protocol in
place on the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights.

This protocol recognises socioeconomic and cultural rights for both men and
women since it speaks to peoples’ rights. This includes the right to
freedom from discrimination, equality of persons, freedom from slavery, the
right to a fair trial and freedom of religion. However, these rights are
considered by learned scholars to be inadequate since, among other things,
the right to privacy and the right to freedom from forced labour are not
explicitly recognised. This protocol was adopted in 2003 and enforced in
2005. It is in line with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, Cedaw.

The SADC Protocol on Gender and Development of 2007 is a ground-breaking
instrument of member states to elevate the Declaration on Gender and
Development as legally binding on member states. Activists both in our
country and in the region hail this protocol as an important step towards
the full empowerment of women.

Timelines attached to its goals include gender equality and equity in all
national institutions; the repeal of discriminatory laws; and 50% female
representation in political and decision-making bodies by 2015.

Although gender-based violence is identified in the protocol, it does not
address marital rape which is a common feature of domestic violence. I
think it will be important for all members to read these protocols, know
and understand them.

I would like to recount something that happened not so long ago. The Sharia
law in Nigeria sentenced a woman to death by stoning for having sex out of
wedlock. There was a loud outcry from the outside world because Sharia law
codified unjust and unequal treatment for men and women in such cases.

The ANC Women’s League ran a campaign to withdraw the death sentence and
appealed for the acquittal of Amina Lawal of any wrongdoing. The campaign
was successful and she was acquitted, thanks to the contribution of the ANC
Women’s League which was proactive with the human rights activists that
regarded the punishment not only as barbaric but severely discriminatory
against women.

Similarly, I wish to remind the House about the execution of a South
African citizen in Botswana by hanging a couple of years ago. Clearly these
executions are contrary to the spirit of Africa Human Rights Day, the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, and the Constitution of South
Africa and cannot be condoned. We commend the ANC Women’s League for being
so proactive on issues regarding human rights in Africa. But as the ANC
government we have our own role to play with regard to Chapter 9
institutions as enshrined in our Constitution.

Let me conclude by saying that as the Portfolio Committee on Women,
Children and People with Disabilities we were privy to an input that would
advance the struggle of women on the African continent in particular, and
the global village in general, to deepen human rights and to entrench
democracy. Both the Commission on Gender Equality and the SA Human Rights
Commission have shortcomings in relation to their constitutional mandates,
and as Parliament we should engage them. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, when one looks at the human rights record on
the African continent in general, one has to look down with shame because
it is appalling. There is sufficient evidence to prove that most African
leaders pay lip service to human rights and that they are allowed to get
away with it.

The African Union and SADC have failed our people, particularly the people
of Zimbabwe, by protecting and defending dictators such as President Mugabe
and President al-Bashir, rather than demanding that they respect the rule
of law, justice, democracy and human rights in their countries.

As Zimbabwe is on the verge of sliding back into chaos, the ACDP urges SADC
leaders to show some political muscle and will by calling for an urgent
regional summit to help save the fragile Zimbabwean coalition. We agree
with leading political analyst and University of Zimbabwe lecturer Eldred
Masunungure who said: “... if SADC has any conscience still left, it should
move swiftly to salvage what is left of the unity government.”

We call on African leaders to stop paying lip service to human rights and
start setting a good example for their people to follow. Thank you.

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Hon Chair, we should acknowledge the fact that powerful
countries in the past have been known to violate the human rights of
citizens of poorer countries. We, in South Africa, should not fall into
that moral dilemma through greed, war and a lack of value for other
people’s human rights.

There is a long way to go before we can have a just society because of the
unfair application of human rights. The rights of some people should not
impinge on those of others. We should be tolerant of one another.

The youth must be aware of human rights, but should not take advantage of
them by losing respect, dignity and discipline. They should bear in mind
that their rights as human beings have no colour or creed and are
nonpolitical, and that they should not be used as a political platform.

We may quote dates, times, reasons when it comes to human rights, but it is
meaningless if we do not check our own internal individual values for the
rights of our fellow human beings. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S MOKGALAPA: House Chairperson, the role of the state in the protection
of human rights is to foster the rule of law and provide security for its
citizens; maintain an independent judiciary; adopt stable economic policy;
hold regular, free and fair elections; invest in social service
infrastructure; protect the environment; and most importantly, protect
human rights. These are the fundamental roles of a functional democratic
state in ensuring that civil liberties are observed and promoted.

The Vienna Declaration stipulates that all human rights are universal,
interdependent and interrelated. It also reaffirms the important and
constructive role played by national human rights institutions.

The World Conference on Human Rights recommended that each state consider
the desirability of drawing up a national action plan, identifying steps in
terms of which that state would improve the promotion and protection of
human rights. The state should, furthermore, strengthen and support the
work done by human rights institutions by providing public education and
training in human rights, by offering technical assistance programmes and
by drafting legislation in conformity with international standards. These
institutions should be independent and effective so that they can hold the
state to account on human rights issues.

The declaration of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights in 1981
led to a new way of thinking as this charter was laid down by Africans
themselves recognising their traditions and cultures. There is no excuse
not to follow the charter as it was crafted by Africans.

This African treaty emphasised the need for equality before the law; the
inviolability of the human being; freedom for all from exploitation and
degradation, especially torture and inhumane punishment; and freedom from
arbitrary arrest or detention – things that are happening in some African
countries as we speak. For lasting political stability on the continent of
Africa, measures are needed to strengthen the protection of individual
rights.

According to the report of the International Commission on Intervention and
State Sovereignty, the basic principle of the responsibility to protect is
grounded in the assumption that state sovereignty implies primary
responsibility for the protection of people’s lives within a state itself.
Where a state fails to protect its citizens, then the people and the
principle of international interference is valid.

In Guinea, for example, the military government is brutalising human rights
groups. Zimbabwe is a classic example. The Gambian president has now also
declared war on the human rights commission. In the Democratic Republic of
Congo, rape is being used to instil fear.

The International Criminal Court has issued an arrest warrant for the
president of Sudan, principally for the violation of human rights. The list
goes on and on in Africa, with daily violations of the human rights this
charter was supposed to prevent. Regional bodies should be more active in
protecting citizens and intervene where necessary.

Africa should grow to realise the importance of human rights bodies and not
just demonise and sabotage them. As we celebrate Africa Human Rights Day,
we should embrace these bodies because Africa needs strong institutions.
These bodies should ensure harmonisation between domestic legislation and
international treaties, encourage the involvement of various sectors of
society in the formulation, implementation and review of relevant policies
and contribute to reports submitted to regional, international and
intergovernmental bodies. It is their duty to be visible and raise public
awareness in so far as human rights violations occur.

As we observe Africa Human Rights Day, we want to be able to say today that
we are really proud of Africa, but we are not. We need to start by
popularising this charter and reverting to the noble principles that formed
the cornerstone of this document, for there is interdependence between
peace, development, respect for and observance of the rule of law and human
rights and a state’s function to ensure that each and every citizen enjoys
civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights.

The charter of the Gaborone Declaration on democracy, elections and
governance also highlighted the fact that democracy in Africa is threatened
by a lack of respect for human rights, intolerance, unconstitutional
changes of government, the re-emergence of one-man rule and the deployment
of unconstitutional means to stay in power.

What is a cause for concern is that this charter has only been ratified by
two African countries. South Africa has not ratified this charter. And the
question is: Why has South Africa not ratified the charter on democracy,
elections and governance?

Democracies must express solidarity with democratic governments and
nonstate actors that work for democracy and human rights and must extend
solidarity to those who are victims of human rights violations at the hands
of undemocratic regimes. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Adv T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, colleagues and comrades, it is special
occasions such as this one that afford us an opportunity to pause and
reflect on the long road we have traversed as a nation –  reflect on where
we are and the road ahead.

It is especially those amongst us who are most vulnerable – women,
particularly girl-children and children in general, the disabled, the
elderly, people affected and infected by HIV and Aids – on whom we should
focus, owing to the particular and peculiar circumstances that confront
them, the challenges that they have to overcome and the need for us as a
people to ensure that human rights give meaning to their everyday lives.
The ANC has been, and continues to be, committed to the principles and
values of human rights. Way back in 1955, in Kliptown, we led our people in
the adoption of the Freedom Charter. Even today the principles enshrined in
the Freedom Charter are still valid and, in fact, many of them can still be
found in the founding principles of our Constitution.

In nearly a century of leading the struggle against oppression, the ANC
challenged apartheid laws such as the Group Areas Act, which limited where
a person could live, and many other similar laws that restricted people’s
ability to live their lives to their fullest potential. Our people were
restricted from accessing equal and quality education because of race. They
were even limited in whom they could marry or fall in love with. That’s how
absurd the apartheid regime or system was in seeking to take social,
political and economic engineering to the very extreme.

Today we enjoy liberty. Many amongst our people are now experiencing a
better quality of life. But it is important not to forget those amongst us
for whom the African sun has not yet shone. The challenge is upon all of us
to ensure that in everything we do, we do not lose sight of the primary
goal, which is the vision that we should be sharing irrespective of
political affiliation or bias - and that is to ensure that all amongst our
people eventually get to enjoy a better life.

As the ANC, in our manifesto with regard to this year’s elections, we
particularly emphasised three key priorities, namely, promoting access to
education and health care; protecting our people from crime, especially
violent crime; placing particular emphasis on rural communities and
ensuring that economic prosperity reaches them as well. All of this was
because we were inspired by our unwavering commitment to ensuring that our
people enjoy the same rights and the same quality of life irrespective of
where they live, irrespective of the colour of their skin or their gender.

We still have a long road ahead. It is important to recall the words of
some of our forebears like O R Tambo who reminded us that a nation that
does not give particular attention to its children has no future. That is
where I would want to suggest we focus as a point of departure: The quality
of life of our children – ensuring that their survival is promoted, that
their nutritional needs are taken care of, that they have access to
education, that they have access to health care and that their general
wellbeing is improved.

We have to ensure that in all our endeavours we promote a culture of
tolerance amongst our people, recognising cultural and social differences
and not allowing them to be the basis of division but rather the basis for
promoting what we call a rainbow nation. We need to celebrate our diversity
rather than see it as a weakness.

The challenges in our country remain, amongst other things, domestic
violence in which women and those that are considered weak are subjected to
unfair and unjust humiliation through violence, whether psychological,
physical or otherwise.

As we approach our commitment to the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence
Against Women and Children campaign, we must take all the necessary steps,
both in government and civil society, to mobilise our resources and our
energies to ensure that, especially in this period, women and children live
lives that are free from violence.

Our society is particularly endowed with resources of different kinds, but
it is especially our cultural heritage of ubuntu that should guide us and
that should give us strength in addressing issues of equality and equity
and ensuring that all of us have access to all that we most treasure,
namely, economic prosperity, social equality and a better life in general.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:10.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
        for  consideration:
        a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for The Presidency for 2008-09.

     2) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Higher Education and Training for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
           Financial Aid Scheme for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.

     3) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:

        a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Evaluation
           of the Implementation of the Batho Pele Principle of Courtesy
           [RP 41-2009].
        b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Evaluation
           of the Implementation of the Batho Pele Principle of Information
           [RP 64-2009].

     4) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
           Communications Authority of South Africa for 2008-09, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 219-2009].

     5) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:

         a) Report of the Registrar of Pension Funds for 2006-07 [RP 244-
            2007].


 2. Letter from President

     1) A letter dated 19 October 2009 has been received from the President
        of the Republic, informing Parliament that –


        a) the following persons have been appointed to the Independent
           Commission for the Remuneration of Political Office-Bearers in
           terms of section 3 of the Independent Commission for the
           Remuneration of Public Office-Bearers Act (Act No 92 of 1997):
           Mr Justice Willie Seriti (Chairperson), Ms Tshidi Mokgabudi
           (Deputy Chairperson), Dr Mark Herbert Raymond Bussin, Dr
           Mpilenhle Pearl Sithole, Ms Philisiwe Buthelezi and Mr Blake
           Keith Mosley-Lefatola;


        b) the new commissioners join two commissioners who are currently
           serving a five-year term: Ms Nicky Newton-King (appointed on 10
           March 2006) and Mr Raphael Martin (appointed on 24 November
           2005); and

        c) Mr Justice Phineas Mojapelo declined the offer of appointment to
           this position on 6 August 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly

 1. The Speaker

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 19 October 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing Members of the Assembly of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for a service in
        fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the Government of the Republic of Mozambique
        in support of the national elections on Mozambique:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR SERVICE
        IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF
        SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE GOVERNMENT OF MOZAMBIQUE IN SUPPORT OF THE
        NATIONAL ELECTIONS IN MOZAMBIQUE


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have employed
        the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) personnel, for
        service in fulfilment of the international obligations of the
        Republic of South Africa towards the Government of the Republic of
        Mozambique, in support of the national elections in Mozambique.
        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        40 Members of the SANDF will be employed from 21 October 2009 until
        05 November 2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof
        to the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards

        signed
        J G ZUMA


