---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 October 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-10-13
---

TUESDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

             WELCOMING OF DELEGATION FROM ROYAL BAFOKENG KINGDOM

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish to acknowledge the presence of
Kgosana Joseph Rapetsana Ganwane Makgosi Tumagole in the gallery and the
delegation from the Royal Bafokeng Kingdom. We welcome you to our
Parliament. [Applause.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G R MORGAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the potential vulnerabilities of South Africa to
   climate change and the steps that various government departments need to
   take to ensure adaptation to climate change.

I thank you.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:

   That the House–

     1) debates the crisis facing school sport; and


     2) should apply its mind in engaging on this crucial aspect.

I thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House–

     1) notes and debates that 16 November 2010 marks a momentous milestone
        for the Indian people of this country as it would be the 150th
        commemoration of the first arrival of Indians to South African
        shores in 1860;
     2) expresses gratitude to the community for their enormous contribution
        to the social and economic development of South Africa;

     3) further notes that South Africa has 11 official languages, but that
        Eastern languages are also widely spoken by communities which
        consist of approximately 1,5 million South Africans, and recognises
        that the Tamil community is the biggest linguistic group numbering
        over 780 000 of the present total of the South African Indian
        population;

     4) urges the Department of Arts and Culture to take note of the United
        Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, Unesco’s,
        report that 6 000 languages around the world face extinction;

     5) implores the South African government to recognise Tamil and other
        Eastern languages as official languages in South Africa; and

     6) exalts the Department of Arts and Culture to encourage support and
        celebrate South Africa’s rich Indian culture and heritage during
        2010.

I thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I am still on notices of motion, not motions
without notice.

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the devastating multilayered effect the high
   prevalence of and mortality rate related to breast cancer has in order to
   come up with possible solutions to enhance awareness campaigns and early
   detection strategies surrounding this insidious disease that affects one
   in 29 women in South Africa.

Thank you.

Mr M WATERS: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the 2008 Antenatal Clinic Survey.

Ms D A SCHÄFER: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the 16 Days of Activism campaign against gender-
   based violence and child abuse, to run from 25 November to 10 December,
   and come up with approaches to ensure the biggest possible positive
   impact resulting from this campaign.
Mr L SUKA: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the funding of sport in South Africa, with
   specific reference to the role of the National Lottery.

Thank you.

                   PRESIDENT OBAMA WINS NOBEL PEACE PRIZE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:
   That the House –


     1) notes that on Friday, 9 October 2009, US President Barack Obama was
        awarded the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize;


     2) further notes that President Obama, whose nomination was received
        only two weeks after he took office, was chosen from amongst a
        record 205 nominations for this prize and became only the third
        incumbent US President and the fourth US head of state to win this
        prestigious prize;


     3) recognises that President Obama received the Nobel Peace Prize for
        his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and
        co-operation between peoples, including his ongoing efforts to
        reach out to the Muslim world and his attempts to curb the
        proliferation of nuclear weapons;


     4) further recognises that Alfred Nobel stipulated in his will that
        the Nobel Peace Prize should only be awarded to a person who has
        done the most or the best work for fraternity between nations and
        the abolition or reduction of standing armies and the formation and
        spreading of peace congresses;


     5) acknowledges that President Obama’s vision of, and dedicated work
        towards, a world without nuclear weapons is an honourable
        undertaking that we should all value and be committed to; and


     6) congratulates President Obama on this rare and exceptional
        achievement.

Agreed to.

                     ROYAL BAFOKENG VISIT TO PARLIAMENT


                             (Draft Resolution)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, I
move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes the presence of the delegation of the Royal Bafokeng Kingdom
         in our midst as part of a two-day visit to Parliament;


      2) further notes that the Royal Bafokeng Administration manages
         service delivery and economic development in the community and the
         purpose of this week’s visit is to explore best practice models on
         institutional governance that can enhance service delivery, as well
         as to familiarise themselves with parliamentary processes;

      3) acknowledges the Royal Bafokeng’s contribution towards restoring
         the dignity of the institution of traditional leadership in our
         country, enhancing its respectability and positioning it to play a
         meaningful role in economic development in the rural areas; and

      4) wishes the Royal Bafokeng Administration a successful visit.

Agreed to.
                 HINDUS AROUND THE WORLD CELEBRATING DIWALI

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that on 17 October Hindus worldwide will be celebrating one of
        the biggest events on the Hindu calendar, Diwali, the festival of
        lights;


     2) further notes that Diwali marks the beginning of the Hindu New Year
        and is celebrated to promote and cherish peace, harmony and the
        triumph of light over darkness;


     3) recognises that the festival of Diwali symbolises the reaffirmation
        of hope, calls for a renewed commitment to friendship and goodwill,
        and is a celebration of all the myriad joys of life;


      4) wishes all Hindus a happy and prosperous new year; and


     5) extends its best wishes to this important community in our society
        over this auspicious period.

Agreed to.

                    COUNTRIES OBSERVE WORLD TEACHERS’ DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that on 5 October 2009 South Africa joined other countries
        around the world to observe World Teachers’ Day, honouring the role
        and importance of teachers in our society;

     2) acknowledges the critical role teachers play in the development of
        our society through the inculcation in our children of the values
        enshrined in our Constitution, and in particular ubuntu/Batho values
        and principles;

     3) recognises the key role of the Department of Education and
        provincial education departments in improving the professional
        development of our educators and restoring the dignity of teaching
        as a profession;

     4) welcomes the latest initiative by the Department of Education to
        implement a new initiative from 2010 that will reduce the many
        administrative burdens on teachers, allowing them to devote more
        time to teaching as further proof of its commitment to enhance the
        professional status of our educators;

     5) further welcomes the initiatives of our President to meet with
        school principals as an act of decisive leadership shown by a leader
        who genuinely cares about the future of our children, who are our
        future; and

     6) declares our support to the thousands of educators in our public and
        private schools who continue to carry out their duties with dignity
        and commitment, despite the difficult circumstances under which many
        of them work.

Agreed to.

                        CELEBRATING WORLD HABITAT DAY


                             (Draft Resolution)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that on Monday, 5 October 2009, countries across the world
         including South Africa observed World Habitat Day under the theme
         “Planning our Urban Future”;

      2) further notes that the purpose of this annual celebration is to
         reflect on the state of towns and cities and their capacity to
         meet their citizen’s social, economic, spiritual and moral needs;

      3) acknowledges the Habitat Scroll of Honour Award bestowed by the
         United Nations agency for human settlements on Gauteng for their
         outstanding efforts in upgrading housing, social and physical
         infrastructure for the people of Alexandra through the Alexandra
         Renewal Project;

      4) further acknowledges that the Habitat Scroll of Honour Award is
         the most prestigious human settlements award in the world and its
         aim is to acknowledge initiatives which have made outstanding
         contributions in areas such as shelter provision, highlighting the
         plight of the homeless and developing and improving the human
         settlements and the quality of urban life; and

      5) commends the Gauteng Department of Local Government and Human
         Settlements on their achievement.

Agreed to.

                          GLOBAL EDUCATION CAMPAIGN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N GINA (ANC): Speaker, the ANC-led government believes that everyone has
a right to basic education, including adult education. Hence, on Tuesday, 6
October 2009, President Jacob Zuma, on behalf of South Africa, joined world
leaders in supporting the global campaign contributing to the promotion of
education for all children.

President Zuma said that it was sad that the fundamental right to education
was still denied to millions of children. The number one goal, Education
for All, is a campaign meant to ensure that 75 million children not in
schools across the globe, half of whom live in Africa, get access to
classrooms, teachers and proper education.

The campaign is also aimed at ensuring that the 2010 Fifa World Cup leaves
a lasting legacy in education. Heads of state agreed to spending the
following year working towards a breakthrough in global education, funding
and making education a legacy of the 2010 Fifa World Cup in Africa and poor
regions around the world.

The ANC-led government remains committed to insuring that every child
receives proper education, which is one of the five key priorities of the
ANC-led government for the next five-year period.

Thank you.

                  MINISTERIAL DISCRETION IN MINING INDUSTRY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H C SCHMIDT (DA): Speaker, South Africa should, in the interests of its
mining sector, remove excessive ministerial discretion from its mining
laws. Owing to South Africa’s laws, the country is internationally
perceived as an uncertain investment destination.

The international Fraser Institute’s research survey has ranked South
Africa 49th out of 79 mining jurisdictions on its policy potential index,
down from position 27 in 2002. The only African countries that ranked lower
than South Africa were the Democratic Republic of Congo, DRC, in 63rd place
and Zimbabwe in 65th place.

From an African perspective, Botswana and Ghana have removed all
ministerial discretion in that if licence requirements are met the licence
is awarded without the application of further discretion. In Nigeria the
mining industry has access to a mining cadastre to ensure a more open and
transparent process.

As stated by a member of the International Bar Association at a recent
mining indaba held in Madrid, the opportunity lost to South Africa was
huge, causing countries less important from a mining perspective to develop
their mining sector at a faster rate than South Africa.

While current mining legislations concerned have opened up South Africa’s
mining sector and promoted Black Economic Empowerment, BEE, the wide
administrative discretion as well as uncertainty in a related framework
discouraged investment, which resulted in BEE opportunities being lost.
Black economic empowerment has benefited only a small group of elite,
displaying aspects of crony capitalism.

We need to address urgently the legal requirements giving rise to this
perception. I thank you. [Applause.]

   CONDUCT OF MINISTER OF CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Speaker, this House has a right to know if:
  The hon Minister of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs had
  deliberately misled the South African people by announcing that
  arrangements had been made with the Independent Electoral Commission for
  them, the residents of Moutse, to vote in a referendum.

This is exactly how the South African Broadcasting Corporation, SABC,
reported the hon Minister in its news broadcast on 28 September 2009. The
report went on to say that according to the hon Minister the voters’ roll
from the April elections would be used.

Cope asked if the hon Minister deliberately lied to the people of South
Africa. Two days later, on 30 September 2009, the hon Minister was once
again quoted on SABC making a very baffling statement that the process is
not a referendum, and that the people’s choice would have an impact on the
Cabinet’s decision.

It is inconceivable that the Independent Electoral Commission could have
conducted anything other than a proper referendum. For some reason, the IEC
was prevented from announcing the results. There is prima facie evidence
that the hon Minister knowingly misled the country.

Under the circumstances, he should do the honourable thing and resign.
Failure on his part to do so will require the President to fire him from
his post if the President really supports good governance. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: There will of course be an opportunity for ministerial
responses.

                      GENDER TESTING ON CASTER SEMENYA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M KOMPHELA (ANC): Speaker, the ANC rejects, with contempt, the latest
move by the ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members on my right, can you please reduce the volume, or
better still, turn it off.

Mr B M KOMPHELA (ANC): ... International Association of Athletics
Federations, IAAF, to formulate a definition of a female. This is the
latest attempt in sustaining the degrading and humiliating treatment the
world’s women 800m champion, Caster Semenya, has been subjected to.

The IAAF is on record as saying that nowhere in the world of sport does
such a definition exist. In fact, international sports federations for
cricket, rugby, tennis and soccer do not define their athletes along these
lines. Furthermore, the IAAF stated that the formulation of such a
definition would take more than a year to finalise.

The question is, where does this leave Caster Semenya, after a cloud of
suspicion has been placed on her by the IAAF? The ANC, therefore, calls on
the IAAF to extend an unconditional apology to the people of South Africa,
the government, and Caster Semenya for their despicable treatment and
handling of this matter.

If the IAAF fails to do so, then we are not going to welcome this matter on
the agenda any longer. Furthermore, the IAAF must withdraw, with immediate
effect, any attempt to release the so-called results for gender testing.
[Time expired.]

              READINESS TO AVERT TERRORIST ATTACKS ON HOME SOIL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Speaker, the IFP finds these comments by Hussein
Solomon alarming, not only because of the National Intelligence Agency,
NIA, still spying on the so-called “enemies” - political parties not
aligned with the ruling party and journalists uncovering ruling party
secrets - but because there has been evidence of a real, credible terrorist
threat, which is suspected to have led to the closure of the United States
of America’s government facilities last month and this morning.
What is even more perturbing is that the International Criminal Police
Organisation, Interpol, has allegedly warned the SA Intelligence Service
about the potential threat, but it seems that the South African government
is not taking any advice or the threat seriously.

While we have received reassurance from the SAPS that the 2010 Fifa World
Cup will be a success from a security perspective, the IFP believes that
government owes the public answers as to why an Interpol warning of a
possible terrorist threat has seemingly been ignored.

Furthermore, we need the assurance that the NIA and the newly established
SA Secret Service, Sass, have the capacity and expertise to deal with a
potential terrorist threat. The IFP will also approach the Joint Standing
Committee on Intelligence to request an urgent briefing by the new Director-
General of NIA, Lizo Gibson Njenje, as well as the leader of the SA Secret
Service, Mo Shaik, on South Africa’s readiness to avert a potential
terrorist attack on home soil. Thank you. Somlomo[Chairperson.].

                TENDER PROCESS FOR “WHO AM I” ONLINE PROJECT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J J MCGLUWA (ID): Speaker, the Independent Democrats calls upon Home
Affairs Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma to release the forensic audit
report on the tender process for the R2,5 billion “Who am I” online
project. The cost of the project, which was awarded to a consortium headed
by GijimaAst in October 2007, has since jumped from R1,9 billion to R2,5
billion. The Auditor-General’s report to the Portfolio Committee on Home
Affairs last year proves there was a high possibility that there were
irregularities in the allocation of the tender.

One year later we have still not heard anything about the outcome of the
forensic audit, and I find it very difficult to believe that it could take
more than one year to uncover the truth. The Smart Card tender is yet
another clinical example of this. The “Who am I” online project has the
potential to make the department’s process faster and reduce corruption.
The longer the Minister and the department remain silent, the more obvious
it becomes that there is a cover up. I thank you.

                          NEW OIL REFINERY IN COEGA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M PILLAY (ANC): Speaker, as a mass-based organisation that is rooted
among its people, reaching into every corner of this land, the African
National Congress has the capacity and the capability to bring all
stakeholders together to make them work together to make change happen
faster.

This ANC-led government welcomes the signing, on Tuesday, 6 October 2009,
of the memorandum of understanding between Coega Development Corporation
and PetroSA. This memorandum of understanding will lead to the development
of a new oil refinery in the deep water port of Coega, and it will be a
stimulus and a catalyst for future change and future development in the
Eastern Cape.

This refinery will inject not millions but billions of rands, and it will
create 27 500 jobs during the construction phase and 18 500 permanent jobs,
direct and indirect, and induced jobs during its operational phase. The
planned refinery will be a major economic boost to the Eastern Cape. It
will help with diversification in an economy that is totally dependent on
the motor industry.

It will result in the reskilling of our people, the upskilling of our
artisans and a huge economic boost for the area. This further justifies the
establishment of the Coega port. Many sceptics were worried that the
investment might become a white elephant.

The ANC-led government commends PetroSA and the Coega Development
Corporation for the signing of this memorandum of understanding and hope
that they will work speedily through conditions towards the establishment
of this port, including the environmental assessment. Thank you.
[Applause.]

              RECKLESS SHOOTING BY POLICE AT UNARMED CIVILIANS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, the ACDP regrets the unnecessary loss of lives
at the hands of the police. We want to express our condolences to the
Kekana family at the loss of their daughter, Olga, who was allegedly
mistakenly shot dead by the police. We also wish the other passengers who
were wounded a speedy recovery.

While the ACDP supports the right of the police to use fire power when
confronted by armed criminals and when their lives are in danger, we do not
support recklessness or a trigger-happy attitude. It is wrong for the
police to shoot to kill unarmed civilians who are not threatening them.
There is no excuse for firing 13 gunshots at people who are not shooting
back or resisting arrest.

We call on the Minister to investigate claims by the South African Air
Force pilot, Captain Simon Mathibela, that in spite of his attempts to wave
his military document to stop the attack the police allegedly continued
firing and that, after shooting them, the police stopped for a few seconds
and then left the occupants to die. We further call on the Minister to
ensure that the police are properly trained in target shooting so that they
will be able to hit tyres and not unarmed passengers. Thank you.

                       SERVICE DELIVERY IN STANDERTON

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Hon Speaker, the IFP is extremely concerned about
the recent shocking images of service delivery unrest that have erupted in
Standerton. Over the past years there have been many violent protests and
this trend seems to be growing. These acts of intense lawlessness by South
Africa’s poorest citizens are potentially very damaging to society and
could, for instance, be extremely embarrassing during 2010.

Residents in Standerton have alleged that they are frustrated by the
failure of the province to act on a forensic report showing fraud,
corruption and maladministration within the local council. We are therefore
asking all relevant authorities to listen carefully to the voices of the
poor, and accordingly address the legitimate concerns of the protesters.
This means fewer PowerPoint presentations and more community meetings. The
onus will always be on the government to prove that it has improved the
pace of service delivery and that it has involved the masses in the
decision-making that will affect their lives. I thank you.

                          PUBLIC TRANSPORT SERVICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P C NGWENYA-MABILA (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC-led government believes
in forming partnerships with relevant stakeholders in order to promote safe
and affordable public transport as a social service.

On Wednesday, 30 September 2009, emerging taxi operators received a major
breakthrough when banking group Absa and the Industrial Development
Corporation, IDC, announced a R300 million deal to boost the industry. Absa
has undertaken to provide money to fund emerging taxi operators and black
entrepreneurs wishing to enter this highly competitive industry. The
arrangement will also allow taxi operators to scrap their old taxis in
favour of legal and compliant minibus taxis.

The ANC supports this initiative and sees it as part and parcel of
accelerating the implementation of the Taxi Recapitalisation Project, which
is about the improvement of the quality, safety and sustainability of this
crucial component of public transport. I thank you. [Applause.]

                          AGRI SA’S ANNUAL CONGRESS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr P J C PRETORIUS (DA): Mr Speaker, Agri SA held its annual congress in
Johannesburg last week. Agriculture is a huge industry in South Africa
contributing 3% to South Africa’s gross domestic product, GDP. It is
estimated that up to 8,5 million people are directly or indirectly
dependent on agriculture for employment and income.

A central theme that ran through discussions was the absolute commitment of
the commercial farming community to provide sufficient food for our people.
In order to do that, farmers need the support of government in many
respects. Various constraints to realising the goal of food security were,
however, highlighted. Uncertainty with regard to tenure as a result of
chaotic land redistribution, land claims, problems with water licensing,
high input costs, cheap imports and stock theft were, inter alia,
highlighted.

Die een kritieke en onverskoonbare belemmering vir boere en plaasbewoners
is die aanvalle en moorde op ons plase. Dis haas onmoontlik om betroubare
regeringstatistieke in die hande te kry, maar volgens Agri SA se eie
statistieke is daar elke maand minstens 60 plaasaanvalle en sterf minstens
10 mense in daardie aanvalle. Dit gebeur op die wreedaardigste maniere
denkbaar. Die DA wil die regering van ons volle samewerking verseker in
enige sinvolle poging om landelike veiligheid te verbeter.

Ter afsluiting wil ek sê dat die kongres groot waardering gehad het vir die
bydrae en gesindheid van agb minister Joemat-Pettersson, en dat kommersiële
landbou vir ’n slag opgewonde is oor opbouende samewerking met die
regering. Die DA bedank haar vir daardie gesindheid en wil haar verseker
dat sy op ons ondersteuning kan staatmaak as sy voortgaan om landbou
pragmaties te bestuur, eerder as ideologies polities, soos die geval
voorheen was en wat die bedryf groot skade berokken het. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The one crucial and inexcusable obstacle for farmers and farm dwellers is
the attacks and murders on our farms. It is practically impossible to
acquire reliable government statistics, but according to the statistics of
Agri SA there are at least 60 farm attacks per month and during these
attacks at least 10 people are killed. It occurs in the most brutal manner
imaginable. The DA wants to assure the government of our full support in
any meaningful attempt to improve rural safety.

In conclusion I want to say that the congress had great appreciation for
the contribution and disposition of the hon Minister Joemat-Petterson, and
that this time commercial farming is excited about constructive cooperation
with the government. The DA thanks her for that disposition and wants to
assure her that she can depend on our support if she continues to manage
agriculture pragmatically, rather than in terms of political ideology, as
was done in the past and which caused great harm to the industry. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

                      CALL FOR POLICE TO SHOOT TO KILL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Hon Speaker, the shoot-to-kill encouragement to
police, began by hon Susan Shabangu during her stint as the Deputy Minister
of Safety and Security, has claimed its first innocent victim. The Minister
of Police and the hon President must also fully share the blame as they
have repeated this irresponsible call for police to shoot to kill.

A woman was killed and two others were wounded in Mabopane on Sunday when
members of the flying squad shot at a car which they alleged did not stop
when ordered to do so. The President and his Minsters are in this instance
usurping the right of Parliament to make laws. They are also actively
inciting the police to ignore section 49 of the Criminal Procedure Act and
to murder at their discretion.

Citizens harassed and tormented by criminals might understandably think
that government is on the right path here. This is not so. This is only
irresponsible chauvinism. It is always through small and seemingly
innocuous steps that the subversion of the Constitution begins. The ANC is
putting our country on a slippery slope to perdition. Cope most definitely
demands action against criminals, but only through legal means. The
executive cannot make its own laws. This will lead to a constitutional
crisis. We cannot afford that, and we must not allow it.

Finally, we wish to extend our heartfelt condolences to the next of kin of
the slain woman. This House must hold government accountable for
encouraging members of the police to act outside the Constitution and the
law. I thank you. [Applause.]

                      ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY TREATMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P TSHWETE (ANC): Speaker, the ANC-led government is confident that
through collective action we will be able to achieve the target we set to
reduce the rate of new HIV infections by 50% and expand access to
appropriate treatment, care and support to 80% of all HIV-positive people
by 2011. As such, a new international report released on Wednesday, 30
September 2009, by the World Health Organisation, the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and Aids has
indicated that South Africa’s HIV and Aids programmes are starting to show
major signs of advancement in the area of antiretroviral treatment.

The report said one of the most notable achievements was that the number of
patients undergoing antiretroviral therapy, ART, has almost doubled between
2007 and 2008. It is further noted that the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission, PMTCT, services were available to over 50% of those in need.

The ANC-led government is encouraged by recent progress made and will
continue to strengthen the nationwide partnership against HIV and Aids and
expand access to a comprehensive programme of treatment and care in public
health facilities. I thank you.

                        SHOOTING PRACTICE FOR POLICE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Speaker, a reply to a parliamentary question regarding
the lack of shooting practice received by police members stationed at
police stations throughout my constituency of Kempton Park, Edenvale, is
alarming. According to the Minister of Police, the minimum shooting
practice required for police members is once a year for low-risk category
members and at least two shooting practices per year for medium-risk
category members.

However, last year only 23% of all police members received firearm shooting
practice, and this year the figure is a dismal 25%. This means that only
one in four police members received the minimum required training. In April
2008, the then Deputy Minister of Police, Susan Shabangu, urged police
officers to shoot to kill, and the current National Police Commissioner has
echoed the same sentiments, yet the ANC government dismally fails to ensure
that police officers can actually shoot accurately. What hypocrites!

When 75% of the SAPS members are not undergoing firearm shooting practice
and are failing to meet the SAPS’ own minimum standards, we have trigger-
happy politicians encouraging police members to shoot to kill. These
politicians are not only paying lip service to the public’s emotions, but
are failing our citizens, especially our men and women in blue, whose lives
are being endangered as this ANC government places pressure on them to
shoot to kill, yet fails to ensure that our police officers are actually
trained to shoot. I thank you. [Applause.]

                                WATER INDABA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P M MATHEBE (ANC): Speaker, the ANC-led government is deeply concerned
about the impact of climate change on South Africa; more accurately, the
severe predictions on the reduction in rainfall and increase in droughts on
the western side of the country.

The government feels that this will exacerbate water scarcity and have
potentially devastating effects on agricultural production as well as on
the survival of the Cape’s floral kingdom and our country’s priceless
biodiversity.

Mpumalanga is already faced with vast water-related challenges such as
pollution and lack of access to water resources by certain communities. As
a result, last Tuesday, 6 October 2009, the Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs conducted a water indaba in Nelspruit with the
purpose of tackling the immediate and long-term water problems affecting
that province and to come up with a detailed action plan that would speed
up the process of service delivery in the province.

Another important purpose of that water indaba was to get a comprehensive
understanding of the challenges facing water supply and water management in
the country, so as to come up with an integrated approach towards service
delivery; hence the theme “Working together for water security and poverty
alleviation”.

The ANC-led government will continue to proactively build capacity and
develop a comprehensive strategy to adapt to the inevitable impacts of
climate change, including the roll out of basic services, infrastructure
planning, agricultural diversity and water resource management. I thank
you. [Applause.]

                          GLOBAL EDUCATION CAMPAIGN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Speaker, I just want to
respond to and agree with the statement made by the hon member about the
importance of education and the commitment of our President and government
to decent education for all.

Last week I was part of a government delegation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, Unesco, and in our main
message there we, amongst other things, called for the world to support our
One Goal campaign during the 2010 World Cup in support of education, we
also welcomed Unesco’s very important commitment to promoting education as
a public common good in which government must play a leading role, working
together with other important stakeholders.

I also wish to underline the statement made by the President at the United
Nations General Assembly that we must not use the current recession to
renege on our social commitments. To that effect, our own government has
committed itself that despite the challenges of the recession we want to
maintain our commitment to the resources that must be put into education
because, in our view, investment in education, as Unesco also says, is not
a deduction from development but, instead, a necessary condition for
building and developing a more just global economic order. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                          PUBLIC TRANSPORT SERVICES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Speaker, I would like to thank my
comrades from the ANC branches who reminded us that October is transport
month, and who then also dealt with the matter of the Absa R300 million
contribution to the taxi industry. You see, that ... no, no! Let me not go
there. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Continue, hon Deputy Minister. Hon members, please allow the
Deputy Minister to proceed with his reply.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: No, no! They can raise whatever issue
they like.

This government is committed to improving public transport. This is a big
challenge, and at the heart of it is indeed the transformation of the
minibus sector — transport for the majority of South Africans. Unlike many
of their constituents, the majority of our constituents depend on public
transport for some kind of mobility. [Interjections.] Less than 50% of
South African households have any access whatsoever to vehicles and private
cars. Therefore, we need to understand the importance of the month of
October and the importance of popularising public transport.

We are making significant progress — this is also important to mention.
What has happened in recent weeks? Many will remember that there were
threats against the Bus Rapid Transit, the Rea Vaya system in Johannesburg,
from the minibus sector. We have managed to launch that. The City of Cape
Town is also trying to launch the Bus Rapid Transit, BRT, and will depend
on our support as the ANC in order to succeed in that respect. They will
also depend on the ANC government in order to succeed in dealing with the
minibus sector, which is a very complicated sector.

Our approach is not to abolish the minibus sector. It is part and parcel of
going forward, but at the same time it has to transform. I think that is
the key message from the ANC government on the occasion of the October
public transport month. [Applause.]

                      CALL FOR POLICE TO SHOOT TO KILL

                        SHOOTING PRACTICE FOR POLICE

              RECKLESS SHOOTING BY POLICE AT UNARMED CIVILIANS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Speaker, firstly, I want to deal with the
instruction to shoot to kill. This buzz phrase has been quite attractive
and has been used by many people who have not sought to engage with regard
to the substance of it. The idea is not to shoot to kill recklessly, but to
shoot to kill armed and dangerous criminals in defence of the innocent.

Criminals have been merciless in killing innocent people and innocent
policemen. Last year, we lost 105 policemen and women in combat, in defence
of the innocent. In the Western Cape we have lost two unarmed community
policing forum, CPF, members. We have also lost a police captain, and
throughout all this we have not heard people shouting at the top of their
voices. All that we hear is that crime is politically convenient for some
people. We can only win the war against crime if we act in unity.

I agree with the member who said that the police need training and that
they need to sharpen their shooting skills. However, it’s not like you are
usurping the Constitution and running a banana republic. [Interjections.]

We are amending the law to protect the police and the innocent people of
South Africa by ensuring that we uphold our slogan “to serve and protect”
the innocent people of South Africa. No amount of petty politicking or
fabrication and distortion will derail us from the mission of winning the
war against crime. [Applause.] Crime knows no colour and no political
affiliation, and some people have used it for political reasons.

Lastly, in cases where people have been put in harm’s way and where there
have been allegations of police brutality, the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD, is there to carry out full investigations. That will
happen today and tomorrow and any other time when innocent people die in
the process of the police executing their mission. [Time expired.] Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

              RECKLESS SHOOTING BY POLICE AT UNARMED CIVILIANS

                        SHOOTING PRACTICE FOR POLICE

                      CALL FOR POLICE TO SHOOT TO KILL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Speaker, as a follow-up on what the Deputy Minister
of Safety and Security has said, I just hope the House has actually noticed
the difference between what was said by the two men who have spoken here.
The leader of the ACDP, Rev Meshoe, first and foremost was concerned and
worried about the lives that have been lost. He started off by expressing
condolences and making a constructive proposal about police training, as
the Deputy Minister has said. The hon member from Cope, “Editor” George ...
[Interjections.] ... in cold-blooded, unashamed opportunism started
attacking the President, accusing him of destroying the Constitution.
[Interjections.] At the end of his speech, he remembered that he was a
human being and finally threw in condolences, as an afterthought. So, his
aim was to attack the President.

Let me repeat the fact that the President clearly said that they must shoot
a thug who points a gun at the police. He never beat about the bush; he was
referring to a thug pointing a gun at the police. If one policeman got
careless, that does not justify what hon George said. He deliberately
forgot ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, please allow the speaker to be heard.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Yes, they cannot swallow the fact that they have
been exposed for what they are. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, continue.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Another policeman lost his life when he was shot
dead trying to shout to a thug to drop his gun. He said nothing about that.
We are interested in health. The Lancet report shows that we are going
through a pandemic of violence perpetrated by these thugs, which the system
can no longer tolerate. I want these people to be realistic. The President
was referring to a thug that is pointing a gun, because when you produce a
gun, your intention is to shoot. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                      GENDER TESTING ON CASTER SEMENYA

                            (Minister’s Response)


The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Hon Speaker, I want to comment on
the Semenya debacle that continues to haunt all of us as South Africans. I
just think that the time has come for all of us to actually take
responsibility for what happened to that young girl who was born a girl and
whose birth certificate indicates that she is a girl. All of us should
embrace and respect the fact that she is a girl.

I would like to call on all South Africans to provide all the support
required by this young lady. We should realise that Semenya has undergone a
very traumatic experience, one that none of us would wish on any of our
children. Therefore, the best we can do for Semenya, rather than continuing
with what is written in the media and the attacks against one another, is
to rally our forces and provide support to her.

The last matter applies to the sporting fraternity - all those who want to
determine the future of our people, and all structures, including the
sporting structure. We should continue to engage on these matters, so that
we can avoid a repetition of what happened to that young girl. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The House adjourned at 14:55.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                        WEDNESDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

   1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    Erratum: The following entry replaces entry (2) on page 604 of the ATC
    of 27 August 2009:

    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
       Finance for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
       on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Committee on
       Public Accounts:
       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Land Bank for 2008-09,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Group Financial
          Statements of the Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South
          Africa for 2008-09 and Performance Information [RP 143-2009].


   2. Membership of Committees

    The following list of replaces the list of portfolio, standing and
    joint committee membership published in the Announcements, Tablings and
    Committee Reports of 19 August 2009. The appointments to the Joint
    Standing Committee on Defence on 27 August 200, however, remain valid:

    a)      The following members have been appointed to the Committees
below:

        Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries


        ANC


        Johnson, Mr M (Chairperson)
        Twala, Ms NM (Whip)
        Phaliso, Mr NM
        Abram, Mr S
        Pilusa-Mosoane, Ms ME
        Mabuza, Ms MC
        Nyalungu, Ms RE
        Turok, Mr B


        DA
        Bosman, Mr LL
        Coetzee, Mr TW


        COPE


        Carter, Ms D
        Tolo, Mr L (Alt)


        IFP


        Cebekhulu, Mr RN
        Msimang, Prof CT (Alt)


        UCDP


        Ditshetelo, Ms IC


        UDM


        Gaehler, Mr LB


        Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture
        ANC


        Farisani, Dr TS    (Chairperson)
        Nxumalo, Ms MD (Whip)
        Maluleka, Mr HP
        Manganye, Ms J
        Lishivha, Ms TE
        Tshivhase, Mr JT
        Nyalungu, Ms ER
        Morutoa, Ms MR
        DA


        Bosman, Mr LL
        Coetzee, Mr TW


        COPE


        Carter, Ms D (Alt)
        Ntshiqela, Mr P


        IFP


        Cebekhulu, Mr RN
        Msimang, Prof CT (Alt)


        UDM
        Ntapane, Mr SZ


        Portfolio Committee on Basic Education


        ANC


        Chohan, Ms FI   (Chairperson)
        Kubayi, Mr MT (Whip)
        Gina, Ms N
        Mashishi, Ms AC
        Mataboge, Mr KD
        Madikizela-Mandela, Ms NW (Alt)
        Makhubele, Mr ZS
        Mkhulisi, Ms NNP (Alt)
        Mushwana, Ms FF
        Saal, Ms G


        DA


        Kloppers-Lourens, Dr JC
        Smiles, Mr DC


        COPE


        Adams, Ms L (Alt)
        Mda, Ms A


        IFP


        Mpontshane, Mr AM
        Msweli, Ms HS (Alt)


        ID


        Hoosen, Mr MH


        UDM


        Kganyago, Mr NM


        MF


        Bhoola, Mr RB (Alt)


        ACDP


        Dudley, Ms C (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Communications
        ANC


        Vadi, Mr I (Chairperson)
        Kholwane, Mr SE (Whip)
        De Lange, Mr J
        Mkhize, Mr LN
        Morutoa, Ms RM
        Magazi, Ms MN
        Newhoudt-Druchen, Ms WS
        Tsebe, Ms SR


        DA


        Van Der Berg, Mr NJ
        Mazibuko, Ms LD


        COPE


        Dexter, Mr PD (Alt)
        Kilian, Ms JD


        IFP


        Zondi, Mr KM
        Makhuba, Ms HN (Alt)
        ID


        De Lille, Ms P


        Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs


        ANC


        Tsenoli, Mr LS   (Chairperson)
        Nhlengethwa, Ms DG (Whip)
        Boshigo, Ms FD
        Matshoba, Mr JM
        Mandela, Nkosi ZMD
        Mavunda, Mr DW (Alt)
        Mdaka, Ms NM
        Segale-Diswai, Ms MJ


        DA


        Doman, Mr WP
        Wenger, Ms M


        COPE


        Botha, Mr T
        Dandala, Dr MH (Alt)


        IFP


        Smith, Mr PF
        Cebekhulu, Mr RN (Alt)
        Msimang, Prof CT (Alt)


        UDM
        Gaehler, Mr LB


        MF


        Bhoola, Mr RB


        ID


        McGluwa, Mr JJ (Alt)


        UCDP


        Ditshetelo, Ms IC (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services
        ANC
        Smith, Mr VG   (Chairperson)
        Ngwenya, Ms W (Whip)
        Abram, Mr S
        De Lange, Mr JH
        Madasa, Mr ZL
        Mdaka, Ms NM
        Molebatsi, Ms MA (Alt)
        Nyanda, Ms MF
        Phaliso, Ms MN
        Van Wyk, A (Alt)


        DA


        Selfe, Mr J
        Fritz, Mr AT


        COPE


        Blaai, Ms BC
        Masisha, Mr WH (Alt)


        IFP


        Van der Merwe, Mr JH
        Ndlovu, Mr VB (Alt)
        Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans


        ANC


        Booi, Mr MS (Chairperson)
        Ndabeni, Ms ST (Whip)
        Diale, Mr LN
        Mgabadeli, Ms HC
        Mlambo, Mr EM
        Mlangeni, Mr A
        Mabedla, Ms NR
        Van Wyk, Ms A


        DA


        Maynier, Mr DJ
        Lorimer, Mr JRB


        COPE


        George, Mr M (Alt)
        Tolo, Mr L J
        IFP


        Mncwango, Mr MA
        Ndlovu, Mr VB (Alt)


        FF+


        Groenewald, Mr PJ


        PAC
        Mphahlele, Mr LM


        Portfolio Committee on Economic Development


        ANC


        Coleman, Ms EM (Chairperson)
        Ntuli, Mr ZC (Whip)
        Bhengu, Ms P
        Huang, Mr SB
        Line, Ms H
        Manamela, Mr KB
        Mabaso, Mr X
        Skosana, Mr JJ
        DA


        Coetzee, Mr R
        Rabie, Dr PJ
        COPE


        Ndude, Ms HN (Alt)
        Ngonyama, Mr S


        IFP
        Singh, Mr N
        Oriani-Abrosini, Mr MG (Alt)
        Skosana, Mr BM (Alt)


        UDM


        Holomisa, Mr BH


        MF


        Bhoola, Mr RB


        ID
        Greyling, Mr LW (Alt)


        ACDP


        Swart, Mr SN (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Energy


        ANC


        Thabethe, Ms E   (Chairperson)
        Moss, Ms LN (Whip)
        Tinto, Ms B
        Njikelana, Mr SJ (Alt)
        Mabedla, Ms NR
        Mathibela, Ms NF
        Selau, Mr JG
        Nchabeleng, Mr EM
        Radebe, Mr SG


        DA


        Motau, Mr SC
        Schmidt, Mr J


        COPE


        Blaai, Mr BC (Alt)
        Dexter, Mr PD


        IFP
        Lucas, Mr EJ
        Zondi, Mr KM (Alt)


        ID


        Greyling, Mr LW


        AZAPO


        Mangena, Mr MA (Alt)


        Standing Committee on Finance


        ANC


        Mufamadi, Mr TA   (Chairperson)
        Sibhidla, Ms NN (Whip)
        Adams, Ms PE
        Dubazana, Ms ZS
        Mthethwa, Mr EM
        Motimele, Mr MS
        Luyenge, Dr Z
        Van Rooyen, Mr DD


        DA
        George, Dr DT
        Swart, Mr M


        COPE
        Balindlela, Ms ZB (Alt)
        Koornhof, Mr NJ


        IFP


        Singh, Mr N
        Oriani-Ambrosini, Mr MG (Alt)


        UCDP


        Matladi, Ms MN


        ACDP


        Swart, Mr SN (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Health


        ANC


        Goqwana, Mr BM (Chairperson)
        Tshwete, Ms P (Whip)
        Kenye, Ms TE
        Segale-Diswai, Mr M J
        Mafolo, Ms MV (Alt)
        Dube, Ms MC
        Luthuli, Dr AN
        Makhubele-Mashele, Ms LS
        Mataboge, Mr KD
        Saal, Ms G
        Tlake, Ms MF (Alt)


        DA


        Waters, Mr M
        More, Ms E


        COPE


        Kganare, Mr DA
        Mnguni, Mr P (Alt)


        IFP


        Msweli, Ms HS
        Makhuba, Ms HN (Alt)
        ID


        Hoosen, Mr MH
        ACDP


        Dudley, Ms C


        Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Traning


        ANC


        Fransman, Mr M (Chairperson)
        Kubayi, Mr MT (Whip)
        Mushwana, Ms FF
        Makhubele, Ms SZ
        Magazi, Ms MN
        Nelson, Ms WJ
        Lekgetho, Mr G
        Radebe, Mr GS
        Gina, Ms N (Alt)


        DA


        James, Dr W G
        Boinamo, Mr GG
        COPE


        Nhanha, Mr MA (Alt)
        Vukuza, Ms NY


        IFP


        Mpontshane, Mr A M
        Zikalala, Ms CN (Alt)


        AZAPO


        Mangena, Mr MA
        ACDP


        Dudley, MsC


        MF


        Bhoola, Mr RB (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs


        ANC


        Martins, Mr BA (Chairperson)
        Maunye, Ms MM (Whip)
        Mathebe, Ms DH
        Madasa, Mr ZL
        Maduna, Ms P
        Gasebonwe, Ms TMA
        Gxowa, Ms NB
        Luthuli, Ms AN


        DA


        Terblanche, Mr JF
        Mnqasela, Mr M
        COPE


        Balindlela, Ms ZB
        Rwexana, Ms SP (Alt)


        IFP


        Makhuba, Ms HN
        Dhlamini, Mr BW (Alt)


        FF+


        Mulder, Dr CP


        ACDP


        Swart, Mr SN (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements


        ANC


        Dambuza, Ms BN (Chairperson)
        Mdakane, Mr MR (Whip)
        Borman, Ms MG
        Dikgacwi, Mr MM
        Gasebonwe, Ms TMA
        Mashishi, Ms AC (Alt)
        Matshoba, Mr JM
        Mnisi, Ms NA
        Mugwanya, Ms V


        DA


        Steyn, Mr AC
        Figlan, Mr AM


        COPE


        Botha, Mr T
        Njobe, Ms MA (Alt)


        IFP


        Dhlamini, Mr BW
        Mncwango, Mr MA (Alt)


        ID


        McGluwa, Mr JJ
        MF


        Bhoola, Mr RB


        ACDP


        Dudley, Ms C (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Co-operation


        ANC


        Nxesi, Mr TW (Chairperson)
        Magau, Ms RK (Whip)
        Manana, Mr MC
        Koornhof, Dr GW
        Gxowa, Ms BN
        Magama, Ms TH
        Jordan, Dr ZP
        Sunduza, Ms TB


        DA


        Mubu, Mr KS
        Mokgalapa, Mr S
        COPE


        Koornhof, Mr NJJvR (Alt)
        Ngonyama, Mr S


        IFP


        Skosana, Mr BM
        Van der Merwe, Mr JH (Alt)


        ACDP


        Meshoe, Rev KRJ


        FF+


        Mulder, Dr CP


        UDM


        Holomisa, Mr BH (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development


        ANC
        Ramatlhodi, Mr NA (Chairperson)
        Gungubele, Mr M (Whip)
        Sithole, Ms SCN
        Jeffery, Mr JH
        Holomisa, Nkosi SP
        Sibanyoni, Mr JB
        Ndabandaba, Prof LBG
        Landers, Mr LT


        DA
        Smuts, Ms M
        Michael, Ms NWA
        COPE
        Adams, Ms LH
        Nhanha, Mr MA (Alt)


        IFP


        Van der Merwe, Mr J H
        Oriani-Ambrosini, Mr MG (Alt)


        ACDP


        Swart, Mr SN


        UDM


        Ntapane, Mr SZ


        ID


        De Lille, Ms P (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Labour


        ANC


        Yengeni, Ms LE (Chairperson)
        Rantsolase, Ms MA
        Khumalo, Ms FE
        Chauke, Mr HP
        Nyekembe, Mr E
        Makhubela-Mashele, Ms LS
        Mtshali, Mr E
        Mnisi, Ms NA
        Maduna, Ms P
        Tsotetsi, Ms DR


        DA


        Louw, Mr A
        Ollis, Mr IM


        COPE


        Kganare, Mr DA (Alt)
        Madisha, Mr WM


        IFP


        Ndlovu, Mr VB
        Mpontshane, Mr AM (Alt)
        FF+


        Spies, Mr WD


        Portfolio Committee on Mining


        ANC


        Gona, Mr FM   (Chairperson)
        Moss, Ms LN (Whip)
        Gololo, Mr CL
        Ngele, Ms NJ
        Bikani, Ms FC
        Magagula, Mr VV
        Mathebe, Ms DH
        Mathibela, Ms NF (Alt)
        Tinto, Ms B


        DA


        Schmidt, Mr HC
        Marais, Mr EJ


        COPE


        Dexter, Mr P
        Poho, Mr PD (Alt)


        IFP


        Lucas, Mr EJ
        Zondi, Mr KM (Alt)


        ID


        Greyling, Mr LW


        Portfolio Committee on Police


        ANC


        Chikunga, Ms LS (Chairperson)
        Schneemann, Mr GD (Whip)
        Chauke, Mr HP
        Dube, Ms MC
        Lekgetho, Mr G
        Mocumi, Ms PA
        Molebatsi, Ms MA
        Nonkonyana, Mr M
        Van Wyk, Ms A
        DA


        Kohler-Barnard, Ms D
        Schafer, Ms DA


        COPE


        George, Mr M
        Ramatlakane, Mr L (Alt)
        IFP


        Ndlovu, Mr VB
        Mncwango, Mr MA (Alt)


        FF+


        Groenewald, Mr PJ


        ACDP


        Meshoe, Rev KRJ


        ID


        Hoosen, Mr MH (Alt)
        Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises


        ANC


        Mentor, Ms MP (Chairperson)
        Ramodibe, Ms DM (Whip)
        Borman, Ms GM
        Gololo, Mr CL
        Hajaig, Ms F
        Jacobs, Ms L
        Koornhof, Dr GW
        Pillay, Dr SM
        Rasool, Mr E (Alt)


        DA


        Van Dyk, Dr SM
        Van Dalen, Mr P


        COPE


        Nhanha, Mr MA
        Vukuza-Linda, Ms NY (Alt)


        IFP
        Oriani-Ambrosini, Mr MG
        Dhlamini, Mr BW (Alt)


        ID


        Greyling, Mr LW


        AZAPO


        Mangena, Mr MA


        Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration


        ANC


        Moloi-Moropa, Ms JC (Chairperson)
        Sulliman, Mr EM (Whip)
        Maluleke, Ms JM
        Mohale, Ms MC
        Boshigo, Ms DF
        Rasool, Mr E
        Suka, Mr L
        Williams, Mr AJ


        DA
        Dreyer, Ms AM
        Van Schalkwyk, Dr HC


        COPE


        Gcume, Ms NP (Alt)
        Ramatlakane, Mr L


        IFP


        Msimang, Prof CT
        Msweli, Mr HS (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Public Works


        ANC


        Duma, Mr NM (Whip)
        Kekana, Mr CD
        Madlala, Ms NM (Alt)
        Manana, Mr MC
        Magama, Mr TH
        Ngcengane, Ms ND
        November, Ms NT
        Oliphant, Mr GG
        Radebe, Mr BA


        DA


        Masango, Mr S J
        Rabotapi, Mr MW
        COPE


        Mguni, Mr PB
        Ntshiqela, Mr P (Alt)


        IFP


        Dhlamini, Mr BW
        Singh, Mr N (Alt)


        UDM


        Kganyago, Mr NM


        Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform


        ANC


        Sizani, Mr SP (Chairperson)
        Matlanyane, Ms HF (Whip)
        Hagana, Ms NE
        Nchabeleng, Mr EM
        Mandela, Inkosi ZMD
        Mmusi, Mr SG (Alt)
        Ngwenya-Mabila, Ms PC
        November, Ms NT (Alt)
        Xaba, Ms PP
        Zulu, Mr BZ


        DA


        Swathe, Mr MM
        Steyn, Ms A


        COPE


        Balindlela, ZB Ms (Alt)
        Dandala, Mr MH


        IFP


        Msimang, Prof CT
        Cebekhulu, Mr RH (Alt)
        Skosana, Mr BM (Alt)
        PAC


        Mphahlele, Mr LM


        ID
        De Lille, Ms P


        UDM


        Ntapane, Mr SZ (Alt)


        UCDP


        Ditshetelo, Ms IC (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology


        ANC


        Ngcobo, Mr ENN (Chairperson)
        Dunjwa, Ms ML (Whip)
        Jacobus, Ms L
        Mkhize, Mr LN
        Mocumi, Ms PA
        Ngcengwane, Ms ND
        Nyama, Ms MMA


        DA


        Kalyan, Ms SV
        Shinn, Ms MR


        COPE


        Adams, Ms L (Alt)
        Molau, Ms SP


        IFP


        Smith, Mr PF
        Lucas, Mr EJ (Alt)


        ID


        Greyling, Mr LW


        AZAPO


        Mangena, Mr MA (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Social Development


        ANC


        Botha, Mr YR (Chairperson)
        Makasi, Ms XC (Whip)
        Kenye, Ms TE (Alt)
        Mafolo, Ms MV
        Magagula, Mr VV
        Malgas, Ms HH
        Masilo, Ms JM
        Nelson, Ms WJ
        Xaba, Ms PP


        DA


        Kopane, Ms SP
        Lamoela, Ms H


        COPE


        Gcume, Ms NP
        Molau, Ms S (Alt)


        IFP
        Makhuba, Ms HN
        Zikalala, Ms CN (Alt)


        UDM
        Kganyago, Mr NM


        MF


        Bhoola, Mr RB (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Sports and Recreation


        ANC


        Komphela, Mr B M (Chairperson)
        Frolick, Mr CT (Whip)
        Suka, Mr L
        Dikgacwi, Mr MM
        Mjobo, Ms LN
        Mmusi, Mr SG
        Lishivha, Ms TE
        Sunduza, Ms TB (Alt)
        Tseke, Ms GK


        DA
        Lee, Mr TD
        Van Der Linde, Mr JJ


        COPE


        Koornhof, Mr NJJvR (Alt)
        MacKenzie, Mr GD


        IFP


        Dhlamini, Mr BW
        Lucas, Mr EJ (Alt)


        UDM


        Holomisa, Mr BH


        ID


        McGluwa, Mr JJ


        FF+


        Spies, Mr WD (Alt)


        PAC
        Mphahlele, Mr LM (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Tourism


        ANC


        Gumede, Mr DM (Chairperson)
        Makasi, Ms XC (Whip)
        Bam-Mugwanya, Ms V
        Khorai, Mr LP
        Maluleke, Ms JM
        Manganye, Ms J
        Tshivhase, Ms TJ
        Zulu, Prince BZ


        DA


        Krumbock, Mr GR
        Shinn, Ms MR


        COPE


        Kotsi, Ms CMP (Alt)
        Njobe, Ms MA
        IFP


        Zikalala, Ms CN
        Smith, Mr PF (Alt)


        UDM


        Ntapane, Mr SZ


        Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry


        ANC


        Fubbs, Ms JL (Chairperson)
        Ntuli, Mr ZC (Whip)
        Gcwabaza, Mr NE
        Hajaij, Ms F (Alt)
        Turok, Prof B
        Line, Ms H
        Njikelana, Mr SJ
        Mabaso, Mr X
        Khumalo, Ms FE
        Williams, Mr AJ


        DA
        Marais, Mr S JF
        Van Der Westhuizen, Mr AP


        COPE


        Kotsi, Ms CMP
        Mackenzie, Mr GD (Alt)


        IFP


        Lebenya, Ms PS
        Oriani-Ambrosini, Mr MG (Alt)


        PAC


        Mphahlele, Mr LM


        FF+


        Spies, Mr WD


        Portfolio Committee on Transport


        ANC


        Bhengu, Ms NR (Chairperson)
        Khunou, Ms NP (Whip)
        Gcwabaza, Mr NE
        Hagana, Ms NE
        Maluleka, Mr HP
        Masango, Mr FT
        Ngele, Ms N J
        Ngwenya- Mabila, Ms PC


        DA


        Farrow, Mr SB
        De Freitas, Mr MSF


        COPE


        Kganare, Mr DA (Alt)
        Poho, Mr PD


        IFP


        Lucas, Mr EJ
        Dhlamini, Mr BW (Alt)


        UDM
        Gaehler, Mr LB


        Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs


        ANC


        Sotyu, Ms MM (Chairperson)
        Mathebe, Mr PM (Whip)
        Bhengu, Ms P
        Dlulane, Ms BN (Alt)
        Huang, Mr SB (Alt)
        Luyenge, Dr Z (Alt)
        Mabuza, Ms MC
        Masango, Mr FT
        Skosana, Mr JJ
        Tsotetsi, Ms DR


        DA


        Morgan, Mr GR
        Lovemore, Ms AT


        COPE


        Koornhof, Mr NJJvR (Alt)
        Ndude, Ms HD


        IFP


        Zikalala, Ms CN
        Makhuba, Ms HN (Alt)


        ID


        Greyling, Mr LW


        UDM


        Holomisa, Mr BH


        AZAPO


        Mangena, Mr MA (Alt)


        Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and People with
        Disabilities


        ANC


        Thompson, Ms B (Chairperson)
        Ramodibe, Ms DM (Whip)
        Kekana, Mr DC
        Khorai, Mr LP
        Maduna, Ms P
        Malgas, Ms HH
        Madlala, Ms NM (Alt)
        Selau, Mr GJ
        Tshabalala-Msimang, Dr EM (Alt)
        Tseke, Ms GK


        DA


        Robinson, Ms D
        Duncan, Ms PC


        COPE


        Mda, Ms A (Alt)
        Rwexana, Ms SP


        IFP


        Lebenya, Ms PS
        Makhuba, Ms HN (Alt)


        UCDP
        Ditshetelo, Ms IC


        UCDP


        Matladi, Ms MN (Alt)


        Committee on Private Member’s Legislative proposals and special
        petitions


        ANC


        Thobejane, Mr SG (Chairperson)
        Sosibo, Ms JE (Whip)
        Tinto, Ms B
        Molebatsi, Ms AM
        Mocumi, Ms PA
        Mdaka, Ms MN
        Fihla, Mr NB
        Twala, Ms NM
        Ainslie, Mr AR (Alt)


        DA


        Dreyer, Ms AM


        COPE
        Adams, Ms L (Alt)
        Kilian, Ms JD


        IFP


        Oriani-Abrosini, Mr MG
        Smith, Mr PF (Alt)


        Committee on Public Accounts


        ANC


        Mbili, Mr ME (Whip)
        Bonhomme, Mr TJ
        Mangena, Ms MS
        Ainslie, Mr AR
        Chiloane, Ms TD
        Thobejane, Mr SG
        Muthambi, Ms AF
        Malale, Mr MI


        DA


        Du Toit, Mr ND
        Steele, Mr MH
        Maynier, Mr DJ (Alt)


        COPE


        Mashiane, Ms LM
        Ramatlakane, Mr L (Alt)


        APC


        Godi, Mr TN (Chairperson)


        IFP


        Singh, Mr N
        Lebenya, Mr PS (Alt)


        UCDP


        Matladi, Ms MN


        APC


        Godi, Mr NT


        Standing Committee on Appropriations
        ANC


        Sogoni, Mr EM (Chairperson)
        Maake, Mr JJ (Whip)
        Gederblom, Mr JP
        Mashigo, Ms R J (Alt)
        Mavunda, Mr DW
        Mkhulisi, Ms NNP
        Ngcobo, Ms BT
        Snell, Mr GT
        Tlake, Ms MF


        DA


        Swart, Mr M
        Rabie, Dr PJ


        COPE


        Mackenzie, Mr GD (Alt)
        Ramatlakane, Mr L


        IFP


        Skosana, Mr BM
        Singh, Mr N (Alt)


        Committee on Auditor-General


        ANC


        Masutha, Adv MT (Chairperson)
        Sosibo, Ms JE (Whip)
        Matshoba, Mr JM
        Nonkonyana, Mr M
        Tsebe, Ms SR
        Tlake, Ms FM
        Ndabandaba, Prof LBG
        Nxumalo, Ms DM


        DA


        George, Dr DT
        Steele, Mr MH


        COPE


        Mashiane, Ms LM


        IFP
        Singh, Mr N
        Lebenya, Mr PS (Alt)


        Constitutional Review Committee


        ANC


        Holomisa, Nkosi SP (Chairperson)
        Sosibo, Ms JE (Whip)
        Masango, Mr FT
        Masutha, Adv TM
        Ainslie, Mr AR
        Matlanyane, Ms HF
        Hajaig, Ms F
        Snell, Mr GT


        DA


        Smuts, Ms M
        Schmidt, Adv HC


        COPE


        Adams, Ms L (Alt)
        Koornhof, Mr NJ
        IFP


        Oriani-Ambrosini, Dr MG


        ACDP


        Swart, Mr SN


        UDM
        Ntapane, Mr SZ

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
        Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
        Linguistic Communities   for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 212-2009].

2.    The Minister of Communications


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department of
        Communications for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 24 for 2008-2009 [RP 209-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
        Office (Ltd) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-2009.


3.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
        Social Development for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 16 for 2008-2009 [RP 225-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
        Agency   for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009 [RP 58-2009].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Social
        Security Agency (SASSA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 29-2009].


4.    The Minister of Energy

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
        Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 220-2009].

5.    The Minister of Mining

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
        Council (MHSC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 8-2009].

                          FRIDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the South
        African Human Rights Commission for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 65-2009].

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
        Service (SARS) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 238-2009].

3.    The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
        Foreign Affairs for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 3 for 2008-2009.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance and
        International Co-operation Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


4.    The Minister of Police

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Independent
        Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 20 for 2008-2009 [RP 234-2009].


5.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
        Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 184-2009].
6.    The Minister of Energy

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group of
        Companies (CEF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information of the Central Energy Fund Group of
        Companies for 2008-2009 [RP 186-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy
        Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 177-2009].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
        Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 141-2009].

7.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of
        Trade and Industry for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 32 for 2008-2009 [RP 18-2009].

                          MONDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
        Council (ARC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 199-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
        Export Control Board (PPECB)for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department of
        Agriculture  for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 23 for 2008-2009 [RP 210-2009].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Onderstepoort Biological
        Products (Ltd) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty)Ltd for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

2.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – Department of
        Public Service and Administration for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 8 for 2008-2009 [RP 190-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
        Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd (SITA) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 47-2009].


3.    The Minister of Mining

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
        Minerals and Energy  for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 28 for 2008-2009 [RP 240-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mintek Group for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 27-2009].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the State Diamond Trader for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        178-2009].


4.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Collective Investment
        Schemes for 2008-2009 [RP 202-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Sasria (Ltd) for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

                         TUESDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
        Defence for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 19
        for 2008-2009 [RP 193-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Castle Control Board for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        165-2009].


2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
        Company (Ltd) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Airways
        (Pty) (Ltd) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-2009.


3.    The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of Public
        Works for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 5 for
        2008-2009.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
        Trust (IDT) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 200-2009].


4.    The Minister of Human Settlements

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
        Housing for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 26
        for 2008-2009 [RP 136-2009].

5.    The Minister of Transport
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
        Africa (Ltd) (ACSA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
        Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2008-2009, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (c)     Reports and Financial Statements of the Ports Regulator of
        South Africa  for 2007-2008 and 2008-2009, including the Reports of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 and 2008-2009.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
        (RSR) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
        [RP 158-2009].


    (e)     Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of
        South Africa and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company for
        2008-2009.


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Roads Agency Limited for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 145-2009].


    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
        Corporation for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 170-2009].


    (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
        Rescue Organisation for 2008-2009.


    (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        217-2009].


    (j)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
        Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.

6.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
        Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        53-2009].


7.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of
        Sport and Recreation South Africa for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 17 for 2008-2009 [RP 152-2009].

                        WEDNESDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2009] – Act No 17 of 2009
         (assented to and signed by President on 29 September 2009).

      2) Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2009] – Act No 18 of
         2009 (assented to and signed by President on 29 September 2009).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Party sequence for members’ statements and questions

    In terms of the Rules, the sequence of questions on the Question Paper
    is determined by the Chief Whips’ Forum from time to time. Practice has
    also been that the same sequence is used for members’ statements.


    On 16 September 2009, the Chief Whips’ Forum agreed that the party
    sequence for members’ statements and questions in the Assembly for the
    duration of the Fourth Parliament will be as follows:  ANC, DA, Cope,
    ANC, IFP, Smaller Parties Group 1, ANC, Smaller Parties Group 2, IFP,
    ANC, DA, Cope, ANC, DA, ANC.


    The Forum further agreed that the smaller parties will be grouped as
    follows:


    Group 1: ID, UDM and FF Plus.


    Group 2: ACDP, UCDP, PAC, MF, Azapo and APC.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of
        Water Affairs and Forestry for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 34 for 2008-2009 [RP 163-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Biodiversity Institute for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 165-2009].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Parks (SANparks ) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 148-2009].

2.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of
        Science and Technology for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 31 for 2008-2009 [RP 236-2009].


3.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


4.    The Minister of Transport
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        221-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Passenger Rail Agency of
        South Africa (PRASA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 157-2009].


5.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
        Justice and Constitutional Development for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 21 for 2008-2009 [RP 189-2009].

6.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
        Intellectual Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2008-2009,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 115-2009].



7.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
        Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 192-2009].
8.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Arts and
        Culture for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
        Arts for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
        [RP 192-2009].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
        Council for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009 [RP 242-2009].


9.     The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
        Development Board (CIDB) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 233-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa (ASA)
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.




    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
        Environment (CBE) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.

10.   The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – National Treasury
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 7 for 2008-
        2009 [RP 198-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
        Board for Auditors for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 156-2009].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Pension
        Funds Adjudicator  for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
        Centre for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009 [RP 162-2009].


11.   The Minister of Health

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of
        Health for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 14
        for 2008-2009 [RP 169-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation
        Commissioner for Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
        Research Council (MRC) for  2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 174-2009].

12.   The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and
        Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2008-2009, including the
        Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
        Universal Service and Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) and
        the Universal Service and Access Fund (USAF) for 2008-2009 [RP 222-
        2009 ].

13.   The Minister of Home Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
        Affairs for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 4
        for 2008-2009 [RP 239-2009].


14.   The Minister in The Presidency for National Planning

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 - Statistics South
        Africa for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 11
        for 2008-2009 [RP 211-2009].


15.   The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of
        Provincial and Local Government for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 29 for 2008-2009.

                           MONDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

            1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


    (a)     Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the Federal
        Republic of Germany for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with
        respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital, tabled in terms of
        Section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Double Taxation Agreement between the
        Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic of Germany for the
        Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income and on
        Capital.


    (c)     Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the United
        Mexican States for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
        Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled
        in terms of Section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Double Taxation Agreement between
        the Republic of South Africa and the United Mexican States for the
        Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
        with respect to Taxes on Income.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        60-2009].
National Assembly

    1. The Speaker


    (a)     Submission of Private Member’s Legislative Proposal

        The following private member's legislative proposal was submitted
        to the Speaker on 28 September 2009 in accordance with Rule 234:

        a) Legislative proposal to amend the Land and Agricultural
           Development Bank Act, No 15 of 2002 (Mr P J C Pretorius)

        Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
        and Special Petitions for consideration and report.


     b) Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 30 September 2009,
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay in the
        submission of the Annual Report of the ICASA for 2008-2009.

        Tabling the written reasons to the National Assembly explaining
        failure to table the Annual Report and Financial Statements of
        ICASA as required by the PFMA.
        In terms of section 65 (1) of the Public Finance Management Act
        (PFMA), I am required to table to the National Assembly, Annual
        Reports and the Financial Statements in respect of each financial
        year and the audit report on those statements within one month
        after the accounting officer for the department or the accounting
        authority for the public entity received the audit report.


        I have recently been informed by ICASA that they will not be able
        to submit their 2008/09 Annual Report and Financial Statements
        within the stipulated time, that would enable me to table to the
        National Assembly before 30 September 2009, citing that;-


        During the discussions held over the past two weeks with the
        Auditor General’s Gauteng office, the Auditor  General’s Head
        Office, National Treasury and Accounting Standards Board, it
        emerged that;-


           • ICASA’s 2009 Annual Report should only reflect one set of
             financial statements and not  separate financial statements for
             ICASA Main Account and the administered Revenue Account as is
             currently the case; and
           • That the Auditor General Gauteng withdraw its separate audit
             opinions on the main Account and the administered Revenue Fund
             and issue one opinion on the ICASA financial statements.

        ICASA is currently awaiting the National Treasury’s response to
        their submission highlighting that this proposal would contribute
        to further delays in the finalization of the 2008/9 Annual Report
        of ICASA as the revised financial statements would have to be
        redrafted and re-audited by the Auditor General. In light of the
        above, ICASA has requested that the 2009 Financial statements be
        presented as in prior years and the changes requested only be
        effected as from the 2010 financial year. They have undertaken to
        revert to me by no later than the date of the National Treasury’s
        response to their submission.
        In compliance with Section 65 (2)(a), I hereby table written
        reasons of inability to table to the National Assembly ICASA’s
        2008/9 Annual Report and Financial Statements of ICASA within the
        stipulated time frame.




        signed
        Gen (Ret) Siphiwe Nyanda, MP
        MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS

                          WEDNESDAY, 7 OCTOBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial Inspectorate
        for Correctional Services for 2008-2009 [RP 132-2009].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
    (a)     Strategic Plan for the Companies and Intellectual Property
        Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2009/10 – 2011/12.

National Assembly
1.    The Speaker


     a) Letter from the Minister of Science and Technology, requesting the
        Assembly to approve a shortlist of candidates for appointment to
        the SA National Space Agency Board in terms of section 7(1)(c) of
        the S A National Space Agency Act, 2008 (Act No 36 of 2008).

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology for
        consideration and report.

     b) A letter dated 15 September 2009 and supporting documents have been
        received from the Minister of Trade and Industry, requesting the
        relevant Assembly committee to recommend a suitable person(s) for
        appointment as chairperson of the National Lotteries Board in terms
        of section 3(3) of the Lotteries Act, No 57 of 1997.

     c) A letter dated 19 September 2009 and supporting documents have been
        received from the Minister of Trade and Industry, requesting the
        relevant Assembly committee to recommend candidates who comply with
        sections 3(1)(c) and 3(2) of the Lotteries Act, Not 57 of 1997, for
        appointment as members of the National Lotteries Board.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry for
       consideration.


   COMMITTEE REPORTS


   National Assembly


   1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and
      Traditional Affairs on the Local Government: Municipal Property Rates
      Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2009], dated 6 October 2009:

        The Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs, having considered the subject of the Local Government:
        Municipal Property Rates Amendment Bill [B12 - 2009] (National
        Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed
        to the Bill without amendments [B12 – 2009].

                          THURSDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Film and Publication Board
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        224-2009].

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No.892 published in Government Gazette No
        32546 dated 31 August 2009: Determination of interest rate for
        purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official rate of
        interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, in terms of the
        Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    (b)     Government Notice No R.918 published in Government Gazette No
        32582 dated 25 September 2009: Exchange Control Regulations:
        Cancellation of appointment of an authorised dealer in foreign
        exchange:  Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft in terms of the Exchange
        Control Regulations.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bank Supervision
        Department of the South African Reserve Bank for 2008.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    First Report of the Committee on Public Accounts on the Report of the
    Auditor General on Performance Audit of Service Delivery at Police
    Stations and 10111 Call Centres of the South African Police Service,
    dated 16 September 2009

    Background

    The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
    evidence on the Special Performance Audit conducted by the Auditor-
    General of South Africa (AGSA) on the service delivery at Police
    Stations and 10111 call centres at the South African Police Service
    (SAPS). The report highlighted deficiencies in processes and systems
    that should be in place at police stations and 10111 centres. The
    following sub-focus areas were identified with regard to police
    stations:
  • Sector Policing
  • Vehicle Management
  • Training
  • Community Service Centres
  • Domestic Violence
  • Bulletproof Vests


    The Committee has reviewed the evidence presented by the Accounting
    Officer and other responsible members of the SAPS at the hearing
    conducted on the 1st of July 2009. SCOPA therefore requests the
    Accounting Officer to urgently address the following:

1. Sector Policing


     The Auditor-General reported the following shortcomings:


      • Due to lack of an approved policy, there were inconsistencies in the
        implementation of the sector policing and in resource allocation
        between different police stations.

      • The minutes of sector crime forum meetings were not always compiled
        and as a consequence it was not possible to assess whether sector
        crime forums were functioning as intended.

   The Committee therefore recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures
   that:


   a) Proper monitoring mechanisms be implemented to ensure consistent
      utilisation of resources at police stations and proper evaluation of
      the efficacy and implementation of Sector Policing.
   b) Minutes of the sector crime forum be recorded and be used to ensure
      the proper running of the sector crime police forum.
   c) A report on the implementation plan be submitted to the National
      Assembly within 30 days after the adoption of this report by the
      House.

2. Vehicle Management

    The Auditor-General reported the following shortcomings:


    That out of the 40 509 vehicles, 13 631 have been equipped with
    Automated Vehicle Location Systems (AVL). The monitoring of the AVL is
    decentralised but only Gauteng and Western Cape have central monitoring
    systems.


  • Instances where operational members did not possess driver’s licences
    were identified.
    • There were instances of control weaknesses with regard to vehicle
      registers, control over keys and controls over garaging authorities
      which allow members’ private usage of vehicles.
  • There were instances of lengthy lead times regarding repairs of
    vehicles.


    The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:

     a) Notwithstanding the response from the Department of Police, the
        Committee recommends that AVL on all operational vehicles be
        implemented during the 2009/10 financial year.
     b) The backlog in training of operational members without driver’s
        licences be addressed as a priority, its completion date be adhered
        to and a training report be submitted to the National Assembly after
        the adoption of this report to the House.
     c) Proper monitoring of vehicles at police stations is implemented to
        ensure responsible authorised usage thereof (also after hours) and
        disciplinary measures be instituted against personnel found to be in
        contravention of applicable policies and regulations.
     d) Reliable and timely management information is generated to identify
        and monitor repairs, and reduce the turnaround time.
     e) A progress report on c) and b) above be submitted to the National
        Assembly after the adoption of this report by the House.

3. Training


     The Auditor-General reported the following shortcomings:


        • The information available on PERSAP was not accurately updated to
          reflect all training courses attended by members thereby
          compromising the accuracy of management information.
        • Also, non-attendance and/or non-completion of certain courses
          were noted in some instances.


     The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:


     a)     All SAPS members be exposed to appropriate training within
     reasonable time frames.
     b)     All deficiencies identified with the training database be
         rectified and recorded correctly, as the Committee was concerned
         by the low levels of members attending training.
     c)     The training budgets must be properly utilised failing which
         necessary disciplinary measures be instituted against responsible
         accounting officials.


    4.      Community Service Centres (CSC)


    The Auditor-General reported the following shortcomings:


    ▪ The layout of the CSCs as audited did not cater for persons with
      disabilities.
    ▪ Basic infrastructure such as water, electricity, telephones and
      computers in some police stations were not in working condition.
    ▪ Proper identification parade rooms did not exist and service
      charters in relation to the public were not conspicuously displayed.
    ▪ Holding cells could not be optimally utilised as some were in a
      state of dilapidation.


    Whilst the committee noted that there were initiatives to improve the
    situation, it nonetheless recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures
    that:


      a)    The rectification of deficiencies in infrastructure is
           prioritised to provide access for people with disabilities.
        b) The rectification of deficiencies in infrastructure and
           equipment including computers are prioritised and that
           engagement with all stakeholders (Eskom, Telecom and Local
           Municipalities) continues as a matter of urgency.
   5. Domestic Violence


   The Auditor-General reported that the obligations imposed by the Domestic
   Violence Act, 1998 (Act No. 116 of 1998) and National Instruction 7/1999
   were not met. According to the Domestic Violence Act and National
   Instruction 7/1999:


   The Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) should, every six month,
   submit a report to Parliament regarding the number of and particulars of
   matters reported to it in terms of subsection (4) (a) of the Domestic
   Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998) and setting out recommendations
   made in respect of such matters.


   The Committee therefore recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures
   that:


      a)    There is compliance with the stipulations as per the National
           Instruction and the Domestic Violence Act.
      b)    A progress report on Domestic Violence be submitted to the
           National Assembly after the adoption of this report by the
           House.


   6. Bulletproof Vests


   The Auditor-General reported the following shortcomings:


        ▪ Various instances were noted of operational members not being
          issued with bulletproof vests.
        ▪ There were female operational members in one police station who
          were not issued with bulletproof vests.
   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:


      a)    Appropriate bulletproof vests are issued to all operational
          members urgently and this includes vests designed for female
          officers and that the distribution of vests be finalised.
      b)    Where policies are not adhered to, disciplinary action be
          instituted.


   7. 10111 Call Centres


   The Auditor-General reported the following shortcomings:


     ▪ There is no fully functional 10111 call centre in Mpumalanga
       Province.
     ▪ The Gauteng Call Centre which has been identified as a model for
       the other Provinces has deficiencies with regard to reaction talk
       group (talk groups facilitate communication between the 10111 call
       centre and policing units which fall outside the ambit of the call
       centre) and the utilisation of AVL functionality despite vehicles
       being equipped with this technology.
        ▪ The minimum service level of 90% was not adhered to at 6 of the
          9 Call Centres audited.
     ▪ The Midrand Centre is equipped with the AVL functionality, however,
       the said functionality is not being utilised despite the fact that 4
       038 vehicles are already equipped with AVLs in the Gauteng Province.


    The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:


        a)  Call Centres in all Provinces operate according to norms and
           standards.
        b)  Deficiencies noted with respect to personnel and equipment be
           addressed.
        c)  Reliable information and statistics are generated to permit
           proper management and monitoring of Call Centre performance.
        d)  Contingency plans in relation to systems failures and damage be
           drawn up for all centres.
        e)  Appropriate training be provided to members at 10111 centres and
           all resources be optimally used and that current training levels
           are maintained.
        f)  Punitive action be taken against members misusing police
           vehicles.


    Conclusion


    The Committee noted that after the hearing, the Department of Police
    National Instruction on Sector Policing was approved on the 13 July 2009
    and circulated to all Provincial and National Commissioners.


    The Committee commends the Department for the speedy response on some of
    the issues that were identified during the hearing and further requests
    the Department to make sure that policies, monitoring controls and
    procedures that run the day to day activities of the Department are
    adhered to.


    The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer should submit a
    report on all the recommendations to the National Assembly within 60
    days after the adoption of this report by the House.


     Report to be considered


 2.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on a
     Presentation by the International Relations Section entitled “Engaging
     Europe: Parliament of South Africa’s Relationship with the European
     Parliament”, dated 7 October 2009


     Following a presentation by the International Relations Section of
     Parliament of the Republic of South Africa entitled, “Engaging Europe:
     Parliament of South Africa’s Relationship with the European
     Parliament,” the Portfolio Committee agreed as follows:


     (1)    The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry undertakes to
         strengthen its working relationship with other Portfolio
         Committees, particularly the Committee on International Relations
         and Cooperation as well as the Parliamentary Group on
         International Relations (PGIR), to discuss matters of mutual
         importance and work towards strengthening parliamentary diplomacy,
         particularly in the area of international trade.


      (2)   The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry will work with
         other Committees and the PGIR to ensure greater public
         participation in international relations through public hearings
         and other suitable mechanisms.


     (3)    It is recommended that the Chairperson of Parliament of South
         Africa’s South Africa-European Union (SA-EU) Delegation works
         together with the PGIR to fast track the approval of the Joint
         Declaration on the Further Strengthening of Inter-Parliamentary
         Relations  and Political Dialogue Between the Delegations of the
         Parliament of the Republic of South Africa and the European
         Parliament.


      (4)   It is further recommended that the Portfolio Committee on Trade
         and Industry works together with the Portfolio Committee on
         International Relations and Cooperation to determine the best
         approach to dealing with the conclusion of the Cotonou Agreement.


      (5)   The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry will work with
         other Committees and the PGIR to determine the most appropriate
         allocation of resources to strengthen Parliament’s international
         relations agenda as well as provide the necessary political
         guidance to improve Parliament’s International Relations Section.


                           FRIDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

       1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
          on Trade and Industry. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
          the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
              Education and Training Authority (Services-Seta) for 2008-
              2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
              2009 [RP 11-2009].


          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
              Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
              (CTFL-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information for 2008-2009 [RP 87-2009].


          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
              Engineering and related Services Education and Training
              Authority (MER-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 99-2009].


          (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
              Manufacturing Industry Sector Education and Training
              Authority (Foodbev-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 92-2009].


          (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and
              Retail Sector Education and Training Authority (W&R-Seta) for
              2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
              2009 [RP 105-2009].

       2) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
          on Transport. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information is referred to the
          Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education
              and Training Authority (TETA) for 2008-2009, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 104-2009].

       3) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
          on Police. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information is referred to the
          Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security
              Sector Education and Training Authority (SASSETA) for 2008-
              2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
              2009.

       4) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
          on Health and Portfolio Committee on Social Development. The
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
              Sector Education and Training Authority (HWSETA) for 2008-
              2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
              2009 [RP 94-2009].


       5) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report. The
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living
              Resources Fund (MLRF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 131-2009].

       6) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Human Settlements for consideration and report. The Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
          consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing
              Finance Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2008-2009, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
              Statements for 2008-2009.


       7) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Labour for consideration and report and to the Standing Committee
          on Finance. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
          Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector
              Education and Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2008-2009,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 85-
              2009].


           b) Report and Financial Statements of The Insurance Sector
              Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2008-2009,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 96-
              2009].


          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Finance,
              Accounting, Management Consulting and other Financial
              Services Sector Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for
              2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
              2009 [RP 91-2009].

        8) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
           Committee on Energy and the Portfolio Committee on Mining. The
           Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
               Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2008-2009,
               including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
               Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 86-
               2009].


           (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Mining
               Qualifications Authority  (MQA) for 2008-2009, including the
               Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
               and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 110-2009].


        9) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
           Committee on Science and Technology. The Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
               Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector
               Education and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2008-2009,
               including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
               Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 95-
               2009].

       10) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
           Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
               Education and Training Authority (Agri-Seta) for 2008-2009,
               including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
               Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 84-
               2009].


           (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
               Sector  Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2008-
               2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
               Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
               2009 [RP 93-2009].

       11) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
           Committee on Basic Education and the Portfolio Committee on
           Higher Education and Training. The Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
           referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Training
               and Development Practices Sector Education and Training
               Authority (ETDP-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
               the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
               Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 89-2009].

       12) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
           Finance for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
           Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The Reports of
           the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
               Southern Africa (DBSA) for 2008-2009, including the Report
               of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
               Performance Information for 2008-2009 and the Report and
               Financial Statements of the Development Bank of Southern
               Africa Development Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report
               of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
               Performance Information of the Development Fund for 2008-
               2009.

       13) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Tourism for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
               2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
               the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
               2008-2009.

       14) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
           Committee on Tourism and Portfolio Committee Sport and
           Recreation. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information is referred to the
           Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
            a) Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality
               and Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2008-
               2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
               Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
               2009 [RP 133-2009].

       15) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Communications for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
               Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
               Training Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the
               Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
               and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 98-2009].


       16) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
           Committee on Public Works and the Portfolio Committee on Human
           Settlements. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information is referred to the
           Committee on Public Accounts:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of Construction Education
               Training Authority (CETA) for 2008-2009, including the
               Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
               and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 88-2009].


       17) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of Productivity SA for 2008-
               2009, including the  Report of the Independent Auditors on
               the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
               2008-2009 [RP 139-2009].


       18) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
           Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs. The
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
           Accounts:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government
               Sector Education and Training Authority (LG-Seta) for 2008-
               2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
               Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
               2009 [RP 97-2009].


       19) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
           report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
           Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Public
               Protector for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
               General on the Financial Statements and Performance
               Information for 2008-2009 [RP 159- 2009].


           (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for
               2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
               the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
               2008-2009 [RP 112-2009].


       20) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

            a) Report on the Review of the Organisation and Post
               Establishment of the Office of the Public Protector during
               2008/2009.


       21) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Mineral Resources for consideration and report. The Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond
               and Precious Metals Regulator for 2008-2009, including the
               Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
               and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 132-2009].


       22) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Minerals and Energy for consideration and report. The Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
               Regulator (NNR) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
               Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
               Information for 2008-2009 [RP 36-2009].


       23) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of
           the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
           the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

            a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Bureau of
               Standards (SABS) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
               Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
               Information for 2008-2009 [RP 142-2009].


            b) Report and Financial Statements of Export Credit Insurance
               Corporation of South Africa Limited for 2008-2009, including
               the  Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
               Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


            c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit
               Regulator (NCR) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
               Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
               Information for 2008-2009 [RP 154-2009].
           (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial
               Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for
               2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
               on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
               2008-2009.


           (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries
               Board for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
               General on the Financial Statements and Performance
               Information for 2008-2009.


           (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling
               Board (NGB) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
               Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
               Information for 2008-2009 [RP 174-2009].

          (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              National Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2008-2009,
              including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
              2009 [RP 168-2009].


           h) Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance
              Limited for 2009-2009, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 128-2009].


           i) Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment
              Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information for 2008-2009 [RP 205-2009].
           j) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal
              for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements and Performance information for 2008-
              2009 [RP 196-2009].


          (k)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Metrology
              Institute of South Africa for 2008-2009, including the Report
              of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 144-2009].


          (l)     Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
              Development Agency for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information for 2008-2009.


          (m)     Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency
              Affairs Board for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009.


          (n)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
              Administration Commission of South Africa for 2008-2009,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 213-
              2009].


          (o)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
              finance Apex Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information for 2008-2009 [RP 113-2009].


      24) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Trade and Industry:

          (a)     Government Notice No 743 published in Government Gazette
              No 32396 dated 17 July 2009: Standards matters in terms of
              the Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


          (b)     Government Notice No 780 published in Government Gazette
              No 32443 dated 31 July 2009: Standards matters in terms of
              the Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


          (c)     Government Notice No 782 published in Government Gazette
              No 32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed amendment to the
              compulsory specification  for motor vehicles of category N1
              in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
              Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


           d) Government Notice No 783 published in Government Gazette No
              32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed amendment to the
              compulsory specification  for replacement brake lining
              assemblies for road vehicles in terms of  the National
              Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5
              of 2008).


           e) Government Notice No 784 published in Government Gazette No
              32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed introduction of a
              compulsory specification  for single capped fluorescent lamps
              in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
              Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


           f) Government Notice No 785 published in Government Gazette No
              32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed introduction of a
              compulsory specification  for  motor vehicles of category L
              in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
              Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


           g) Government Notice No 786 published in Government Gazette No
              32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed amendment to the
              compulsory specification  for  motor vehicles of category M1
              in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
              Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


           h) Government Notice No 787 published in Government Gazette No
              32443 dated 31 July 2009: Correction Notice: Compulsory
              specification  for  lamp controlgear in terms of the National
              Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5
              of 2008).


           i) Government Notice No 788 published in Government Gazette No
              32443 dated 31 July 2009: Correction Notice: Compulsory
              specification  for  electrical and electronic apparatus in
              terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications
              Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

           j) Government Notice No 810 published in Government Gazette No
              32467 dated 31 July 2009: Broad-Based Black Economic
              Empowerment in terms of section 14 of the Broad-Based Black
              Economic Empowerment Act, 2003 (Act No 53 of 2003).


      25) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Labour for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
          General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
          and Performance Information are referred to the Committee on
          Public Accounts for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of Department of Labour –
              Vote 15 for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information of Vote 15 for 2008-2009 and the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information of the Sheltered Employment Factories for 2008-
              2009 [RP 77-2009].


           b) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
              2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
              2009 [RP 81-2009].


           c) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
              Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2008-2009,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 33-
              2009].

           d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
              Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2008-2009,
              including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2008-2009.

          (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment
              Insurance Fund (UIF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 82-2009].

      26) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
          consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of Department of Public
              Enterprises – Vote 30 for 2008-2009, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information of Vote 30 for 2008-2009 [RP 206-
              2009].


      27) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
          report and to the Portfolio Committee on Police. The Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
          consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
              Unit (SIU) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information for 2008-2009 [RP 214-2009].


      28) The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration:
           a) Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the Republic
              of South Africa, Vote 2, for 2008-2009, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009.


      29) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Human Settlements for consideration and report. The Reports of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
          consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan
              Fund (RHLF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009.


          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing
              Foundation (SHF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009.


          (c)     Annual Review of the National Urban Reconstruction and
              Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2008-2009.


      30) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
          Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information is referred to the
          Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
              Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2008-2009, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009.


          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for
              2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
              on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
              2008-2009.


      31) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Public Service and Administration for consideration and report.
          The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service
              Commission (PSC) – Vote 9 for 2008-2009, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information of Vote 9 for 2008-2009 [RP 195-
              2009].


          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Public Administration
              Leadership and Management Academy (Palama) Vote 10 for 2008-
              2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 10
              for 2008-2009 [RP 187-2009].


      32) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Public Service and Administration for consideration:

           a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
              Administration for 2009-2012.


           b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Financial
              Misconduct for 2007-2008 Financial Year [RP 21-2009].

      33) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

           a) Notice No 748 published in Government Gazette No 32404 dated
              14 July 2009: National Environmental Management: Protected
              Areas Amendment Act, 2009 (Act No 15 of 2009).


           b) General Notice No 964 published in Government Gazette No
              32394 dated 15 July 2009: Draft Model Air Quality Management
              By-law for adoption and adaptation by municipalities in terms
              of the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act,
              2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


           c) General Notice No 756 published in Government Gazette No
              32426 dated 20 July 2009: Marking of rhinoceros horn and
              hunting of white rhinoceros for trophy hunting purposes in
              terms of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity
              Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


           d) Government Notice No 777 published in Government Gazette No
              32439 dated 24 July 2009: National Policy in Thermal
              Treatment of General and Hazardous Waste in terms of the
              National Environmental Management: Waste Act, 2008 (Act No 59
              of  2008).


           e) General Notice No 1001 published in Government Gazette No
              32434 dated 24 July 2009: List of Activities which result in
              Atmospheric emissions which have or may have a significant
              detrimental effect on the environment, including health,
              social conditions, economic conditions, ecological conditions
              or cultural heritage in terms of the National Environmental
              Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


           f) Government Notice No 789 published in Government Gazette No
              32449 dated 31 July 2009: Publication of the Policy for the
              Transfer of Commercial Fishing Rights  in terms of the Marine
              Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

      34) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Basic Education and the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education
          and Training for consideration and report. The Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
          consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
              Education Vote 13 for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information of Vote 13 for 2008-2009 [RP 191-2009].


      35) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Basic Education for consideration and report. The Reports of the
          Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
          Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
              Relations Council for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information of the Transformation Fund of the Education
              Labour Relations Council for 2008-2009 [RP 176-2009].


           b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
              Assurance in General and Further Education and Training -
              UMALUSI for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009.


      36) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Higher Education and Training for consideration and report. The
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Qualifications Authority for 2008-2009, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
              Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 66-2009].


      37) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Report of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
          consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited
              for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information for 2008-2009.


      38) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Report of
          the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Tshumisano Trust
              for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
              Information for 2008-2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
        Bank for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2008-2009.
    (b)     Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank – 17
        September 2009.

Correction: The following two entries replace the tabling published under
          the name of the Minister of Energy in the Announcements, Tablings
          and Committee Reports (ATC) of 31 August 2009, page 622:

2.    The Minister of Energy

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
        Regulator (NNR) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 36-2009].

3.    The Minister of Mining

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond
        and Precious Metals Regulator for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 132-2009].


                          TUESDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
    (1)     Report of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority (POA)


        Note: The following replaces Appendix A of the Report of the POA
        published on page 872 of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee
        Reports of 17 September 2009:


CREDA INSERT - T091013e-insert1 – PAGES 1017-1022


    Report to be considered.

