---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 30 June 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-06-30
---

                            TUESDAY, 30 JUNE 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:07.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

          ALLEGATIONS OF CORRUPTION AGAINST PARLIAMENTARY EMPLOYEES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I move without notice, on behalf of the DA:

   That the Council –

        1) notes that –


          a) a report by KPMG has implicated several key employees of
             Parliament in a range of corrupt activities, which have
             allegedly resulted in many thousands of rands from
             Parliament’s budget being misappropriated for personal gain;


          b) President Zuma has committed his new government to clean
             government and that it is therefore important that Parliament,
             one of the three pillars of South Africa’s constitutional
             democracy, acts quickly and vigorously to ensure that
             Parliament’s reputation is not tainted by these allegations;
             and

     2) therefore resolves that, in view of the seriousness of the
        allegations, and the fact that they were first made over a year ago
        and that the KPMG report was completed three months ago, immediate
        action be taken against the five people implicated in the report.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       PREFERENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY

                               (Announcement)

The Chairperson announced that preference would be given to Order No 3,
namely Policy debate on Budget Vote No 29: Provincial and Local Government.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Budget Vote No 29 - Provincial and Local Government:

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy Minister, distinguished members of the
House, ladies and gentlemen, and officials of the department, I appreciate
and feel privileged to be speaking in this House, presenting a budget for a
brand-new Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. It
is important to me, because this is the first time I stand in front of you
to speak and engage with you, in this new administration, after the
provincial and national elections.

Colleagues will recall that I am very passionate about the NCOP as a
structure, because I am a former chairperson of the Select Committee on
Local Government and Administration.

Today I want to reflect on the expanded mandate of the department, which is
moving from being a Department of Provincial and Local Government to a
Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. This mandate
was outlined in the state of the nation address, where we said that as a
department we are the choir conductor of our system of co-operative
governance in South Africa. The role of choir conductor is a new and
expanded one, shifting the focus from co-operative government to co-
operative governance.

At the same time we are able to give support to provinces, something we
didn’t do in the past. We should sharpen our legal instruments so that we
are able to give support to municipalities. We must ensure that these
instruments are strategic in nature, because municipalities are required to
report on so many things. They spend most of their time writing reports,
receiving guests from national government, from Parliament, from the
provinces, and so on. They have meeting after meeting, and a meeting to
prepare for another meeting. We believe that those days are gone. Local
government officials must spend their time doing their work, rather than
spending most of their time in meetings. Meetings are not going to help us
go forward.

The other shift is that we believe we must move away from traditional
leadership to traditional affairs. It means we look at all the affairs of
traditional communities. Included among those affairs are indigenous
knowledge systems. It includes throwing of the bones, which I call a “floor
X-ray”. When you go to hospital, they do an X-ray of your chest to check
your health status. In our traditional communities they throw the floor X-
ray to determine your health. We want to market this, because we believe
that this is what our people are doing in terms of survival. Of course, we
must deal with the charlatans, those who are abusing the systems and our
people. We believe that 85% of South Africans are using this practice or
system. South Africa is a democratic country - those who believe in using
this system should be allowed to do so without fear, because according to
our Constitution choices can be made.

In terms of our mandate we will come with innovative ways of strengthening
social cohesion and deepening participatory governance in this country. In
doing so, we believe that over the next five years we should be able to
protect, guide and direct the roles and responsibilities so as to ensure
that we produce a single, harmonious melody in this country. We must ensure
that the rhythm, the vibrancy and the meaning of this melody are in
consonance with what we want to put across.

As choir conductors we therefore want to say that, in conducting our
responsibilities, our strategic partner is the NCOP. We believe that we
have a unique role to play and a responsibility to live up to. However,
some quotations have been presented in relation to the role of the NCOP.
Allow me to be as direct as to quote you, hon Chairperson, from your
documents:


  The NCOP not only provides provinces with a forum in which to engage with
  the national government on matters concerning areas of shared national
  and provincial legislative powers, but also oversees the programmes and
  activities of national government relating to provincial and local
  government matters.
You further state, and I quote:


  The 1996 Constitution introduced a new concept called “co-operative
  government”. That places a high priority on consultation, co-ordination
  and communication between the different levels of government and all
  organs of state. The NCOP can be regarded as a concrete expression of “co-
  operative government”, whereby governance in South Africa is seen as a
  partnership among the national, provincial and local spheres of
  government. It further means that national legislation must be sensitive
  to provincial interests and concerns. In addition, provinces must not act
  alone or in isolation, but must be integrated into the national
  legislative or law-making process.

In our view the conceptualisation in these quotations is a bit flawed in
some respects. Firstly, the focus is on “co-operative government”, and not
on “co-operative governance”, where the governed and the governor are
working together. That is the first thing.

In the second place, we are saying that the way in which it is
conceptualised doesn’t look at the issue of local government. Local
government is ghettoised, not only in terms of the name of the National
Council of Provinces, where local government is not mentioned, but also in
respect of the fact that the 10 representatives who are supposed to be here
are observers. It means they are not allowed to vote. That is why you find
that local government as a sphere feels a bit alienated from participating
in the NCOP. They don’t feel that they are an integral part of the system.

The third area we believe is quite important relates to the capability of
this institution in terms of its numbers and strength. We believe that this
has shortcomings, and must be bolstered and strengthened.

Lastly, we believe that the issue of facilitating international relations
to promote a good and just world order is something that has to be looked
at and strengthened. We therefore believe that, having expressed these
views, you remain a premier strategic partner of this department going
forward. We believe that we must work together, because we are an
expression of co-operative governance in the legislature. We ourselves deal
with co-operative governance at an executive level, so therefore we must be
able to ensure that we collaborate and work together going forward.

One of the most important things, as we see it, is that we are involved in
a process of reviewing the future of provinces. We have finalised the
policy and it is a question of taking it to Cabinet to engage with it. At
the same time we are looking at the issue of municipalities and what has
happened to them. In doing so, we must be able to work together. Having
taken the policy to Cabinet, we believe that once Cabinet pronounces on it,
it must ensure that the process is taken to the legislatures and to the
people of this country, so that they can express whether they believe that
we should continue with the current conjuncture of the system of government
as is. We believe that these matters must be engaged upon. If there is
agreement that provinces should remain, we believe we will need a
fundamental review of the structure of the NCOP, as I have said, with
regard to its name, its structure, and its capability. But not only that.
We also have to look at the priorities and the positioning of the NCOP in a
way that reflects the interests of provinces and municipalities going
forward.

From our side, as the department, we think there are about five priorities
that we must take forward. Firstly, we must ensure that, in our
developmental state, we build provinces and strengthen them — so that they
are responsive, efficient and effective – and the same goes for
municipalities.

We must ensure that the system of governance focuses on vulnerable groups.
According to the ANC’s strategy and tactics, we are the disciplined force
of the left. This means that in our action we support the weak and the
vulnerable. In respect of our definition, we believe the weak should
include military veterans and farmworkers. Those groups were not included
in the past.

We also believe that we must support the institution of governance, in
particular in respect of traditional leadership and traditional
communities. We must use processes to build social cohesion going forward.

We have agreed that we must have a turnaround strategy for local
government. It is called the Local Government Turnaround Strategy 2009-11.
This turnaround strategy will cover the following issues: reducing the
number of complaints regarding issues of local government by 2011; reducing
municipal debt, which is more than R41 billion, by half by 2014; building a
debt-free society and promoting a culture of saving and payment for
services; ensuring that municipalities have clean audits by 2014; reducing
corruption and fraud to the minimum by 2011; and promoting clean cities by
transforming waste into work by 2014 and at the same time establishing
people’s parks for love.

We also believe that ward committees should be empowered to become centres
of co-operative governance, where we can ensure that our people interact at
local level and co-ordinate all activities. Today the police have its own
structures, health services have its own structures, and education has its
own structures. We believe that this represents a silo mentality. Ward
committees must be centres of co-ordination. One could have specific areas
of responsibility, but the ward level is where things should be happening.

We also believe these ward committees must focus on establishing co-
operatives, so that economic wealth is generated and they stop spending
their time complaining, finding fault and not doing anything. In every
village there must be economic activity taking place. It means that going
forward people have to look at how they can generate wealth in their own
areas of jurisdiction.

We believe that by doing these things we will actually be able to go
forward. When I make my closing remarks, I will outline the tasks that
should be undertaken by the ward committees. That will be when I come back
for the second round.

We believe that one would be able to hold the department accountable for
ensuring that these things are done. These are measurable objectives. We
are saying, if you can’t measure it, you can’t monitor it. Therefore we are
presenting things that can be monitored, because you can measure them. That
is what we are outlining here. It is not a general statement that we are
presenting in going forward. Thank you very much, Chairperson.

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon
special delegates and delegates, let me congratulate the Minister at the
outset on his reappointment to the newly named Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs, and also the Deputy Minister on a well-
deserved appointment. I can assure both of you that from a financial
support perspective, we cannot fault this department. No less than 98,7% of
the department’s annual budget is allocated to local government, of which
the encouraging amount of R11 billion is dedicated to municipal
infrastructure grants.

It has also become abundantly clear in recent times that Minister Shiceka
openly admits to problems facing his department and displays a willingness
to tackle challenges head-on. Both this attitude and the department’s
liberal funding programme bode well for local government, because this is
where the fundamental malfunctioning of ANC governance has been paramount,
and it has been showing tendencies of rapid growth since 1994 and
particularly in these past five years.

Let’s be honest, Minister, there is very little wrong with the structure
and systems of local government. After all, these emanate from the most
lauded Constitution in the world. But any system could stand or fall
because of the way it is implemented, monitored and maintained, and that is
just where the real problem lies. Your government was in such a rush to
implement affirmative action that you hurriedly and systematically evicted
all those officials with expertise and experience from municipalities and
replaced them with crony deployment in a closed patronage system - truly a
recipe for disaster.

What we need now is for an early warning system to be implemented by all
provinces, so that the problems that are developing in municipalities can
be identified and addressed before it is too late. Just last week,
Chairperson, we learnt of 13 pending interventions in no fewer than 13
municipalities in one province alone, and we in the DA know of at least one
more to be added to that list in that province. This sad situation is no
different in other provinces, and I can quote many examples of where my
colleagues and I called for early interventions.

But, you see, hon Chairperson, the problem also lies with the ANC’s system
of cadre deployment. Very often the MEC in question is lower in rank within
the ANC or SACP than the municipal manager or the mayor, and therefore
fearful and apprehensive of acting against such a party’s superior.
[Interjections.] That is the truth. You can’t argue with that. I have seen
it.

Die toestand, Voorsitter, van die onderpresterende munisipaliteite is
derhalwe die gevolg van hierdie wydverspreide ontplooiing van onbekwame
kaders en die oorkoepelende hiërargie van die ANC. Dít, Voorsitter, is
hoekom wydverspreide boikotte en weerhouding van belastingbetaling in
bykans alle provinsies aan die orde van die dag is. Die DA steun glad nie
dié boikotte of enige vorm van weerhouding van belasting nie, maar ’n mens
kan jou nie blindstaar teen die frustrasies van die belastingbetalers nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, the situation of the underperforming municipalities can
therefore be ascribed to this widespread deployment of incompetent cadres
and the overarching hierarchy of the ANC. Chairperson, this is why
widespread boycotts and withholding rates seem to be the order of the day
in all the provinces these days. The DA does not support these boycotts or
any form of withholding, but one cannot ignore the frustration of the
ratepayers.]

The bottom line is that service delivery is nonexistent in many
municipalities because of incompetence and corruption. In Thaba Chweu Local
Municipality in Mpumalanga, Eskom reportedly suspended the supply of
electricity last week because of nonpayment, while the theft of R3,2
million of taxpayers’ money in April, allegedly by computer hackers,
remains unsolved.

Decisive action must now be taken, hon Minister, to reverse this situation,
because if we don’t take such action, we will be faced with the total
collapse of services in most of our towns and cities, and the health of all
our citizens will be at risk, not to speak of that of the thousands of Fifa
soccer fans expected to visit us next year.

So, hon Minister, please convince your colleagues in Cabinet that you do
not have to rush to Parliament for the adoption of the Constitution
Seventeenth Amendment Bill to give central government more power over local
government. [Laughter.] Just make it work by applying the principles of
best-person government in an open opportunity society, where there is a
progressive transfer of knowledge and expertise and an uppermost desire to
deliver quality services at affordable rates.

And for goodness sake, Minister, don’t tamper with the provinces and their
areas of competence. Just because the ANC provincial governments are all
dysfunctional, and the one DA provincial government is already excelling
... [Interjections.] ... there is no reason to do away with provinces.

The ball is firmly in your court, hon Minister. You are a seasoned
politician and a local government petitioner, and you have a very
experienced Deputy Minister, so please go for it and let us get
municipalities back to basics and working again, but don’t try to fix what
ain’t broken. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, Minister, comrades and friends, allow me, in the first
instance, to congratulate you, Chairperson, on your reappointment as
Chairperson of this august House. I am particularly struck by the fact that
you served from 1994 onwards in the very committee of the same portfolio in
which the Minister and I served. While he was MEC for Local Government in
Gauteng, you were in the committee. So I would ask Mr Watson to bear in
mind that, when he is very critical, he is critical, no less, of his very
Chairperson who had a big hand in shaping the co-operative governance
system through the Constitutional Assembly process, and in fact should have
taken account, let me add, Mr Watson, of the practical issues that might
arise.

But having said that, it is a pleasure to be here, and to say that we live,
of course, as many if not all of us know, in an ever-changing, dynamic,
globalised world, whose key characteristic is the speed and sweep of
events. We have to be constantly on guard, always prepared to change, not
just reactively, but, very importantly, proactively. Our principles, values
and goals need not change, but our means of fulfilling them may have to
change.

As for our basic goals, we are very clear: It is to deepen democracy,
advance nation-building, and ensure the development of our people,
particularly the poor and the disadvantaged. And if these three major tasks
cannot be separated, it is also clear that there cannot be any significant
advances in entrenching democracy or nation-building without substantial
development of the people and a significant reduction in social and
material inequalities.

So the development of our people is fundamental, and though we have made
major strides since 1994 in advancing development, we still have a very
long way to go, and far too limited a time to get there. We need to
accelerate service delivery and development. The next five years are
crucial to ensuring this. They are, as many of us say, our do-or-die years,
not just for the government, but for Parliament too, not least this House,
as you directly represent the people, and have to hold us as the executive
to account.

So any failures on our part are failures of yours as well, which is why we
stress – the Minister and I, and indeed the department – the importance of
Parliament and this House exercising vigorous oversight over us. A strong,
effective Parliament is in the interests of the executive too. You will
serve to ensure that we deliver on our mandate. Indeed, the President too
has made this clear: He has repeatedly stressed the need for an activist
Parliament. Our department fully endorses that. Indeed, we too define
ourselves as an activist department, and the Minister and myself as an
activist Ministry.

Just how activist we will be depends in part on how activist you are, and
as the Minister said earlier in this debate, the NCOP has a vital role to
play, particularly in respect of the responsibilities of our portfolio. It
is interesting, too, that members such as Mr Watson are raising issues here
about local government, but here again, we think the NCOP has a major
oversight responsibility as well, within the constitutional constraints, in
ensuring that municipalities work. It is not just the responsibility, may I
add, of the executive. Accelerating service delivery and development will
be particularly challenging, as we all know, over the next five years,
given the impact of the global economic crisis on our shores. Yes, we are
not as hard hit as other countries, but hit we are, and we have to confront
this hard reality.

So it is against at least three backgrounds that we have begun, and are
taking further, a review of the form of the state that we arrived at. As
many of us know, including Mr Watson who was here in 1994, Mr Mahlangu, the
Chairperson of the House, and others of you, we shaped this Constitution
and the form of the state we derived from that Constitution in the
negotiating process, on the basis of give and take, and on the basis of our
political negotiations. So what is there in the Constitution is not
necessarily objectively in the best interests of a developmental state.
What we have there was for that particular context, of early 1994 to 1996,
when we were trying to consolidate a consensus around our democracy, and we
wanted to ensure that the needs of nation-building were met. So that is the
first background.

What we now need to look at, with regard to the state and what the powers
and functions of the spheres should be, is what is necessary to accelerate
service delivery and development. Therefore the second background against
which we are reviewing the powers and functions of the tiers is the
recognition that we need to accelerate service delivery and development.

A third issue is the recognition, particularly over the past nine months
and more, of the need for us to have a strong developmental state to
withstand the economic crisis that we are experiencing all over the world.
Only strong developmental states will actually survive, and when we talk of
a developmental state, it is not your East Asian tigers, although there are
many lessons there; it is our own African and South African form of it,
which derives from the active participation of people, as the Minister has
said.

We are a department of co-operative governance, not “co-operative
government”, so we are saying we want a democratic developmental state. We
are clear that a system of co-operative governance is enshrined in the
Constitution – that system is not going to change. What is going to happen
is that we are going to strengthen that system to ensure that it works
better.

The imperatives that are underpinning our review are not ideological; they
are actually very practical. They are about ensuring that we are able to
accelerate service delivery and development. They are to take account of
the lessons that we spoke about when we appeared before the relevant
committee, about the failures of the past 15 years.

Co-operative governance has not been working the way we wanted it to work.
That is what it is about. It is about throwing open a discussion. It is
about recognising that one needs to change and adapt as conditions require.
But it is very clear that the hoo-ha in the press and the media is rather
misplaced. The Minister does not have the power to say “Let’s abolish the
provinces”. Indeed, the President doesn’t. And if either of them or both of
them did have that power, I doubt very much whether they’d ever do it,
because they both recognise the need to consult with the people out there.

This Constitution was shaped through the active participation of our
population. Some two million and more people, as we all know, contributed
to shaping that final Constitution. It cannot be changed willy-nilly. There
will be a discussion, and we are not going to be stuck in the past, we are
not going to be fossils; we are going to be creative, imaginative thinkers.
All the Minister and the department have done, is throw open a series of
questions that all of us, whichever party we come from, need to discuss.

The questions that arise are: Is it best to have two or three spheres to
advance our democracy, to build a nation, to accelerate service delivery
and development? If so, whether it is two, three, or however many spheres,
what should be the relevant powers and functions for the period that we are
entering into, in the context of the three or four points that I have set
the background against?

What I am saying, in short, and what the Minister is saying, is that there
are various considerations here about service delivery and development,
whichever party we come from.

It is very instructive that when we appeared before the committee this
morning, across political parties, people were asking: Why is this
department not intervening in all these difficult challenges that
municipalities are having? On the one hand, people are saying this
department, this Minister, must intervene. On the other hand, they are
saying, don’t change the Constitution. How can you have both? In fact, the
Minister is limited in what he and the Ministry can do, because of what is
there in the Constitution.

I think we can certainly do more than we are currently doing, even within
the constraints of the Constitution, but we cannot intervene in the
interventionist sense that was presented to us, not least by the DA
representatives, when we appeared before the committee. In short, we need
to look at this Constitution in the context of the needs of the time. We
are saying to our friends that we need a discussion.

There are various options that are possible. One is that we retain all nine
provinces, with basically the same powers and functions, but clarify them
and fine-tune them. The second option is that we keep the nine provinces,
but with a review of the powers and functions that would make them more
developmental. A third option could be that we reduce the number of
provinces and that can be done in various forms. Either you merge
provinces, or you redraw certain boundaries, if it’s necessary. Or fourthly
– I am just thinking of four options now, there could be many more, but we
need a discussion – we could dissolve the provinces, but strengthen local
government. Those are all the options. There is going to be a discussion,
and this House will play, as the Minister has said, an especially leading
role.

We should not say, on the one hand, that the governing party closes the
discussion, and, on the other hand, when we open a discussion, say “No, no,
you can’t have that discussion”.

So, friends, I want to echo what the Minister has said: You as the National
Council of Provinces will play, as indeed Parliament as a whole will play,
a fundamentally important role. And if you look at the developmental state,
elements of it are there in our Constitution, in Chapter 7 in particular.
They are there in the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act. They are
there in the recognition that the private sector alone cannot deliver. For
market failure reasons the state needs to intervene. But as much as for
market failure reasons, the state needs to intervene to ensure
partnerships, to ensure that the private sector is directed in a particular
way, and many states do.

I need to wrap up. I thank you very much indeed, and we look forward to the
fullest co-operation of the NCOP and wish you well. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Hon Chair of the NCOP, our Ministers here present, we thank
you for your presence. Hon members, let me join our Minister, and also tell
our Minister to say: “Vorentoe, nie agtertoe nie”!

The Minister has outlined the mandate of the new department. All that is
still required is that the Minister must put in place the budget to realise
those objectives as outlined. We have about five priorities that are
required to realise the objectives of our manifesto, and without putting
the proper budget in place, our Minister will hear what we hear from some
of the parties that are like tortoises that do not want to relinquish their
shells. All we need to do is to create decent jobs, fight crime, and
promote rural development, health and education.

If you are from the past, especially if you tasted apartheid, it might not
be easy to transform to what the current government wants the people of
South Africa to taste. And if that is the case, we call on people to
support the type of Minister we have, a Minister who is a choirmaster,
ready to remove any person, from whatever political party, who does not
want the song to be melodious to the audience. If you sing with people who
are not able to sing, as we say in Sotho, your song will indeed not be
melodious to the people.

Minister, we welcome your speech. We as the select committee are saying
that we support every element of your speech. Over the past 15 years, we
have seen that the mandate of the department is forcing us to say that, in
order to move forward, we need to review certain legislative and policy
aspects, precisely because without doing that the broad mandate of
provincial and local government might not be realised. At stake here, hon
House, is the fact that the Department of Provincial and Local Government
Affairs ignored one sphere of our three spheres of government, the
provincial government. While there was a lot of noise about municipalities,
the provincial government did not have enough legislative capacity to
ensure that it intervened.

We are facing a lot of section 139 interventions, which are not a result of
wrong or weak policies; our policies are strong, and our policies are
correct. All that is needed is to close the gap, and the gap is at
provincial level. Therefore we must indeed speed up the White Paper, so
that as NCOP committees we are able to make an input into what type of
provinces we want.

No one is saying that we are going to remove the provinces as yet, but if
perhaps South Africa wants them to be dissolved, fine, because there are
nine provinces, not eight provinces plus one. There are nine provinces in a
unitary state and that is why other people are worried. There are nine
provinces – there is no single province that belongs in a separate pocket.
That is not true. Therefore we need to move forward with that legislation.
We want to see the strengthening of co-operative governance in a
developmental state. Once we do that, we will deliver service freely,
without tension, without section 139 interventions, without section 100
interventions, without any other noise from anywhere, because we would then
have created a correct political environment for governance to take place.
We need to go back and to strengthen that accountability. The process of
accountability in government will have to be addressed so that the policies
and the legislation are strengthened, because there are weaknesses, and we
do not want that type of thing. We need to correct that type of thing.

We can only accelerate service delivery, Minister, if, indeed, we review
that particular procedural relationship, particularly at local level where
farmworkers and MK veterans are to be found. If we don’t do that, how can
we assist them? They are vulnerable, not because of their character, but
because of the history of apartheid. Therefore we are still correcting
that. We are still fighting something that is a legacy, even after 15 years
in power. There are still many remnants of the legacy and the history of
apartheid. Therefore no one must say we are in power and doing nothing,
when these people were in power for over 300 years after Jan van Riebeeck
occupied our land, right here in Cape Town. No one should tell us that.

We have a duty to perform and our duty, as we celebrate our centenary in
2012, is to tell our people that indeed this was a struggle worth fighting
for. They shall have access to water and electricity, better roads, better
jobs, and decent jobs for that matter. And, indeed, that is what we need to
strive for.

Minister, your song, your melody, says we must also strive to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. Indeed, we must commit ourselves to that. I
think because the mandate is broad, the department can no longer say we
want to halve poverty by 2014. We should fight poverty as long as we are
alive. We have to fight it.

There are developments, there are extensions, and there is expansion, but
as long as this government exists, we will have to fight poverty, until it
is totally eradicated.

At municipal level, Minister, we have seen the budget. Earlier on we met
with the Deputy Minister and had a briefing; we have seen the budget and we
are happy with it. We only want to say that here and there we need to
tighten certain screws. For example, we would want the department to study,
debate and review the formula that determines the grant allocation. While
it increases every year, I think the formula needs to be reviewed, because
when you increase the grant next year, you will find that the prices have
also gone up, so the increase might not be visible. Once we review that
formula, we will be in a position to address not only the backlog but to
plan forward for whatever we need to see happening in our community.

The other aspect that we need to tighten is the very same idea of
intergovernmental relations. Previously it was a voluntary forum. We need
that forum to no longer be voluntary, but to be obligatory. It must respond
to a particular instruction or role, so that anyone who does not want to
sing in the Rural Development Initiative, RDI, must know that there are
consequences for not doing that. If that is not happening, the Minister
must be able to drive the forum of the Rural Development Initiative
correctly, and the provinces are at the head of the RDI. Who is at the
centre? At the centre are the provinces ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members, Ministers present
here, first of all I would like to thank the 1,3 million people of South
Africa who voted for Cope to come and represent them in this august House.

Chairperson, allow me to congratulate the Minister. He says it is a new
department. A new department means a new broom which must sweep clean. I’m
going to raise three issues that the Minister is supposed to go and
implement. Firstly, what is the criterion for establishing municipal areas?
For example, in the Musina Local Municipality there are 57 196 people and
in Mutale Municipality there are 108 215 people; in Malamulele there are
307 897 people but it is not a municipality. What has been done now is that
they have taken Malamulele and included it in Mutale. What is the rationale
behind that? I was with Kgosi XiKundu who was crying, because if his people
are included in Mutale, they will have to travel 200 km from where they are
in order to receive services.

In Giyani location – but I call it “town” myself, because I have a problem
with the issue of “location” - there is special treatment for the mayor.
There is a section, Section E in Giyani, that has no tarmac roads or
streets. Since the appointment of the mayor, as I’m standing here, they are
busy working on those streets to tar them. Why is that?

Let us consider the anticorruption strategy, as was mentioned at the first
briefing in the morning and now. Is it merely a rosy document to be put on
the shelves? Will those strategies be properly implemented? I was happy to
hear the Minister say that he was going to come up with a turnaround
strategy which will deal with the complaints and debts. I want to see a
clean audit by 2014. Are we going to be relieved to see that? [Time
expired.]

Mr T E CHAANE: Hon Chairman Mr Mahlangu, hon Ministers present here, hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, the past few days were very hectic as
committees of Parliament engaged in the most important work of budgeting.
Today is no different to those processes, but marks the final stages of the
release of the required resources to implement a national plan, as directed
by the President of the Republic during his state of the nation address on
6 June.

Budgets by nature are about planning for the collection of revenue and its
allocation or equitable and fair division across all spheres of government,
so as to deliver quality services to our people. This is in many instances
restricted by domestic and global market conditions such as the current
economic downturn, whose effects we are beginning to feel. These conditions
should not in any way distract us from achieving our goals, but should
rather, as the President said so well, merely delay us for a while. It is
indeed true that where there is a will, there is a way. This will cannot be
expressed any better than in the policies of our movement, the ANC, and in
its election manifesto, as the quest to build a better life for all. It is
our shared view that the fact that we are in a global financial downturn
does not mean that priorities should be abandoned, but rather that the
country may need to strategically phase in the implementation as conditions
become better.

The fulfilment of our priorities, outlined in the ANC manifesto and
elaborated upon by the President during his state of nation address, is
intended to consolidate the building of a developmental state. We need to
build more capacity at all levels of our government, especially at the
level of our municipalities.

Minister, it is indeed true and correct that the birth of the Department of
Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs on 10 May 2009 is
representing an irreversible shift to an expanded and more deliberate
mandate on matters of co-operative governance. It is indeed correct that
this new name of the department gives effect to the provisions of Chapters
3, 6, 7 and 12 of the Constitution, with Chapters 3 and 12 as fundamental
priorities for execution. As we execute this mammoth task, we should be
cautious never to overlook the harsh realities relating to the obstacles
that are there. The biggest challenge in addressing the plight of our
municipalities is first to deal with glaring legislative barriers that make
it difficult to make meaningful, effective, efficient and responsive
interventions as and when it becomes necessary to do so. The manner in
which support and assistance is required should be provided by both
national and provincial spheres of government to local government needs to
be clarified; otherwise we will never win the battle.

Hon Minister, we are fully behind your call to strengthen systems of
accountability and build clean government as one of the most important
pillars of co-operative governance. However, I must caution that in so
doing, as the choir conductor, great care and support should be given to
our local councillors who, despite all their weaknesses, are faced with
serious challenges. Their lives are more threatened and vulnerable than any
of the public office bearers, for they are our striking forces to achieve
service delivery goals. Being too harsh on them without addressing their
plight or giving them the required support will only allow the enemy to
creep in. Indeed, we should hold them accountable to the communities, but,
in so doing, we should not lose sight of the harsh reality of the risks
that they face on a daily basis. We need to strengthen their capabilities
to provide oversight and to be part of the decision-making processes. Bad
elements among them need to be isolated and dealt with harshly. We should
avoid generalising when pointing at corrupt officials in municipalities.

The department should move with speed to develop codes of conduct for
senior managers. Even so, we should talk more about the frustrations of our
people than about the frustrations of those in power. Both must be
arrested. It can never be right, Minister, that we talk more about the
weaknesses of our municipalities and less about their challenges. It can
never be right that 15 years into democracy we still have people staying in
mining holes at waste dumping sites such as those in the area of the
Matlosana Municipality. It can never be right that our people still live in
pigsty-like shacks, like the ones that we see here in the Western Cape, yet
the DA has the nerve to tell us that the Western Cape is a little heaven.
[Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Gee kans! [Just wait!]

Mr T E CHAANE: Minister, we cannot lecture you on those challenges at the
municipalities, for you know them better than most of us. But the situation
in the North West needs a speedy solution, rather than engagement in the
media, as seems to be happening now. It should not be enough for the
department to be aware of problems of maladministration, lack of
accountability and corruption, as already indicated in many municipalities
across the country, with the North West and the Eastern Cape being cases in
point. Ways and means should be devised to salvage these municipalities,
without this being seen as encroachment or interference.

Like hawks hovering in the sky, monitoring their potential prey, our
committee will do the same with all departments in executing its oversight
work. We will provide support and make necessary criticisms as and when
such are needed. Such criticism should be taken in the same spirit as when
we are singing praises for any job well done.

There should be close collaboration, not only with parliamentary
committees, but also with key sectors of the department. Together we can
make sure that there is no space for laziness, corruption and all these bad
things hindering service delivery. A situation such as the one that we
experienced this morning, Minister, where instead of being given answers we
were told to go and investigate, I should think is not the way to go,
Deputy Minister. The directive from the President to do things differently,
smarter and better is not only meant for ANC members and their supportive
public servants, but it is also directed at all those who, by oath or
affirmation, took up positions to serve the people of this country, and
that includes the opposition.

Minister, true to your slogan, “many voices, one message”, we should create
no space for any uncalled-for discord from members of this broad church. As
you conduct this choir in a competition for improved service delivery,
improvement for a better life and the eradication of poverty, let us be
cautious not to pitch our voices too high when singing about challenges and
problems that are man-made, for we know amongst us there are those who do
nothing but look for such musical discord. Our music should be so
harmonious and sweet that our audience, and even our detractors and
opposition, can do nothing but sing and dance along with us, for that is
the purpose of music: to heal, to soothe, to bless and to uplift the
spirit. That should be the kind of service we provide to our communities
this time around.

The ANC, as a liberation movement, liberated not only the oppressed but
even the oppressor. I was encouraged last week during the youth debate to
hear hon Tim Harris from the DA acknowledging the fact that the youth of
his generation benefited from the work of the class of 1976. I was actually
shocked when he said that. I even said “Wow, he is in the wrong party”, but
on second thought, I realised that we need to recruit him to the ANC. It is
young people like hon Harris who can teach old men like hon Watson how
things are done. [Laughter.]

The ANC is elected by the people and its policies are derived from and
driven by the people. It is about time that the DA realises that they
cannot stop the leaders of the ANC. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As hon Mchunu comes to the podium, I want to
congratulate him for being appointed as MEC responsible for local
government, from being a Speaker. [Applause.] Congratulations, Mr Mchunu.
[Interjections.] We will invite you to visit us.

Mr T W MCHUNU (KwaZulu-Natal): Thank you, Chairperson of the NCOP, for
those comments, which are very lovely indeed.

Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members of the
House, colleagues, I want to start by congratulating the Minister on his
appointment to this position, and also congratulate him for tabling such
comprehensive and what also seem to be very balanced and developmental
budget estimates of public expenditure for the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework period starting now.

For us in KwaZulu-Natal, it is indeed appropriate that we share your
sentiments in accepting the new name of the department and also the new
mandate that goes with it, because we believe this has been fairly
scrutinised. It is most appropriate: it is a new year, it is a new mandate,
it is a new government, and things must be done from a new perspective.

We have looked at the budget, and we certainly want to raise a few
observations. We will raise them not because we are selfish, but from the
perspective of our province.

Firstly, I want to refer to infrastructure development. In this province,
we are the recipients of a huge part of the municipal infrastructure grant
funding, but we are the first ones to cry that it is insufficient. We say
it is insufficient because of experiences regarding the spending of this
budget line. Our province is slightly different from other provinces. Its
topography is one area to go by, which seriously undermines any form of
developmental budget that may be put in. This has affected every aspect and
type of development and every type of budget that has been applied to the
province. It is therefore refreshing for us to notice that the budget has
been increasing over the years and that it has increased again now. But we
still wonder if it is going to fulfil its task.

We are worried in this area of work, because, importantly, it is in this
area where public participation finds expression. For us public
participation and empowerment form the basis and the cornerstone of the
promotion of people-centred and sustainable local governance, which focuses
on service delivery and is responsive to the needs of communities.

In this area, the costs for us in the provinces have been increasing over
the years, but the challenges are further compounded by the latest focus on
rural development. This focus demands that a lot more of the resources be
allocated to development in the rural areas. Our main concern has always
been that the more infrastructure we put in, the more resources we need to
operate and maintain the infrastructure. We have found that this aspect is
not adequately addressed.

We deal with municipalities, as you will know. You have certainly been in
that province time and again; you know the area. You know the capacity of
our municipalities in the rural areas. In some of these municipalities, the
tax base is nonexistent. In others, the tax base is very limited. If you
add the operating and maintenance costs of the infrastructure, which we
help them put in, we are actually saying to municipalities that we are
introducing infrastructure that will degenerate and that they will not be
in a position to operate and maintain on their own at any given time
without assistance from national and provincial government. We are saying
these are areas we must address, both the area of funding and the area of
capacitating these municipalities.

It is on this score, Minister, that we support your argument on debating
the form our governance structures need to take. Whether you are talking
about provinces or municipalities, there must be a debate, because in our
view some of the municipalities are just not going to make it unless some
reconfiguration is arrived at. We want to make an effective contribution in
this regard.
We also want to raise an issue that I believe does not affect many
provinces the way it affects our own. When you talk to us about traditional
leadership, you are not talking to us like you are talking to Gauteng. It
is a different matter, with due respect to my colleagues in Gauteng.
[Laughter.] It is a fact and a reality that we must accept. Gauteng can
never boast the number of traditional leaders that we have. We have 271
traditional councils that have been recognised up to now. This is 271 out
of an existing 302 traditional councils. There are still disputes amongst
some of the communities, with the result that those traditional councils
have not been recognised as yet. We have a debate to enter into there. We
need to share your wisdom on how to deal with such matters, when it comes
to the costs of running these municipalities.

I want to indicate to you that when we talk about traditional leadership
and traditional affairs, we are not just talking about “amakhosi”. The 271
out of 302 that I am referring to are just “amakhosi” and traditional
councils. I have not spoken about “izinduna”. I can certainly tell the
Minister and the House that there are 1 200 “izinduna” whose stipends are
also paid by the department. The costs of running these institutions are
enormous for us. Therefore, based on our experience, and based on your
experience, the new mandate and the new approach, it is appropriate that
all of us engage in debates of this nature and engage in the realities that
face us as a government, as well as the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs - which we fully endorse and support.

But, in respect of all I have said, I want to indicate to you, Mr Minister,
that we have absolutely no qualms with your capabilities and that of your
department. I want to indicate our province’s unreserved support for the
budget as it has been tabled. We want to engage further on many of the
debates that have been raised in your speech, which we value and which we
believe are appropriate. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Thank you, hon Chair. Hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon
Deputy Chair and hon Chief Whip, hon members and distinguished guests in
the gallery, indeed it is a real privilege to stand here, but listening to
and seeing the budget of this department, this new Ministry, I wonder
whether we will make it. With the huge challenges that the councils are
facing in this country, poverty and service delivery are real issues.

The problem that we are really facing here is that service delivery needs
urgent attention and development. However, the very same money is often
used to pay mayors and municipal managers that have been found guilty of
mismanagement and corruption. We must speak truth to power. For example,
the mayor in the municipality of Mier in the Northern Cape was found guilty
of corruption and she lost her appeal but continues to serve as mayor. In
Siyanda District Municipality, meanwhile, the municipal manager was given a
golden handshake of almost R1 million after an investigation report,
following an investigation that was conducted by a private firm, said he
should be charged for the misuse of public funds and corruption. After he
was given a golden handshake, he was appointed temporary municipal manager
in Mier Local Municipality.

How seriously do we take our people at grass-roots level? Sol Plaatje
Municipality already has seven disclaimers. What kind of message does this
send to our people? We should not be surprised when the people barricade
the roads and burn down the houses of councillors. Yet councillors are
facing these challenges without any real support of any kind.

Hierdie Raad verteenwoordig die mense op voetsoolvlak en dit is hoekom ons
moet kyk na hierdie enorme taak. Dienslewering is baie belangrik vir ons
mense. Indien ’n mens na private grond kyk, is daar mense in die Noord-Kaap
wat nie dienste ontvang nie, omdat hulle op private grond bly. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[This Council represents the people at grass-roots level and that is why we
have to look at this huge undertaking. Service delivery is very important
to our people. If one looks at private land, one will see that there are
people in the Northern Cape who are not receiving services, as they are
living on private land.]
This department and this select committee must make sure that the people on
private land who are not receiving water, electricity and houses, need to
receive services. This is very important.

Another point of concern for the ID is the fact that an estimated 30% of
councillors in South Africa are illiterate concerning finances. We need to
train our councillors to understand budgets and to understand how finance
systems are working, so that they can indeed serve the people. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                           VOTING ON 25 JUNE 2009

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Just before I call the next member, I
would like to bring to the attention of members that during the plenary of
25 June 2009 it transpired that a member who was not supposed to vote cast
his vote, and the results that were announced took his vote into account.
After perusal of the voting records, I can confirm that all provinces voted
in favour, and I have requested that the minutes should also be corrected,
so you will receive the corrected minutes next time.

I now call upon the hon Mofokeng.

Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Chairperson, in terms of section 1 of the Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa, national and provincial governments are
required to provide support to and strengthen the capacity of local
government. The provincial sphere of government was developed without a
coherent policy framework to guide its operations towards the realisation
of this provision. The Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs was therefore mandated to develop a White Paper on
provincial governance and review the White Paper on local government.

In terms of section 106 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act,
provinces must establish mechanisms, processes and procedures that are in
line with the provisions of section 155(6) of the Constitution of the
Republic to monitor municipalities in managing their affairs, exercising
their powers and performing their functions. The legislation developed to
guide the performance, operations and functioning of local government,
informed by the Constitution and the White Paper on local government,
include, amongst others, the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, the
Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, the Local Government: Municipal
Finance Management Act, the Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Act
and the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act. It is through
these pieces of legislation that inroads were made to fight poverty at the
local sphere of government. Since 1994 the number of households with access
to water supply has increased by more than 30%, the number of households
with access to basic sanitation has increased by more than 35%, and the
number of households with electricity connections has increased by more
than 30%. More than two million houses have been constructed over the past
15 years to provide shelter to those without houses.

Over and above this, there are policy questions and proposals that have
emanated from the experience we have had over the past 15 years, which
mainly focus on public consultation to strengthen the quality and democracy
of local government. Municipalities have not been proactive in providing
feedback and accounting to the community on their performance as required
by the legislation. There is room for municipalities to build meaningful
partnerships with community-based organisations, labour organisations and
the private sector.

Municipalities are further faced with the challenge of financial management
and revenue generation. A number of municipalities are faced with
bankruptcy, while others are running deficits. Regardless of these
challenges that municipalities are facing, there is a steady improvement in
the development of Local Economic Development, strategies and policies, but
the challenge remains with the implementation of these strategies and
policies. A new department has been established, which should be focusing
on economic development. The question therefore arises as to how Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs will be working with this
department and provinces to ensure that job creation at the municipal level
is intensified, given the challenges caused by the global economic
downturn.

Given the challenges mentioned above, a number of municipalities have been
placed under both section 106 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems
Act and section 139 of the Constitution. This process is a challenge both
in respect of capital and human resources to assist these municipalities
that are in the ICU. Provisions are made for the department in this budget
to ensure that provinces are not held back by a lack of resources in
exercising their mandate to assist municipalities that are not performing
well. The role and function of the provincial sphere of government is
critical in addressing the above-mentioned challenges in local government,
as it is the sphere that is closest to local government. The areas which
need improving are those of synergistic connections between provincial
growth and development strategies and municipal integrated development
plans. Municipalities must develop realistic IDPs and credible Local
Economic Development, LED, programmes. Obviously, the operationalisation of
these programmes is critical, as municipalities would need the material and
human resources as well as the management and operational systems to
implement their IDPs and LEDs.

However, the department addressed the fundamental weaknesses of local
government, which includes the following: Poor planning; weak links between
planning, policy-making and budgeting; poor expenditure control; little
relationship between formulated and executed budget; poor cash management;
and poorly motivated staff. There is a lack of alignment between the
budgeting and planning regimes, which means that the system is not
functioning as cohesively as it ought to. It has in a way contributed to
poor spending, especially with regard to the municipal infrastructure
grant. These funds are often rolled over or withdrawn by both the
department and the National Treasury.

Meanwhile service delivery remains a serious challenge. It is imperative
that the department introduces measures through this budget to ensure that
the provincial government, as the sphere working closely with local
government, reduces cost spending to the lowest possible figure.

The new support programme for municipalities should seek to instil greater
certainty in the support, monetary and supervisory regimes that affect the
local and provincial spheres of government. The big question remains as to
how much has been set aside by the department to assist municipalities to
perform their functions through the guidance and support of the provincial
sphere of government. It should also be noted that some municipalities are
financially not capable of paying salaries to staff, while some provinces
are battling to implement fully the provisions of both section 106 of the
Local Government: Municipal Systems Act and section 139 of the
Constitution. We need to level both financial and human resources. If this
issue is not addressed with the urgency it deserves, we will still have a
long way before we can win the battle against poverty and service backlogs
and achieve a well-established, well-functioning system of local
government.

The efficiency and effectiveness of hands-on support through the two-year
programme of Project Consolidate remains critical. A number of
municipalities that were part of Project Consolidate have been placed under
section 139, while others gained a sure sense of relief as a result of this
programme. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr J J VISSER (Western Cape): Madam Chair, members of this House, thank you
for the opportunity to speak here today. I would like to acknowledge the
budget speech of Minister Sicelo Shiceka, which he delivered to the country
last Tuesday, 23 June 2009. The speech is setting a clear direction for a
local government programme of action for the next five years. The Western
Cape is committed to working with the Minister of Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs to achieve these objectives. I am pleased to say
that Minister Shiceka’s priorities and the provincial priorities are well
aligned.

Mr Shiceka emphasised the importance of co-operative governance, greater
discipline amongst councillors and officials, better service delivery, and
development partnerships.

Co-operative governance can only work if we rise above party politics and
work together. We have quarterly meetings of the provincial advisory forum,
which are chaired by the MEC for local government, and we also have
provincial co-ordinating forums, which are chaired by the Premier. In the
coming year we shall ensure that these meetings are not talk shops but
places where we can learn from one another. They should be places where we
strengthen our relationship with national and provincial departments. I am
pleased that Mr Sicelo Shiceka has agreed to come to a forthcoming
provincial advisory forum. We are also prioritising service delivery.
Municipalities in the Western Cape only spent 78% of their capital budgets
last year and we are going to increase this significantly in the coming
year.

Another problem is that municipalities are not spending enough on
maintaining the infrastructure that they do have. The province expects
municipalities to spend at least 10% of their operational budgets on
infrastructure maintenance, phased in over the next four years.

We are also doing a comprehensive audit on our water and sanitation
infrastructure in order to develop a ten-year provincial infrastructure
project and financing plan for municipalities. We are working together with
the national Department of Water and Environmental Affairs and the
provincial treasury on this project. The province is putting a lot of
effort into building the capacity of municipalities. The department is
working together with municipalities to finalise the municipal support
plans, the MSPs, which identify capacity gaps and say how they could be
addressed over the next five years.

Here are some examples of how we are already assisting municipalities. We
are helping 19 municipalities to improve their performance management
systems. We are assisting municipalities to implement fully the Local
Government: Municipal Property Rates Act. Together with Salga, we will
provide leadership training to councillors and we are also rolling out code
of conduct training to councillors.

I agree with Minister Shiceka that we must instil more discipline in
municipalities. We are concerned that there has been a breakdown of
discipline among both councillors and officials. The Department of Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs is in the process of compiling
a list of councillors and officials who owe money to municipalities for
rates or services charged. If these debts are not paid within two months,
the mayors of these municipalities must answer for this.

We want to make sure that fraud and corruption are eliminated and that
councillors and their family members do not unlawfully benefit from
municipal contracts. One of the ways to stop fraud is to focus on fraud
prevention. The department has developed antifraud guidelines for local
government in respect of human resources and finance. We are supporting ten
municipalities with the compilation of anticorruption strategies and
implementation plans, eight with ethics management planning and ten with
debt governance training.

The province has a concern around integrated development plans, the so-
called IDPs. We are pleased that 20 out of the 20 municipalities have IDPs
that are considered to be credible, but many of these are only IDPs on
paper. We are asking the department to check every IDP and make sure that
it is an actual plan and not a wish list. We will also help municipalities
to improve their integrated planning through the IDP learnership programme.
This programme is offered to all municipalities and it includes six
modules.

Another significant programme of the province is disaster planning. We have
experienced many disasters in the Western Cape during the past 12 months,
including floods, fires and violence against foreigners. The long-term
solution to disasters is to be proactive and to prevent disasters or reduce
their impact. The provincial disaster management centre will focus its
efforts on assisting municipalities and provincial departments to do
exactly this in the coming year.

I have indicated that there is alignment between national and provincial
strategic priorities. However, we as the Western Cape province also have a
number of concerns that we will have to raise in Parliament. Firstly, the
development of provincial and local government as independent spheres of
government must be respected. Service delivery cannot be effective if it is
overcentralised. Secondly, while the remuneration of councillors is
important, we believe that a sharp and singular focus must be on
performance. There are many mayors and councillors in the Western Cape, and
I am sure across the country, who work very hard, but as Minister Shiceka
himself indicated, we are way short of achieving our service delivery
objectives. Our Minister Anton de Waal is concerned about the district
councils. Some district councils are well resourced, but are not using the
resources to address problems of poverty and underdevelopment.

In conclusion, we look forward to discussing these issues and working with
the national government to achieve our objectives. I thank you. [Applause.]

Cllr S PITI (Salga): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister,
hon members of the House, firstly, allow me to apologise on behalf of our
chairperson of Salga, Councillor Masondo, who unfortunately could not make
it.

The SA Local Government Association, Salga, takes great pride, and is
indeed honoured, in participating in this historic Budget Vote debate of
the newly formed Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs. Salga has a very close working relationship with the department,
and we are committed to remain its close intergovernmental partner in
pursuit of enhanced service delivery to the communities across the length
and breadth of our country.

Salga participated in the recent bosberaad of the department where
participants engaged with its new role of strengthening intergovernmental
relations, building enhanced accountability across the three spheres and
bringing traditional leadership into the mainstream democratic discourse.
Salga shares the vision of the department of a strong local sphere of
government that is people-centred, that is accountable to its residents and
communities, that is developmentally oriented in respect of how it delivers
services, and that is an equal partner to the other spheres of government
with regard to how it responds to the national agenda set by the President.
In this regard the provision of job opportunities and the foundation of
economic development by providing sustainable infrastructure and services
must find full expression in the integrated development plans of
municipalities for this term of government.

Salga is committed to playing its role in fulfilling these aspects of the
national agenda. In this regard we wish to emphasise the findings of the
recently released community survey by Statistics South Africa in October
2007 where projects and progress regarding the provision of services were
detailed. The report noted that over 88% of households have access to piped
water, over 80% of households have access to electricity, and over 60% of
households have access to flush toilets. These gains in the extension of
services to other people were made possible through the committed
endeavours of the three spheres of government working towards this common
goal. Salga is firmly of the view that the provision of services by the
sphere of government closest to the people is the most sustainable way for
government as a whole to enhance democracy, by putting people in charge of
their destinies through local accountability.

In the area of policy development, legislative and regulatory reform, we
have recently gone through a policy review process in respect of provincial
and local government. During that process, Salga raised a number of issues
in its submissions, which we will continue to raise as the process reaches
its conclusion. These issues include, among others, strengthening public
participation in local decision-making; strengthening the relationships
between ward councillors, community development workers, and traditional
leaders; strengthening organised local government to enhance its
intergovernmental capacities; streamlining development planning across the
spheres with IDPs being the building blocks of government-wide planning;
building coherent capacity at local level to facilitate local economic
development; and developing a comprehensive approach to councillor support,
not merely remuneration, that will enable local politicians to serve their
communities effectively and sustainably, to name but a few.

Hon Chairperson and hon Minister, in the area of urban and rural
development, the nodal municipalities continue to support the roll-out of
urban and rural development projects aimed at increasing the visibility of
government as a whole in the lives of our people. The innovative planning
initiatives within these areas continue to enrich the increased
participation of communities in developmentally oriented projects. We can
confirm the findings of the review done in the anchor areas — that to
consolidate private and public sector investment can be a powerful tool for
improving investor confidence, increase public participation, and promote
the quality of the public space and local services in underdeveloped areas.

The focus of the rural development programme must urgently continue to
improve service delivery and create development opportunities in the rural
hinterland. There is a need for an increased partnership between all
spheres of government and the private sector to make a success of this
approach. Rural development cannot and should not be the sole
responsibility of the municipalities in those areas.

Hon Chair and hon Minister, building the institutional and human resource
capacity of local government must continue to be a priority of government.
The lessons of Project Consolidate are embedded in the strategic agenda of
local government. Although it is early days, there is a marked improvement
in the percentage of section 67 managers that have signed performance
agreements. The pressure must be maintained to continue this climate.
In the area of free basic services and infrastructure, it is noteworthy
that the expenditure of municipalities has increased significantly. It does
however remain a concern that the funding of new infrastructure is not
matched by proportional funding for the upkeep and maintenance of existing
infrastructure. In as much as new infrastructure is needed to extend
services to previously unserved areas, local government is paying the price
for infrastructure that is dilapidated and at times incapable of being
returned to its useful state. The infrastructure maintenance backlog is
growing by the day and it will take a considered effort by both national
and local government to address the ticking time bomb.

Salga continues to make the point that the equitable transfer to
municipalities is insufficient for local government to play its
developmental role. The challenges in especially the rural areas are
immense and very often an intergovernmental transfer is the only source of
reliable income for such municipalities. This formula must be revised to
take account of such rural challenges.

As indicated earlier, Salga remains committed to playing its role in the
attainment of the national agenda. It is committed to playing this role in
every intergovernmental forum, in every municipality, and, of course, in
this august House. Salga has now strengthened its ability to engage
meaningfully in Parliament as a whole, but more particularly in this House.
Salga wants to take this opportunity to wish hon Minister Shiceka well in
his endeavours. May the partnership between the Ministry, the department,
and Salga grow from strength to strength. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L P M NZIMANDE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon MEC, hon members in the
House, my work has been made easy, because I come from KwaZulu-Natal and my
leader has spoken already, so I have a free role to play.

I need to make one or two things clear to hon Watson. Hon Watson, firstly,
on affirmative action, over 50% of the citizens of South Africa believe in
affirmative action, because they stand no chance in a new democracy for any
opportunity. It is a fallacy of the DA to believe that equal opportunities
can just fall like manna from heaven. It cannot happen. Transformation is
required for this purpose. There would be no change for people with
disabilities, for young people, for black people, and for women in this
country if there were no affirmative action. Therefore I think the debate
must no longer be about whether affirmative action works or doesn’t work.
One of the principles is the values contained in the objectives of
affirmative action.

Secondly, I think we need to move from arguing about the collapse of ANC
municipalities or this and that, and get to the crux of the issue. The crux
of the issue is that we have a new system that is even younger than these
15 years that we are talking about, because local government is younger
than national and provincial government. And whatever we are talking about
— whether it is about corruption, as Mr Gunda has done — we can’t do it by
crying and lamenting about what is criminal. What is criminal is criminal;
it is incumbent upon every one of us to deal with what is criminal as
criminal, so that nobody gets blamed for things that are criminal.

As the ANC government our objectives are to enhance, to strengthen, and to
create institutions that will help us in providing for the resources and
taking forward the programmes that would assist in dealing with the issues
of our people. The objectives that we espoused in this new term of
Parliament, contained in the manifesto, outline the pillars upon which we
anchor all our engagements. We are pleased to hear today about the new
vigour, the energy, and the plans and policies that are before us. That is
the reason why we stand up to support the budget. We need to support the
budget because it is sufficient. We are supporting this budget because it
is now giving us a clear direction as to what capacity we need, what
resources we need, and what kind of people we need to take these matters
forward.

My emphasis here is to make a plea to you and the departmental officials
with regard to our vulnerable groups. I am glad that the vulnerable groups
are now part of the planning and the priorities of this new budget of the
new department, as reconfigured. I hope that we will now have our indigent
policies standardised to be able to deal with the needs of the poor who are
often part of these vulnerable groups. Furthermore I hope that the
structures and institutions that are created will be caring, taking
cognisance of the needs and the issues of the people who are affected to
the core by service delivery objectives. Now, as we are nearing the
maturity date of the Millennium Development Goals of 2014, we are indeed
poised to take forward and to make sure that we are able and better
equipped to eradicate poverty, and to ensure that there is action with
regard to education. We also need to ensure that we would no longer have to
argue the issue of gender, because we would have attained full empowerment
of women, as reflected in the Millennium Development Goals to which we are
a signatory.

Before my time expires, let me say that I was hoping Mr Visser would raise
certain things. I want to raise them, because I am focusing on the area of
vulnerable groups. It is a sad thing for the DA that Mr Watson has come
here to lecture us about how affirmative action for any group is wrong. You
have fired a disabled head of department in the Western Cape because she is
an ANC supporter. She was the HOD for local government elections.
[Interjections.] I respect that woman, because of her skill and merits; her
qualifications in my view cannot be surpassed. Whatever we are talking
about here, Mr Visser, you were just posing exactly what that manager has
been implementing in this province. For the first time you are officially,
on paper, in black and white, acknowledging the ANC in the Western Cape in
respect of local government, because all the things you have been talking
about you couldn’t have done in the four weeks since you have been in
power. So your whole speech really is singing our praises. I think you have
now really listened to what our President has been saying, that is for us
to work together and help each other.

Going forward, we are saying to the DA, and we will say it again and again:
Where are the women? We are asking: Where are your young people? We are
asking: Where are the disabled people? [Interjections.] You cannot shelve
them. Therefore, whatever issue you would like to raise, it would be
hypocritical to blame the ANC for anything to do with affirmative action,
including cadre deployment. You cannot fire people for the sake of firing
them because you think they are ANC supporters.

Going forward, together we can do more. If you believe in the debate about
merit and skill, you should stop justifying your evictions and firing
people because they support the ANC. You should stop firing people because
they were working with the previous ANC government, if you are serious
about what you are talking about.

Going forward, we support this budget, because, as indicated, the budget
gives us a better framework, and we understand that there is now a strong
focus on monitoring and evaluation within the budget. We are supporting
this budget because we now understand the concerns and the problems that we
are faced with, and, going forward, our role as the NCOP will be to make
sure that we do not become ... We will go to the North West, we will go
anywhere in the country, including the Western Cape ... Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! I alert all
members to the fact that I have allocated five more minutes to Minister
Shiceka, because there are quite a lot of questions to answer. Minister
Shiceka.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Thank you
very much, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP.

I want to thank everyone for the contributions that have been made in this
discussion and say that the debate, in my view, was of quality. That was
confirmed by the Deputy Minister, who sat in this House for the first time
in his life. [Applause.] He was saying that the debate was a quality one,
comparatively speaking. I won’t say comparative to what. [Laughter.] I was
telling him that this is always the case. This House is always focused, and
its debates are of quality.

At the same time I want to say that it is clear to me that everyone in this
debate calls for the intervention of government at the national level on
issues of governance across the board, whether in municipalities or in
provinces. I can promise you we are going to do exactly that. We are going
to breathe heavily down the necks of everyone who is not performing their
tasks and carrying out their responsibilities. [Applause.] We believe that,
from our side, serving the people of South Africa in whatever role is a
privilege, and that privilege must not be taken for granted. That privilege
must be respected, because the decisions we make affect many people. We are
not working in the private sector where decisions we are making only affect
us and our families. Therefore we must never betray the trust that our
people, as the people of this country, place in us, including ourselves in
this august House.

Mr Watson, the veteran, is raising an issue around representivity, the
removal of people, the deployment of cadres and so on. I think he must tell
me and members of this House why there are no women in the provincial
cabinet of this province. We will continuously raise this issue because we
believe that the women of South Africa are in the majority, and also in the
Western Cape. Are you telling us that there are no capable women in this
province? That is the first thing. Secondly, since the DA has come to
power, whether in the local municipality of Cape Town or the province, it
has been on a purge to remove administrators that were appointed by the
ANC. Are you choosing your own friends, DA? You must not throw stones when
you live in a glass house. [Applause.]

The hon member also raised the issue of interventions. He is saying that
there are pending interventions. We are going to come to the Western Cape.
We are going to meet with the provincial government. I have had discussions
with the leader of the DA, Madam Helen Zille. We have agreed that in this
country there is no island. There is no structure that should believe that
it can make a UDI. The Western Cape and the Cape Town municipality are part
of the bigger South Africa. In that respect we have agreed that we will
work together in partnership, as Mr Visser has said, which I appreciate,
and we have agreed that in doing so, we are going to pursue the goals that
must be pursued.

We shall work within the Constitution and within the laws. However, we are
raising the issue of amending the Constitution. Let me tell you, in the
area of local government, there is no doctrine in respect of the separation
of powers. All powers are centred and vested in the council. It is the
council that delegates to the executive committee or mayoral committee, and
the mayoral committee delegates at that level. There is a blurring of lines
of accountability and oversight, and we are saying that this situation
cannot be allowed to continue. In addition to that, I have raised the issue
that the NCOP has ghettoised the representation of local government, and if
this House has to focus on issues of local government in the provinces, it
means we have to amend the Constitution. It must be able to reflect that.

But also, going forward, if you look at the issue of the system, there are
a lot of challenges. Amongst those are the challenges of alignment between
national, provincial and local government, not only regarding the
structure, but also as far as budgeting is concerned. The financial year of
the national and provincial budgeting cycle ends in March. In the local
municipalities it ends in June. The implication of that is that when
provinces and national government are coming to the end of their financial
year, they dump money in municipalities. We are saying we must align
everything, including structures, in relation to local government. This
requires the amendment of the Constitution.

Also, if you look at the issue of electricity, which is a national
strategic area with regard to basic service delivery, it cannot be left to
the whims of individual municipalities. These municipalities sometimes
don’t look at the broader interests of the country. They look myopically at
their own areas of responsibility. That is why we support the amendment of
the Constitution to ensure that we look at national priorities. Water and
electricity are the most important ones. Nobody can disagree with that.
Furthermore investment in infrastructure by municipalities over time has
not been very good. This is why we are looking at different ways and
mechanisms of dealing with these issues.

Therefore, from our point of view, Mr Watson, we support a constitutional
amendment, because it is going to ensure that South Africa is placed where
it belongs, at a place where it is the best of the best compared to other
countries. That is what we believe in, and we support that very strongly.
The other issue that is raised by the people’s movement, the ANC, is the
issue around the formula for the allocation of resources. We agree with
that. In fact, we are engaging with the Financial and Fiscal Commission,
FFC, to say we believe the formula for the allocation of resources, in
relation to the division of revenue, is skewed. But in addition to that,
with regard to its strategy, the ANC is biased towards the poor and the
vulnerable. If you agree with this, then this must be reflected even in
respect of the allocation of resources. The way the system is currently
working is that it gives more resources to municipalities and provinces
that are strong, and we believe that we should work to support the weak
that cannot stand on their own. That is what we are calling for with regard
to change. We agree with the movement in that respect, and we have said
that we are going to support it as we go forward.

Also, we are raising an issue around voluntarism in the intergovernmental
relations system. We support that. We are saying it must be dealt with,
going forward.

With regard to the issue of the North West, we are going to engage with
that, going forward.

In relation to the issue raised by Cope: We are saying on the issue of the
establishment of municipalities, it’s a matter we are engaging upon. We are
looking at the formula, but I believe that the legislation dealing with
local government must be section 76. Currently it is section 75, which I
believe is a challenge. At the same time, my view on all section 75 laws is
that it should be introduced in the NCOP. When such legislation goes to the
NA, it should be a second process; it should not start in the NA. I think
the NA must deal with section 75 pieces of legislation when they are
introduced.

Concerning the issues that you have raised, Tata Makhubela, we will look at
them. We will ensure that we attend to them, because we believe your
contribution is quite important, going forward. We understand these are
issues that bother you.

Mr Chaane, we are focusing on infrastructure. We are saying we cannot
continue to deal with infrastructure the way we are dealing with it – we
will never deliver, or even address the backlogs. We are introducing a
comprehensive infrastructure plan that will look at the backlogs in every
municipality, in every city, in every town in this country. And we believe
that we must rope in the private sector, particularly when dealing with
these issues in future. We agree on the topography of the issues. We have
engaged with you on the issue of the Financial and Fiscal Commission
formula that we have to look at. Let us work together.

You are raising an issue around traditional leadership and the support that
is required. We are looking at ensuring that this area is a concurrent
function. In terms of the formula, the FFC must actually ensure that money
is given to provinces for traditional leaders as a way to take things
forward. These are matters that we will be discussing with you, going
forward. We agree with you that KwaZulu-Natal has a lot of challenges.

We want to thank you very much as a province, because you show a high
degree of organisation and discipline in the way you conduct activities.
That discipline is also demonstrated by your presence here in this debate.
We also want to address the issue of MECs not participating in important
debates in this House, because we believe that they are undermining this
House by not attending. We are going to take that up. [Applause.] We will
be taking up the issue with the Leader of Government Business to ensure
that these matters are attended to, going forward, Deputy Chairperson.

At the same time, from our point of view, we want to call on everyone to
ensure that we work together in such a way that we are able to move
forward, because we believe that local government matters can be
politicised. We must rise above politics so that we can actually address
the issues that are affecting our people. We are saying that local
government should be everybody’s business, because whether we’re at work or
at home, everyone is affected. If your electricity doesn’t work when you
wake up in the morning and you don’t have water, we become concerned. If
the traffic lights are not working, we become concerned. Therefore, let us
ensure that we work together.
We will listen to the opposition. If you see things that are not going well
in your own area, where you work, where you stay, take them up with the
department. We’ll be able to ensure that we take up these matters honestly
without any bias in the way in which we deal with it, because we believe
that together we can ensure that South Africa is a country, a place, where
we will be happy to live and work.

Therefore collective wisdom is quite important, going forward, in
addressing issues that must be taken up. As a department, we don’t believe
that we are a repository of wisdom. We believe that the wisdom is with the
people, the wisdom is with you. Our task is to co-ordinate that wisdom. Our
task is to direct what must be done. That is why we are here; that is why
we are talking about a choir conductor, because we believe that a choir
conductor is able to ensure that there is a harmonious melody in the way
things are done. And we believe you, as the NCOP, are a partner. We must
look at how to work together, going forward, in order to address these
issues.

There is an issue around resource allocation. You know that the government
was established after the Budget had been passed. We have agreed that by
October the processes for the allocation of resources would be reflected
and addressed. Therefore we are saying let us ensure that we deal with
these issues while we are able to work together.

The other thing that we are going to do is that we are going to take all
the speeches that have been presented here. It is unfortunate for those who
have not prepared speeches, because it means we cannot refer to anything,
except that we could actually check the Hansard, so that we are able to
respond to each and every one who has made an input in this debate. We want
to ensure that we take up issues and follow up on matters as we go forward.
You see my team there, highly energised and highly motivated. Their morale
is very high. They are there and ready to deliver.

I want to conclude by saying we are going to be working with the Deputy
President when we embark on Taking Parliament to the People, to follow up
on issues that are raised, even matters that are raised in the provinces
and municipalities. The Deputy President will be following up with national
departments regarding such issues, so that we are a responsive government.
We will be moving in, Matungwane, to Matatiele to follow up on the issue
that has been raised around correspondence. We are going there to go and
test the views of the public, the views of the people. We are saying that
we have listened to organisations, and they have not assisted us. The best
thing to do is to go to the people. But in doing so, we will be working
together. We will be doing the same in Matatiele, because we believe that
we must actually address issues collectively. We don’t believe in sweeping
things under the carpet. We believe that we must confront every issue that
has been raised, so that we are able to take the country forward, as we do
our work as a country.
I want to thank the committee for their incisive engagement with the
department. I want to thank the officials for their support and engagement,
and I also thank Macingwane for being here with us. We are saying your
support is valuable and appreciated by us, and at the same time I want to
thank the Deputy Minister for his support and his free-spirited approach on
issues. He is a person who says what he thinks at any time. Continue with
that free-spirited role that you are playing. Thank you very much,
colleagues. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Budget Vote No 25 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, prior to our country’s
democratisation in 1994, we were certainly not celebrated as a tourism
destination that offered a diversity of experiences and cultures to our
foreign travellers or to our own domestic tourists. We did not attract
large numbers of international visitors, nor did we as South Africans
travel our own country to explore our common humanity. We lived segregated
lives, pitted against each other because of our divisive racial policies,
and a mere two decades ago many prime tourist destinations were no-go areas
to the majority of South Africans.



Since the advent of democracy, our popularity as a tourism destination has
grown beyond anything we could have envisioned 15 years ago. In 1994, fewer
than 600 000 tourists visited our country. Last year, we saw more than 9,5
million foreign arrivals to this country, many from our immediate
neighbouring countries who were still the targets of government-sponsored
destabilisation in the recent past. In fact, since 1994 we have seen 48
million foreign arrivals, which is a number larger than the total
population of our country.

These visitors come to South Africa because it is a destination that offers
everything from natural beauty and wildlife to authentic cultural
experiences, as well as world-class facilities. All of this is showcased
with contagious energy by warm-hearted South Africans who passionately
believe in the product they are promoting — the country we call home.

In South Africa tourism is one of the major contributors to our GDP. It
employs about half a million people directly, whilst creating even more
indirect employment opportunities.

The global economic downturn and its consequences need little elaboration.
According to the United Nations World Tourism Organisation, the UNWTO,
international tourist arrivals declined from 7% in 2007 to just 2% in 2008,
which was the fourth consecutive year of strong international growth.

In this country our tourism sector has certainly proved to be more
resilient than some other economic sectors, but we are not immune to the
effects of the economic crisis. In 2008, we bucked the worldwide negative
trend with 5,5% growth in our foreign arrivals. Furthermore, in 2008
foreign direct spend grew by an estimated 23,5%, amounting to more than R74
billion. Yet, even though we have thus far been spared the worst impacts,
we are not complacent and cannot ignore the fact that our growth could slow
down during this year as many of our primary markets remain in recession.

Fortunately, in the face of these challenges, we understand the importance
of planning better and getting the fundamentals right. We will continue to
grow, in a balanced way, our domestic, regional and long-haul markets. And
if there are any questions in this regard, I will deal with them in the
reply.

We will also enhance our stringent quality control regime that ensures
value for money, as well as the unique selling points of our natural
heritage. To build resilience, we understand that we can do even more
through improved market analysis, product diversification, improved
geographical spread, and the promotion of rural tourism as well as people
and skills development.

Chairperson, tourism holds many benefits for our country. These can be
measured in terms of, amongst other things, economic growth, job creation,
foreign currency earnings, skills development, and infrastructure
development. But there is a benefit of tourism that is very hard to
quantify, and yet is one of the most valuable. It is the fact that tourism
has helped us build bridges to the farthest corners of the world, and also,
most importantly, between the people of our own country. The social capital
unlocked by tourism should not be underestimated.

We have come a long way as a nation since we opened our towns, our cities,
our homes and hearts to each other in 1994. The more we appreciated each
other and understood our rich cultures and practices, the more we became
tourists in our own country. The more we opened our eyes to the unseen
beauty and our ears to the uncelebrated songs, the better ambassadors we
became of all the variety that South Africa encompasses. As fellow
citizens, we have a shared responsibility for our future, and I would like
to encourage all South Africans to continue on this journey towards a
better future for all.

Tourism has helped us learn about each other, and this learning has been
the basis of understanding, tolerance and respect. It is this
transformative power of tourism that we can now present to the world as we
prepare to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup next year. It affords us a once-in-
a-lifetime chance to show the best we have as a tourism destination, which
is our people and their cultures, our natural heritage and our world-class
infrastructure that fills all of us with pride.

The World Cup has not only resulted in huge public sector investment, but
also in massive new investment by the tourism industry itself. Our
government is investing more than R26 billion in stadiums and precinct
development, transport, and ports of entry infrastructure.

In addition, our department has allocated more than R936 million of our
expanded public works allocation for 2009 through to 2012 to further
develop the tourism sector. Here, special emphasis will be placed on the
development of rural tourism.

Through our Tourism Enterprise Partnership programme, we have already given
a major boost to the fast-tracked development of small and medium-sized
tourism enterprises. Since the inception of this programme in 2000, we have
facilitated transactions worth more than R4 billion and assisted more than
5 500 enterprises.

Following the establishment of an independent Department of Tourism after
the elections, we are now in the process of formulating a strategic vision
and defining our key deliverables. We are building a re-energised tourism
department with a renewed focus on sustainable, competitive and equitable
tourism development and growth to the benefit of all South Africans.

I look forward to joining hands with an enthusiastic new department,
stakeholders in the South African tourism industry, our provinces, and
local governments in promoting our country as one of the most special
tourism destinations in the world.

For me and Deputy Minister Thokozile Xasa, it is a privilege to work with
an inspired management team, led by the director-general, Nosipho Ngcaba. I
would also like to express the appreciation of our department to the
chairperson and members of our select committee.

As we share our country with each other and get to know our fellow South
Africans better, I have no doubt that our confidence and excitement about
our destination will continue to grow. Tourism has indeed helped us to
unite as a nation as we cross the divides that once separated us. I look
forward to working with all South Africans in unifying our nation behind
the common goal of promoting and proudly celebrating our country.

Chairperson, I will deal with the issues that members raise in my reply, as
well as any questions they might have. Thank you very much. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS: Hon Chairperson,
hon members, our guests who are here, officials, ladies and gentlemen, we,
as a department that is at the forefront of ensuring that environmental
policy-making is responsive to the challenges faced by our people, feel
that we must do more.

It is with this in mind that we will support rural development objectives
by ensuring that the integrity of the ecosystems, on which rural economies
are based, is protected. Needless to say, we are mindful of the enormity of
the work to be done; hence, we call for partnerships with other spheres of
government.

As the President reminded us in his state of the nation address, working
together we can do more; we need to do exactly that. We call upon all
provinces to work with us in designing programmes that are relevant to
their social settings in this regard. This partnership will not only be
confined to government, as we are convinced that participatory democracy is
central to rolling out successful community-based natural resource
management programmes that will focus on enterprise development and benefit-
sharing from indigenous biological resources with local communities.

The policy and legislative tools provided by the National Environmental
Management: Biodiversity Act will therefore be used to this effect. We’ll
make sure that the process makes sense to the affected communities, and
their effective involvement will be encouraged.

With regard to the management, protection and monitoring of South Africa’s
marine protected areas and estuaries, our department continues to protect
the country’s biodiversity, build up fish stocks and regulate the
activities of users.

With the establishment of the Still Bay Marine Protected Area, the total
number of marine protected areas in the country is now 20. By extending the
marine areas that are brought under protection, the department can ensure
the effective management, monitoring and surveillance of promulgated marine
protected areas, through partnerships with other conservation agencies, and
the development of management plans.

Most of South Africa’s estuaries are heavily impacted upon by the variety
of human activities. Six estuary management plans were completed in the
Cape region. The development of two estuary management plans in the Eastern
Cape is under way, and a further nine management plans are being developed
through co-operation with the Cape Action for People and the Environment
and local municipalities.

Regarding protected areas, we feel the current system of protected areas in
South Africa is under management and oversight of no fewer than 20
institutions at provincial and national level, in addition to local
government institutions which manage about 229 local protected areas. This
has led to significant fragmentation, overlapping in function, and
duplication, and the efforts that are being made, we feel, are somewhat of
a waste of resources.

It therefore makes sense in terms of good governance that rationalisation
of protected areas within bioregions, where possible, should take place in
order to ensure that government resources are effectively deployed and
utilised economically, and that management approaches are harmonised across
the board. The packaging and commercialisation of these larger iconic areas
are more logical and easier. By attracting tourists, these areas will
contribute both to local as well as to wider economic development.

It is in this context that a feasibility study towards the rationalisation
of protected area management and world heritage sites will be undertaken by
our department, in order to ensure effective and efficient institutional
management of these nationally and globally significant biodiverse assets.

This evaluation will assist us in carefully managing protected areas to
cope with escalating pressures and threats such as climate change and alien
and invasive species. This will directly contribute towards improving
protected area management by identifying critical management weaknesses,
key threats, inappropriate policies, issues of capacity-building and
management gaps in the protected areas network, as well as existing
financial constraints.

The department will continue to work closely with the sector departments
and other players also supporting land and agrarian reform and food
security. This will entail integration of processes such as the management
of alien and invasive species as well as strengthening the management of
genetically modified organisms in light of the role of agricultural
biotechnology in food security.

The department has worked very closely with key role-players in developing
a national core management framework to support uniform participation and
beneficiation of communities in protected areas. In order to guarantee
effective implementation of this core management framework, a post-
settlement support programme for protected areas will be developed in
collaboration with relevant institutions, in line with the settlement
implementation strategy which was developed by the Land Claims Commission
in 2007.

Working together to improve the quality of the air we breathe has been one
of the priorities of this government. The creation of a healthy nation
includes paying careful attention to the quality of the air that we
breathe. Last week, we launched the 2009 Cleaner Fires Campaign, called
“Basa njengo Magogo”, in Secunda. This forms part of our campaign aimed at
reducing the unacceptable consequences of outdoor air pollution, which
results from the burning of coal in many areas, especially in low-income
settlements. This campaign must be seen as a catalyst that promotes good
working relationships between government, communities and industries in
collectively addressing air quality issues.

I would like to encourage all members here to learn to do it, and to go and
demonstrate it and assist the communities out there. In this way we’ll
reduce pollution. It has been scientifically proven that it reduces
pollution by 80%. Let each and every one of us go and learn. I’ve attended
the training. So let us all go and assist our people.

We as a department aim to make 2009 a watershed year in air quality
governance in South Africa, which will see 9/11 assume a new meaning for
air quality management stakeholders in South Africa. The 11th of September
2009 will see the complete repeal of the Atmospheric Pollution Prevention
Act of 1965 and the coming into full force of the National Environmental
Management: Air Quality Act of 2004. This final change of the guard, from
the Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act to the National Environmental
Management: Air Quality Act, is the product of a long transition which has
been carefully steered by the department with a number of transition
projects to ensure the smooth passing of the baton.

This will see powers transferred to municipalities to take full
responsibility for air quality management, in particular licensing, which
used to be the responsibility of the national government.

The department continues to undertake strategic environmental compliance
inspections into prioritised areas, industrial sectors such as the
ferroalloy sector, the production component of the cement sector, the
petrochemical sector, as well as the paper and pulp sector. All major
facilities in the petrochemical refinery and cement sectors have now been
subjected to environmental compliance inspection.

We shall continue to ensure that our people live a healthy life. To achieve
this, we shall work closely with municipalities in respect of providing
training to inspectors, in order to develop a cadre of inspectors at local
government level. Approximately 110 cases are being investigated by the
national department for criminal and administrative enforcement, including
investigations into the Airports Company SA, the fuel spill that we all
know happened in 2006, and the illegal storage and dumping of medical waste
by several companies.

A total of 21 finalised criminal dockets are currently with the National
Prosecuting Authority for prosecution.

Enforcement resulted in the shutdown of three facilities that were
operating without the requisite authorisation or contravening the
conditions of their permits. This included a metal foundry in Roodepoort in
Johannesburg.

Tomorrow, July 1, ushers in the new waste management Act that will
strengthen us to deal with waste while we create a thousand jobs. We shall
work with the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
and other departments. We shall continue to work with our partners, Buyisa-
e-Bag and Indalo Yethu, and other NGOs who come to the party. We do not
want to be branded as a “throw away” country, but as a recycling country,
sorting waste at source. That will also support our greening programme.

We hope that the enforcement of the law will assist us, and if we do all
these clean-ups we are going to have a clean South Africa and we won’t be
contributing to climate change.

In conclusion, it is our conviction that, working together with all spheres
of government, we can do more to ensure that the quality of our people’s
lives is improved. This is not only to be done by us as the department or
our partners, but by all members here. At work, at home and every day, ask
yourself what you are doing. Are you contributing to climate change? When
you throw away something, are you not contributing to making our country
dirty? You should know that by recycling, you are helping to create
employment and wealth wherever you stay. Members, I would like to encourage
you to live by example – at home, in your constituencies and in your
offices. Basa njengo Magogo! Please, recycle. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A N D QIKANI: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, the
department, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I greet you all.

Our continent’s oldest liberation movement, the ANC, in its 2009 election
manifesto said that, working together, we can do more. Indeed, our
President, his Excellency Comrade Jacob Zuma, had this in mind when
appointing his Cabinet Ministers. I commend him for his visionary intellect
of drafting government Ministers in a manner that in this fourth term would
work best to benefit our masses.

The subject of today’s Budget Vote debate is somewhat less important to
many of our people’s minds. This is not because of ignorance, but rather
because of a lack of information, poverty and an unwillingness to take the
initiative of starting projects in relation to environmental solutions. The
questions we have to ask ourselves today are: How are we going to address
the situation? What measures will the Ministry take to diminish the apathy?
If people were fed information about the importance of better environmental
care, they would be in a better position to take the necessary steps.

The Department of Environmental Affairs, over the past five years, has done
a lot to make things better, and that includes its endeavours to repeal the
Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act of 1965. Our duty, members of the
NCOP, is to see to it that Parliament’s decisions are most favourable to
the citizens of the country at large. The laws are well made due to
processes that are correctly followed.

Hon Minister Buyelwa Sonjica in her 2009-10 budget speech made it clear to
the public that, and I quote:

   The policy and legislative tools provided by the National Environmental
   Management: Biodiversity Act will therefore be used to this effect and we
   will make sure that the processes make sense to the affected communities
   and their effective involvement will be encouraged.

In the same speech provinces and local government were encouraged to come
up with specific programmes that would respond to their unique challenges.
It is then our duty as members of the concerned select committee to assist
the Ministry with follow-ups and to encourage progress in these two spheres
of government in order to speed up delivery in line with the exact
timeframes.

The Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs in each programme for
oversight will prioritise more time for the most environmentally endangered
areas to seek solutions — together with the communities, civil society,
research bodies, government, and concerned groups — and to advise the hon
Minister on effective solutions to benefit the people.

I am sure that all of us will not rest as long as areas such as Mpumalanga
are hit hard by massive erosion; as long as biodiversity is threatened by
extinction in areas such as St Lucia; as long as fires threaten the
existence of our most treasured biodiversity, especially in the Western
Cape; as long as our air quality deteriorates by the day because of toxic
gases produced by firms and automobiles; and as long as callous
urbanisation robs our people of the green that produces oxygen for the
communities. We will not rest until we are sure that the rest of our
country is beautifully green.

Chairperson, in relation to the aforementioned, it is evident from news
reports in the print and electronic media on 29 June 2009 that there has
been a continuous trend in Port Elizabeth for the past 17 years, and that
in that part of the country maritime life is at risk because toxic waste
and effluent are finding its way to the sea waters from the storage
facilities of Transnet. This raises serious concerns in society about how
Parliament, which is us, and the Ministry will intervene to stop this
hazard.

Other breaking news is that today, 30 June, we are informed that the SA
Maritime Safety Authority is to take a decision on whether to continue with
research into the containers that sunk, some of which carried a toxic
chemical called cresol. These containers were washed overboard the
Safmarine Meru on Tuesday last week, 23 June. I bring this to your
attention to highlight the need for us as members of the Select Committee
on Land and Environmental Affairs to visit such areas in a bid to do urgent
oversight visits in these areas so that we are able to ensure that these
matters receive the urgency and care they deserve, for better environmental
management and ultimately for our people’s wellbeing.

Hon Chairperson, his Excellency our President and ANC president, in his
January 8th Statement to the nation emphasised that the implementation of
government policy does not only succeed by micromanaging all aspects of
government, but also by putting in place a system of ongoing co-ordination,
monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of government programmes
and processes. It is in this spirit that we are going to ensure that we are
seized with this responsibility. We are going to ensure that we as members
have the responsibility of monitoring and evaluating progress made so that
we meet expectations in accordance with the mandate entrusted to us to
implement. Together with the members of the committee, we should become the
bridge to close the gap between the government and its people.

Hon Minister, let me commend you for prioritising transformation of the
biodiversity sector. It is one of those sectors that have been ignored for
a long time. However, I think we need to advise that it needs the financial
allocation to be able to deliver the desired results in the desired
periods. Marine biodiversity is particularly relevant to rural people who
live in coastal areas. They should be targeted, as most of them, especially
black people, were never given the opportunity to venture into studies
about the very nature that surrounds them. As a result, most of them are
unaware of the biodiversity world, especially marine biodiversity.
Considering that education is a long-term issue that requires one to invest
more financial resources, I strongly recommend that the Minister considers
adjusting the budget to accommodate the latter.

We are indeed facing a mammoth task ahead of us in this term, considering
the importance of environmental wellness, as it relates to the Soccer World
Cup tournament in 2010 and beyond. Our predecessors have laid a foundation
for us, and for that we are grateful. We appreciate their contribution to
the cause. We will work together with the Minister and our beloved people’s
movement that drives our people-governing policies in executing our role to
make sure that indeed our government works for our people to make their
lives better.

Ndicinga ukuba isebe lulwenze ngokufanelekileyo nangokuzimisela uhlahlo-
lwabiwo-mali, kwaye siyaneliseka siyikomiti. [I think the department has
prepared the budget effectively and diligently, and as a committee we are
pleased.]
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr K A SINCLAIR: Baie dankie, agb Voorsitter, ons behoort nie aan
dieselfde politieke party nie, maar ons kom albei van die Noord-Kaap. U sal
dus seker darem so ’n bietjie meer tegemoetkomend wees met die tyd. [Thank
you very much, hon Chairperson, we do not belong to the same political
party, but we both come from the Northern Cape. You will therefore probably
be a bit more accommodating with time.]

Chairperson, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate from Kenya, Wangari Maathai, in
a recent book called The Challenge for Africa, motivated for a new vision
of leadership for Africa. This leadership, according to Maathai, is not
based on political leadership per se, but rather on a drive to motivation
and sustainable leadership involving issues threatening the existence of
our continent and the planet. I want to label it “green leadership”. This
Budget Vote on Environmental Affairs and Tourism deals with exactly that.
To achieve the vision and mission of these departments, it is necessary to
adopt the following: an attitude of preservation over exploitation;
collective responsibility over industrial gain; and common feeling for the
continent rather than narrow nationalism and greed.

Given the fact that South Africa as a developmental state needs development
to be a competitive force to address the needs and desires of its citizens,
it is imperative that all of us as leaders be labelled “green leaders”.
Environmental affairs and tourism are indeed at the coalface of leaving a
sustainable legacy for the generations to come after us. So, it is not
about a selfish today, but rather about a sustainable, sharing tomorrow.

To this end, Cope, as an alternate government, wants to propose the
following: Firstly, that waste management, recycling, education, and job
incentives – as announced by the Minister – be elevated to some of the top
priorities. Legislation, regulations, and bylaws must be tightened and/or
reinstated by the different spheres of government to protect our
environment. South Africans in general have become a society of polluters.
Plastic bags have become our national flower. Rivers are polluted to the
extent that toxic and dangerous wastes are serious threats to the usage of
many rivers, including the Vaal River and the Orange River arteries. We
need green leadership to address this.

Secondly, tourism, as the number one worldwide revenue generator, must
place a higher priority on saving the continent and the planet. It is
suggested that tourism, the environment, and good citizenship become
compulsory as part of the school curriculum up to Grade 10.

Furthermore, internal tourism for South Africans must be enhanced. Building
on the successful Sho’t Left initiative, more needs to be done to
popularise South Africa as an internal destination.
Vanuit hierdie perspektief versoek ek dan dat aandag geskenk moet word aan
die prioritisering van die Gariep Dam-toerisme-inisiatief tussen die
Vrystaat, die Noord-Kaap en die Oos-Kaap. Die konsolidering van die
Rolfontein- en Doringkloof-reservate kan, saam met die
privaatnatuurreservate, die toeristepotensiaal langs die N1 verder
ontsluit.

Ter afsluiting moet ons sê dit moet natuurlik gedoen word met inagneming
van Maathai se pleidooie vir ware groen leierskap. Slegs dan sal ons vanuit
’n volhoubare omgewing iets nalaat waarop ons nageslag trots kan wees. Baie
dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follow.)

[From this perspective I then request that attention be given to
prioritising the Gariep Dam Tourism initiative between the Free State, the
Northern Cape and the Eastern Cape. Consolidating the Rolfontein and
Doringkloof reserves, together with the private nature reserves, could
further develop the tourism potential along the N1.

In conclusion, we must say that it should of course be done taking into
account Maathi’s pleas for true green leadership. Only then will we be able
to bequeath something to our descendants from a sustainable environment of
which they can be proud. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mr C J DE BEER: House Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members of this august House ...

... ek en my kollega Sinclair kom ’n lang pad saam. Die doelwit is
dieselfde, die politieke voertuig het begin verskil. Ons het met ’n
Maserati gery. Hulle kom met ’n klein karretjie agterna. [... my colleague
Sinclair and I have come a long way together. The aim is the same, except
the political vehicle has changed. We drove a Maserati. They are following
in a small car.]

On 22 April, the people of South Africa went to the voting stations and
gave the ANC-led government an overwhelming mandate to go forward, saying
“working together we can do more”.

Von Goethe said:

   Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must do.


What does this mean? It means to live a dignified life, a purposeful life,
and to improve the quality of life. This was captured in the manifesto of
the ANC. A safe and healthy environment is the key to the very survival of
life on this planet. Environmental sustainability can only be achieved if
pollution and waste are managed and prevented, environmental impact
developments are assessed and mitigated, and global issues of air quality
and climate change are addressed.

I am thankful for what hon Minister Van Schalkwyk did in his capacity as
the then Minister of Environmental Affairs and also in the world.
Furthermore, environmental sustainability can be achieved if compliance
with environmental legislation is monitored and evaluated. We are all part
and parcel of this and are in this together to ensure a prosperous society
that lives in harmony with its natural resources.

The utilisation of our natural resources must enhance economic growth and
poverty eradication. We need to create a safe environment within the given
budget of R3,4 billion by creating jobs. The department’s 2009-10 budget
allocations support and meet both the department’s key strategic priorities
identified in the strategic plans, as well as the government’s priorities
articulated in the 2009 state of the nation address.

South Africa’s national resources represent rich and diverse national
assets that provide important economic and social opportunities for the
human population. This, in turn, has developed a strong reliance on these
resources for commercial opportunity in food and recreation. These
resources have facilitated job creation and general economic enlistment in
the country. The focus must be on improving service delivery; better co-
ordination between government departments and local municipalities in
environmental management in terms of the Intergovernmental Relations
Framework Act; and saving water, fixing broken pipes and taps and getting
qualified technical people into municipalities in terms of water and waste
management – thus, capacity-building. We are concerned to see that 20% of
the positions in the department are vacant.

We believe that poverty eradication improves environmental management.
Abject poverty forces people to place a new value on the environment as
they are more concerned about living for today rather than for tomorrow. We
propose a programme to create a large number of green jobs, namely
employment in industries and facilities that are designated to mitigate the
effects of climate change.

We welcome the increase in the budget for environmental quality and
protection, marine and coastal management, biodiversity and conservation,
as well as the additional funds from National Treasury for climate change
research. In fact, South Africa has a high level of plastic bag littering,
and we welcome the money allocated to this programme of recycling.

We call on the department to roll out the Keep my Town Clean/Keep my City
Clean campaign in all areas. Rooifontein is a small town in Namaqualand in
the Northern Cape. The people of Rooifontein keep their town clean. Why? It
is because they want to keep it clean - I worked there during the
elections. South Africa can learn a lesson from these people of
Rooifontein. Why? They educate their learners to protect the environment
and not to throw papers around. In spring, Rooifontein is covered with
flowers - a healthy clean environment that also adds to the quality of
life. They are poor people, but they are dignified.

Waste management, driven by municipalities, needs serious attention. The
location of dumping sites too close to towns is a health hazard, as in
Hartswater in the Northern Cape. Proper fencing of these sites, as well as
access control, needs to be improved because people without work live on
these sites and look for food. We, as Members of Parliament, have to do our
work during constituency periods and visit these sites, evaluate them and
follow up on issues with the department. We call on the department to do an
audit of the number of experts in waste management in provincial
departments who can assist municipalities with the correct advice.

To have quality drinking water will lead to an improved quality of life.
The waste disposals of industries on the banks of the Vaal River in the
Vaal Triangle and of mines in the catchment area of the river must not find
their way into the Vaal River. If this happens, it will reduce the water
quality of the river and have a negative effect on water irrigation,
specifically in the Vaalharts Irrigation Scheme. The irrigation scheme
actually starts at Christiana and ends at Taung. It affects the quality of
production and the quality of drinking water of the people in the Vaalharts
region, as well as the poor people. We call on the department to monitor
the dumping of waste and sewerage in the Vaal River. It is our task as
Members of Parliament to be vigilant when we visit our constituencies.

South Africa’s coastline is a unique part of our environment. In the
Northern Cape, we have 380 km of coastline with a small harbour at Port
Nolloth. Marine and coastal management must develop and manage marine and
coastal environments that ensure the sustainability of marine resources
while maximising economic opportunities. Integrated coastal management is
responsible for managing a variety of human impacts on the coastal
environment by regulating activities along the coastline - for example,
with regard to 4x4 vehicles and quad bikes in the coastal zone. We call on
the department to, within the next year, improve coastal patrol through a
water unit in partnership with the SA Police Service, as they are presently
using a rubber duck to do law enforcement, and to indicate with clear signs
where 4x4s and quad bikes are allowed to drive along our Northern Cape
coast. Signboards at Port Nolloth have been put up indicating where not to
drive, but not where one is allowed to drive along the coast.

Furthermore, we call on the department to assist municipalities with the
development of a coastal disaster management plan; to interact with the De
Beers marine unit to implement a harbour master at the Port Nolloth
harbour; and to enforce access control to the coastal area between Groen
River and Brak River, in partnership with the Kamiesberg Local Municipality
in Namaqualand.

The Orange River flows into the sea in Alexander Bay and forms a delta.
Having seen what has been done to the Richards Bay coastline in the St
Lucia area, can’t the same be done to Alexander Bay? I propose that the
department, together with the Minister, pay a visit to our coastline up to
Alexander Bay in order to familiarise themselves with the circumstances.
There are also tourism possibilities in that development.

In conclusion, we have to deliver on our mandate which we received from the
voters. Let us do that. The ANC supports this Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Thanks, Chairperson. Firstly, by way of correction to the
speakers’ list, I am the chairperson of the Select Committee on Trade and
International Relations, which includes tourism. We shall leave this
opportunity to other parties who call themselves opposition parties, who
will then oppose the fact that there are two chairpersons on the other
committee.

Let me congratulate you, hon Minister Van Schalkwyk and hon Deputy Minister
Xasa, on your appointment. This department has lived up to the ANC policy
of 50/50. We have also practised the provisions of the Freedom Charter,
which says that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and
white.

Hon Minister, Deputy Minister and other Deputy Ministers present here, one
must first admit that tourism is now part of the Select Committee on Trade
and International Relations and point out that in the few days since the
establishment of this committee hon members have realised that this
department is one of the key departments in creating sustainable and decent
jobs.

Tourism contributes a lot towards the GDP. The question is always, however,
who drives and who benefits from this contribution. Are historically
disadvantaged individuals part of the drivers? An honest answer would be
no. The very nature of this industry requires that any historically
disadvantaged individual hoping to enter this industry must have access to
finance and markets.

Another issue, hon Minister, we noted is that the department is still
using, to a certain extent, some consultants. Is there a possibility of
cutting down on the use of such consultants? We believe that we have
capable officials and leaders who can actually do this.

The Tourism BEE Charter and the scorecard are currently voluntary. If we
may check, hon Minister, when will it be possible to make these compulsory,
for transformation in tourism is very slow? It is actually moving at a
snail’s pace.

The other issue is how to expand tourism to rural areas, that is, to areas
in KwaZulu-Natal, in uMgungundlovu, in Nongoma, in Msinga, Nkandla, and
Maphumulo, that are beyond the game farms. When we talk of tourism, it
should go beyond game farms. It is about those rural areas. Also, how do we
take tourism to other townships such as Ngwelezane, eSikhawini, Umlazi,
KwaMashu and Mpumalanga? Tourism is tourism by its nature.

As we speak, there are nine provinces in South Africa. That is why we have
this diversity. But then, are we using this diversity to our benefit per
province? Is there an integrated approach between municipalities,
provinces, SA Tourism and the department? Who markets the country? Who
markets events? I was happy, because earlier Minister Sicelo Shiceka was
saying that we have one country, one South Africa, one Constitution, one
President. This I say after what has been in the media about the City of
Cape Town and its funding to another body. As a committee we shall deal
with this issue. We shall deal with them separately, because we shall call
them to account on this issue that we don’t have a federation of the
Western Cape, or of the City of Cape Town. We have one South Africa, one
Constitution, and one President.

Chairperson, members of this committee are going to say a lot about 2010,
about accommodation, about safety, about transport, but I need to mention
that we expect to see rural areas benefiting from 2010, so that their lives
will not be the same after 2010, and that there will be infrastructure and
decent work after 2010.

Issues such as skills in the tourism sector, the quality of tourism
products and services, and the promotion of the tourism sector are issues
that are part of the key performance areas of the department. We shall be
monitoring these thoroughly as we move on as a committee.

On a lighter note, we wish to say to the hon Minister and Deputy Minister
and to the Department of Tourism, well done on doing excellent work during
the Confederations Cup and the visit by the British and Irish Lions. We
have proven that South Africa is equal to any task and that challenges that
we face on organising these events will be sorted out by 2010.

Before coming to my conclusion, I won’t be doing justice to this debate if
I don’t mention this: There is still a major challenge in the hospitality
sector with regard to accommodation for people with disabilities. I recall
that an international conference on disability could not be held because we
could not get accommodation for plus-minus 4 000 disabled people. This is a
serious challenge that we have. Hon Minister, all these hotels and B&Bs
must be user-friendly and accessible, and we must place a deadline on this
issue. We cannot just leave it to them.

The President of the country, his Excellency Comrade Jacob Gedleyihlekisa
Zuma, said, and I quote:

   ... we will have to act prudently – no wastage, no rollovers of funds –
   every cent must be spent wisely and fruitfully.

This quotation fits the department, that we should really not have roll-
over funds.

In conclusion, on a lighter note, I heard hon Sinclair asking for a few
minutes, based on the fact that he and the Chair come from the same
province. But he forgot to mention that he once belonged to this movement,
to the ANC, which is the home of all South Africans, and that at some stage
he will come back. Home is always home, and we shall welcome him back.
[Laughter.] I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister Van Schalkwyk, Deputy
Minister, hon members, as I have only three minutes, I shall concentrate my
speech on environmental affairs.

The vision of the environmental component is “a prosperous and equitable
society living in harmony with our natural resources.” The strategic
priorities – and I hope I don’t bore you – that have been identified
include addressing the climate change challenges and developing the
appropriate policies and tools to address this threat; waste management
systems and services; implementing an effective and efficient environmental
impact management system nationally, whilst ensuring that ecosystems are
sustained and resources are available to support livelihoods; and that
green jobs are created to contribute to economic growth.

Deputy Chairperson, whilst there is an increase in budget allocations, in
real terms, after factoring in inflation, there is only a 3,7% increase,
most of which is allocated to the marine and coastal management component.
This is cause for concern with regard to the enforcement of the
environmental and conservation mandates. Abalone poaching has increased
drastically, and not a day goes by when one does not read in the news of
large consignments of poached abalone being discovered. Hake fish resources
are also fast diminishing.

Poaching of indigenous species such as cycads and rhino has, according to
the environmental component, increased fiftyfold, or 5000%.

South Africa’s predominantly coal-based energy makes South Africa the
leading polluting country on the African continent, and the 11th worst in
the world. This means high levels of carbon dioxide emissions, contributing
to climate change. The adoption of strategies for alternate or renewable
power supplies, such as solar, wind, hydropower and tidal waves, amongst
others, must be utilised to reduce emissions and contribute to the
resolution of the energy crisis. Whilst resources such as fossil fuels and
water are declining, pressure is being exerted to allow mining in game
reserves and parks, wetlands, and in and around world heritage sites and
Wild Coast areas. More must be done, however, to eradicate poverty, as
poverty eradication will uplift standards and improve environmental
management.

Deputy Chairperson, the country is particularly susceptible to the effects
of climate change and its effects on human and natural systems are becoming
evident. Changes in weather patterns, and increases and decreases in
rainfall, are all evident. Some of the major impacts of the change and
increasing variability of the climate include health issues, the spread of
malaria, changes in the distribution and availability of water resources,
changes in agriculture, and changes to biodiversity and ecosystems. It is
imperative that strategies are implemented to deal with these critical
issues. One of these would be if Mr Adams would also give up smoking, as he
also helps to pollute the atmosphere! Thank you, Deputy Chair. [Applause.]

Ms M C DIKGALE: Hon Chairperson, Ministers present here, hon members,
tourism is the largest and most rapidly expanding economic activity
throughout the world.

As reported by the World Tourism Organisation, travel and tourism involved
625 million people internationally and generated $425 billion in the last
decade. In South Africa, it has overtaken gold mining as the country’s
leading earner of foreign exchange, and it has yet to reach its full
potential. It has not been referred to as South Africa’s new gold without
reason, as for every 12 foreign tourists that arrive in the country, one
new job is created in local tourism. It should therefore be striving to
attract even greater investment.

It is globally accepted and acknowledged that tourism has unrivalled
potential to create sustainable jobs and grow the economy faster than any
other sector. It is also on record that tourists and holiday markets
account for 38 million leisure and religious trips around South Africa
visiting friends and relatives each year.

In recent years our government has estimated that tourism accounts for 8%
of growth in GDP. It is estimated that the tourism industry is well
positioned to grow its GDP contribution to 12%, with the potential to
create more than 500 000 jobs by 2014. The global tourism industry is
expected to grow significantly in future, as personal income and leisure
time increase and as transportation networks improve.

The continued improved performance of the tourism industry depends on the
success with which conditions can be created for sustainable tourism growth
and development in South Africa. As a strategic driver of tourism, the
tourism branch of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has
now become a department in its own right, namely the Department of Tourism
under the leadership of Minister Marthinus van Schalkwyk. The new
department’s functions include the tourism industry; development through
tourism research, business development and regulation; as well as tourism
industry promotion through international tourism relations; human resource
capacity-building; and national tourism support services.

The key objective of tourism in South Africa since the advent of democracy
in South Africa 15 years ago has been to enhance its role as a driver of
socioeconomic development. In this regard it has sought to develop the
tourism industry and transform the sector by promoting the growth and
competitiveness of the country as the tourist destination of choice, both
locally and internationally.

In order to address the current challenges facing tourism and to prepare
for the next five years, the department has developed a draft tourism
growth strategy for 2010-2015, for managing tourism in the short, medium
and long term. It has identified the tourism industry’s global
competitiveness as a critical success factor in growing the industry. To
achieve global competitiveness, the department has been working with other
departments such as Transport, Home Affairs and Public Enterprises to
reduce the constraints such as limited flights, land transport limitations,
and visa restrictions that might prevent potential tourists from visiting
South Africa. It also aims to address challenges related to tourism safety,
promote a culture of service excellence, expand the product base, and
ensure quality assurance of products and services, with particular emphasis
on the grading of accommodation establishments.

Tourist movement is not just hampered by air and land transport, but by
delays and service delivery challenges in obtaining visas and passing
through immigration points. It is therefore gratifying that Home Affairs
has been able to introduce special visa arrangements which were applied
during the Fifa Confederations Cup matches played in South Africa over the
past two weeks. Hopefully this will be in full swing for the World Cup next
year when South African tourism will reap the rewards of years of planning.

We are all aware of how important the 2010 World Cup is for South African
tourism and how much it will boost the tourism industry. Tourism has also
been identified as a priority area in the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa. The labour-intensive nature of the
tourism sector facilitates its rapid growth by encouraging the creation of
jobs, promoting foreign investment, and contributing to economic growth.

The increased expenditure on the tourism programme can also be attributed
to the growing need for the transformation of the tourism industry. The
main policy thrust in this regard has been the empowerment of small, micro
and medium enterprises by facilitating access to tourism market
opportunities, and also by the provision of professional assistance to
them.

South Africa is a developmental state, which is faced with challenges of
growing and stabilising the economy, ensuring food security, creating
sustainable jobs, and eradicating poverty. The unprecedented socioeconomic
benefits from tourism demonstrate that this is a strategic industry for
investment and business opportunities. The growth of the tourism industry
in South Africa should therefore be celebrated by all of us. This is
testament to the fact that we are creating more jobs and more
entrepreneurial opportunities. All South Africans should be more than 100%
committed to growing the tourism industry through the work we do, through
working with the industry and our partners, and through working harder with
more passion and more determination.

The ANC government’s focus is on developing our tourism industry to
contribute to our vision of creating decent work for South Africans. It has
committed itself to making the creation of decent work opportunities and
sustainable livelihoods the primary focus of economic policies. Decent work
embraces both the need for more jobs and for better quality jobs. The
underlying factor is that all economic policies must address the challenges
of poverty, unemployment, and inequality. The ANC government will use the
tourism industry and all other sectors of our economy to achieve these
goals. By working together to grow South Africa’s tourism industry, we can
all do more and much better to improve the quality of life of our people. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon
members, Tourism is one of the departments being weaned off another
department. Finally, the importance of tourism is being recognised. We
acknowledge that it is one of the larger contributors to GDP, now larger
than mining. It is the fastest growing industry in South Africa. Tourism is
at a critical point now where it needs to do the final preparations for
2010 and ensure that there is a legacy beyond this epic event.

The question is: How tourism ready, or how 2010 ready, are we now? At Cape
Town International Airport I stood in five queues for an hour and a half
last Friday morning, eventually to get onto a plane. I stood amongst the
Confederations Cup and the Lions tour supporters and it was one disastrous
event, from the first flight to the very last flight. Is Tourism to blame?
I think not. Tourism does not stand alone to promote South Africa during
the Fifa World Cup next year.

The soon-to-be-completed new terminals at Cape Town and Durban airports
still have to be fully tested under stressful situations. SAA flights are
late and luggage often flies in different directions to the passengers.
Access roads are incomplete, crime is rife, and there is practically no
presence of SA Tourism at any first point of contact with our foreign
tourists.

Nevertheless, the DA wishes to congratulate SA Tourism and the industry for
the sustainable programmes and projects thus far implemented. The
international marketing campaigns are all inspiring and although the buying
power of the rand is hurting our potential to maximise our advertising
slots, again we say, making a success of tourism is not only the work of
the new Department of Tourism. If all the other departments, most notably
Police and Transport, do not co-operate, all the good work that SA Tourism
has put together for 2010 and beyond will not be fully realised. We cannot
sit back and allow this. All departments must deliver and we will see to it
that they are held accountable.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup is a once-off opportunity to show the world South
Africa is a beautiful and affordable country to visit, where one is safe
amongst our rainbow nation. This will open the doors for the tomorrows
after 2010 and it will promote tourism and sustainable jobs in South
Africa. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, may I join my colleagues who
spoke earlier in congratulating all the members of the National Council of
Provinces who have made their way to this spot in this term of Parliament.

Tourism serves as the warp and the weft that is woven through the patchwork
of our diverse communities. Indeed, it resonates with the very essence of
ubuntu. Working together with our fellow South Africans, let us embrace the
opportunities before us to show the world and one another what we are
capable of. We as citizens of our remarkable country are ultimately the
biggest proponents of our South African brand. It is our responsibility to
inculcate a sense of pride that will strengthen cultural identity and raise
awareness through constant advocacy campaigns. In the context of our
government’s focus on the fight against poverty we must not underestimate
the pivotal role of the tourism sector in economic growth and job creation.

In 2008, tourism contributed an estimated R195 billion to the South African
economy and helped create more than one million jobs, directly and
indirectly. This constitutes a substantial contribution and positions
tourism as a vital pillar of our economy. The steps outlined in our
government’s Medium-Term Strategic Framework have taken into account the
constraints posed by the economic crisis and have set out a plan to offset
them. We have made a commitment that, working together, we shall speed up
economic growth and transform the economy to create sustainable
livelihoods. This speaks clearly to the way tourism is also responsible for
stimulating the economy, by contributing to job creation and poverty
alleviation.

Our department encourages entrepreneurial spirit and a responsible tourism
focus through, amongst others, what is called its Hidden Treasures
programme, which supports unique arts and craft experiences, including
artists, performers, tour guides, and cultural and heritage products.

Sustainable tourism therefore ensures the equitable distribution of
benefits, so that the communities whose land, resources and labour,
knowledge and cultures are used as the basis for tourism actually benefit
from tourism. A focus on sustainability also helps us to ensure that the
positive impacts of tourism are maximised at grass-roots level and enable
communities to protect their cultural heritage from exploitation.

Not only has tourism facilitated the much-needed economic boost for rural
communities, but it has also been a catalyst for training and development
in hospitality-related fields and the improvement which, as the chairperson
was indicating, still needs to be beefed up. Our local communities have
experienced a revival and have developed a fresh commitment to the
preservation of their natural and cultural heritage. Indeed, a new
appreciation and a sense of ownership have been instilled and cultivated.
In line with the country’s comprehensive rural development strategy, the
department will continue to prioritise the development of community and
rural tourism, to ensure that tourism benefits are equitably distributed.
This includes the development of infrastructure and the promotion of
tourism opportunities through the implementation and success of our
department’s contribution to the Expanded Public Works Programme.

Rural tourism will only reap success if we continue to support tourism
potential at the local sphere of government, and the role of local
government in this process must be duly acknowledged. This is currently
done through our annual local government indaba on tourism. The indaba
provides a platform for engagement, leadership, and sharing of challenges
and best practices in order to deliver the tourism mandate towards 2010 and
beyond.

At this year’s indaba we launched the tourism planning toolkit for local
government, and engaged stakeholders on the proposed national tourism
growth strategy. This strategy will help us formulate our response to the
global economic recession, revitalise domestic tourism marketing and
implement the sector skills plan. Consultation with provinces and
municipalities is ongoing, and capacity-building for tourism planning at
local level, targeting certain municipalities that have a high potential
for tourism growth, will also be prioritised. We shall consult with all
local municipalities and provinces continually to ensure that we have
integrated and structured planning to align tourism priority projects. As a
department we continue to help strengthen our country’s skills and human
resource base.

Various exciting projects and programmes are being implemented as South
Africa gears up for the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup. From what the hon
member Van Lingen was saying, if we take the positive side of what was
happening, we have learnt a lot from the past Confederations Cup, and we
shall build on that to ensure that come 2010 we will make improvements on
what we are short of.

We remain steadfast in our promotion of service excellence and dynamic
partnerships in the tourism industry. The tourism service excellence
strategy, launched at the annual national tourism conference in November
2008, is focusing on the upskilling of those involved in the service
delivery industry. Some of the initiatives of this strategy include
behaviour and attitude alignment at service touch points, as well as
appropriate training programmes and other interventions to achieve
sustained changes in behaviour and attitude.

At the conference delegates and representatives of various organisations
also signed a tourism service excellence pledge, committing themselves to
ensuring the provision of quality service at all times. The department
furthermore continues to contribute towards alleviating poverty and
unemployment through training, placement programmes, capacity-building
initiatives, and familiarisation programmes focused on the youth. Gender-
sensitive development strategies are also being put in place to ensure
social redress in the industry.

I would like to thank the select committee and our friends in the tourism
industry, as well as all the stakeholders for their unwavering support thus
far. Our department will continue to work with you to forge ahead and to
realise the full potential of this industry in building a better life for
all. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J VISSER (Western Cape): Hon Chair, hon Minister, members of this
House, the Western Cape has an array of offerings to foreign and local
tourists. Ahead of 2010 it is our duty to ensure that our major icons are
operating at their best. This involves them being safe for visitors,
infrastructurally functional and informatively signed. As provincial
government, it is also important that we ensure their proper protection and
good management, so that generations to come will also have the opportunity
to experience their beauty.

Though some of the icons do not lie within our legislative jurisdiction, we
shall play a facilitating role in whatever format to ensure their
sustainability, especially as it relates to the image of the destination in
terms of tourism products.

Robben Island is a World Heritage Site, which along with its museum falls
within the ambit of the national Department of Arts and Culture. In the
recent past this island has faced several challenges relating to the
culling of its rabbits, problems with its tourist transport vessels and,
most worrying, the resolution of the Robben Island Museum board. All of
these have made media headlines, and in some cases have resulted in the
island being closed for days during peak season, causing disappointment for
Cape Town tourists, as well as the loss of revenue. As previously
mentioned, the provincial government is not currently being included in the
management of the island as a tourist attraction, but even though it falls
within the jurisdiction of the national Department of Arts and Culture, it
is one of the jewels in the crown of the Western Cape, and I am afraid it
is fading very rapidly.

Therefore we cannot ignore problems associated with it, and appeal to the
national Minister to consider addressing this issue of the museum board as
urgently as possible. It is evident that we need to forge closer links with
national government to prevent future crises of such a nature from
occurring at our iconic sites. The biggest infrastructure development
project on which we are engaging is the attempt to bring life back into
another tourism icon, the Outeniqua Choo-Tjoe. We are very concerned about
the fact that the train may well have run for the final time last Friday,
26 June, despite Transnet’s claims that it is merely closed for
maintenance. So far we have finalised feasibility studies for the
commercialisation of the George-Knysna and the George-Mossel Bay lines, and
they have looked at opportunities for the development of other properties
that Transnet holds in this region. Within the next few days we shall meet
with Transnet, the line operator, in an attempt to put together an
attractive set of investment possibilities, which will help the business
community and locals of the area who have a vested interest in the running
of this train.

In closing, and on a positive note, we wish to report that we are in the
process of investing R1,1 million in partnership with SANParks to begin
building infrastructure at one of the least developed of our tourism icons,
the southernmost tip of Africa at Agulhas. This will be the first time in
many years that this attraction is receiving an upgrade. In the initial
phase to be completed soon, we are building a boardwalk with benches and
signs. Completion of phases 1 and 2 will have a very positive effect on
tourism to the Overberg region.

Further developments are envisaged in the way of creating a link to the
West Coast in the form of a cultural San route. The Western Cape’s tourism
industry is one of the province’s major employers and economic drivers. We
must therefore treasure our icons and ensure that they are well managed for
now and for future generations. I thank you, hon Chair. [Applause.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, agb Adjunkminister, agb lede, ek
weet die agb Visser kom van die Wes-Kaap, maar ek wil hom net herinner die
persoon wat toerisme in die Wes-Kaap op die kaart geplaas het, was agb
Minister Marthinus van Schalkwyk toe hy nog die premier van die Wes-Kaap
was. Toerisme is nie deur die DA op die kaart geplaas nie; dit was die agb
Minister wat dit daar geplaas het.

Toerisme in Suid-Afrika bied ’n wonderlike geleentheid vir vernuftige
entrepreneurs. Daar is baie kanse in die toerismebedryf om benut te word en
ek dink nie Cope kan dit benut nie, alhoewel hulle beweer dat hulle die
alternatief vir die regerende party is. Hulle moet maar aanhou droom, want
dit is ’n droom wat nie waar sal word nie.

Voorsitter, Pieter wat op die Kaapse Vlakte woon en ’n minibus het, het ’n
idee om dit vir hom te laat werk. Hy wil oorsese toeriste daarmee rondneem,
en hulle besienswaardighede wys. Hy wil hulle vir ’n vleisbraai nooi, en
hulle onthaal met ’n braai oor ’n wingerdhoutvuur, en hulle iets van die
ware karakter van Suid-Afrika wys. Dan wil hy hulle in sy gesin se
spaarkamer laat slaap en die dollars en euro’s sien inrol. Maar Pieter het
nie veel om te verloor as hy dit wil probeer nie. Hy het nie die wêreld se
geld nodig om ’n onderneming te begin nie, wat uitsonderlik is, want
gewoonlik het ’n mens baie geld nodig om ’n nuwe besigheid op die been te
bring. Hy kan sy energie ingooi in ’n lewenskragtige industrie wat lankal
besig is om een van ons land se belangrikste industrieë te word en wat
allerhande nuwe geleenthede vir entrepreneurs bied.

Daar is baie geleenthede in hierdie nog betreklik nuwe mark om planne te
kan uitvoer en daardie behoefte te bevredig. Vir die persoon wat bereid is
om dit te doen, wag daar heelwat winste en hy of sy kan werklik voordeel
daaruit trek. Ek wil hê die DA moet luister.

Voorsitter, die internasionale toerismemark sorg jaarliks vir miljoene
rande en dis nie verniet dat nagenoeg een uit elke tien werkers op aarde in
’n onderneming is wat daarmee verband hou nie. Suid-Afrikaners, soos Pieter
op die Kaapse Vlakte, wil ook ’n deel hiervan opeis. Om jou in toerisme te
begewe, is harde werk, maar ons mense het nog nooit geskrik vir harde werk
nie. Die ANC is nie bang vir harde werk nie. Dit is net die DA en Cope wat
daarvoor skrik.

Toeriste word amptelik van gewone besoekers onderskei in die sin dat hulle
langer as een nag bly. Toerisme is vandag moontlik die grootste bedryf in
die wêreld en is ook verantwoordelik vir die grootste vloei van mense oor
die oppervlak van die aarde. Dit is daarom belangrik om dit te benut as ’n
instrument om verandering op ons planeet teweeg te bring. Dit is een van
die mees sigbare manifestasies van globalisering. Reisigers uit ander lande
verteenwoordig ander gemeenskappe, omgewings en ekonomieë, wat probleme kan
veroorsaak. Terselfdertyd is toerisme ’n bron van groot pret en genot vir
miljoene mense, en bring dit mense van verskillende wêrelddele en kulture
bymekaar. Luister, DA en Cope.

Suid-Afrika as ’n toerismebestemming bied die wêreld in een land, van die
Kaapse fynbos tot by die Hoëveld se grasvelde, tot by KwaZulu-Natal se
piesangplantasies. Ons het ’n skouspelagtige en uiteenlopende natuurskoon,
iets waarmee ander lande nie kan spog nie. Ook het ons land so ’n bonte
verskeidenheid van kulture en herkomste, soveel so dat Suid-Afrikaners as
die reënboognasie bekend geraak het.

Voorsitter, daar is ’n noodsaaklikheid om hierdie toerisme volhoubaar te
bevorder. Volhoubare toerisme kan beskryf word as ’n proses wat
ontwikkeling bevorder sonder dat ons ons bronne uitput. Daar is groot
kommer oor die opkomende entrepreneurs in die toerismebedryf. Toerisme moet
bevorder word met inagneming van die onderlinge afhanklikheid van toerisme
en die omgewing, en van toerisme en kultuurerfenis. Dit is van wesenlike
belang dat die toerismebeleid goed geformuleer moet word.

Ons moet nie bekommerd wees dat Suid-Afrika se gewildheid as
toerismebestemming gaan afneem nie, want ons land is gelukkig dat ons een
van die voorste toeristebestemmings in die wêreld is. Om die waarheid te
sê, daar is aanduidings dat ons in die toekoms nog van krag tot krag kan
gaan, en die uitdaging is om dit binne ’n volhoubare raamwerk te laat
gebeur.
Ons besef dat daar ’n aantal negatiewe aspekte is, soos veiligheid, wat sal
moet verander, asook Suid-Afrikaners se ingesteldheid teenoor besoekers en
geldwisseling. Alle denkende Suid-Afrikaners sal saamstem dat ons land
vroeër of later sy regmatige plek in die galery van die wêreld se top
toerismebestemmings moet inneem. Mense met blink idees, soos ek dink Cope
en die DA nie het nie, moet inspring en werk maak van hul planne. Die ANC
steun hierdie begrotingspos. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon
members, I know the hon Visser comes from the Western Cape, but I just want
to remind him that it was Minister Martinus van Schalkwyk who put tourism
on the map in the Western Cape when he was still the premier of the Western
Cape. Tourism was not put on the map by the DA; it was because of the hon
Minister’s efforts.

Tourism in South Africa provides a wonderful opportunity for ingenious
entrepreneurs. There are a lot of opportunities that can be taken advantage
of in the tourism industry, and I don’t think Cope can utilise it, although
they claim to be the alternative to the ruling party. They will have to
continue dreaming, because this is a dream that will not become a reality.

Chairperson, Pieter who lives on the Cape Flats and owns a minibus has an
idea to make it work for him. He wants to use it to take overseas tourists
on sightseeing trips. He wants to invite them over for braaivleis and treat
them to a braai on a fire made from vine logs, showing them something about
the true character of South Africa. Then he wants them to sleep in his
family’s spare room while watching the dollars and euros rolling in. But
Pieter does not have a lot to lose if he were to try this. He would not
need a huge sum of money to start a business, which is exceptional, as one
would usually need a lot of money to establish a new business. He would be
able to focus all his energy on a vigorous industry, which has become, for
some time now, one of our country’s most important industries offering
various new opportunities to entrepreneurs.

There are many opportunities in this still fairly new market to execute
plans and to satisfy that need. A lot of profit awaits the person who is
willing to do this, and he or she could really benefit from it. I want the
DA to listen.

Chairperson, the international tourism market is bringing in millions of
rands each year and there’s a reason why nearly one out of every ten
employees on earth is working in an industry that is related to this. South
Africans, like Pieter on the Cape Flats, also want to claim a part of this.
To pursue a profession in tourism is hard work, but our people have never
stood back for hard work. The ANC does not shy away from hard work. It’s
only the DA and Cope that shies away.

By definition, tourists are set apart from normal visitors on the grounds
that they stay longer than one night. Tourism is probably the biggest
industry in the world today and accounts for the biggest flow of people
across the earth. It is thus important to utilise it as an instrument to
bring about change on our planet. It is one of the most visible
manifestations of globalisation. Travellers from other countries represent
other communities, environments and economies, which could cause problems.
At the same time, tourism is a source of great fun and pleasure for
millions of people, and it brings together people of different cultures and
parts of the world. Listen, DA and Cope.

As a tourist destination, South Africa is offering the world in one
country, from the fynbos in the Cape to the grasslands of the Highveld and
KwaZulu-Natal’s banana plantations. We have a natural beauty that is both
spectacular and diverse, something that other countries are not able to
show off. Our country also has a colourful variety of cultures and origins,
so much so that South Africans have become known as the rainbow nation.

Chairperson, it is necessary to promote this tourism in a sustainable
manner. Sustainable tourism can be described as a process that promotes
development without exhausting our resources. There is great concern
regarding the emerging entrepreneurs in the tourism industry. Tourism must
be promoted by taking into account the interdependence of tourism and the
environment, and of tourism and cultural heritage. It is of the utmost
importance that tourism policies are well formulated.

We should not be worried that South Africa’s popularity as a tourist
destination is going to decline, because our country is privileged to be
one of the foremost tourist destinations in the world. In fact, there are
indications that we can still go from strength to strength in future, and
the challenge is to make this possible within a sustainable framework.

We realise that there are a number of negative aspects, such as concerns
about safety, which need to change, as well as South Africans’ attitudes
towards visitors and money exchange. All sentient South Africans will agree
that our country needs to take its rightful place in the gallery of the
world’s top tourist destinations sooner or later. People with clever ideas,
which I don’t think Cope and the DA have, need to take action and implement
on their plans. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. I thank you.]

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, thank you very much. I would like to
start off where my colleague the Minister of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs ended in his reply, and that was that the executive,
and I think all of us, should at the beginning of a new term pause and ask
ourselves the question: Why do we have an NCOP in this country? It is a
very important question. The NCOP is not a “House of Lords”, simply with
powers to review. It is a very important part of our parliamentary process,
with regional powers, derived from the Constitution, and I think there
rests on us as the executive, apart from all the other stakeholders, a
special responsibility to respect the NCOP. I would like to assure this
House, but also the two Chairpersons, that that is what they can expect
from the Department of Tourism. But I am also reporting back, or replying,
on behalf of the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs, and I am
quite sure I speak on her behalf as well.

Let me quickly deal with some of the issues in the limited time I have.
Issues that were raised by the chairperson, Mr Gamede, were the issue of
consultants, management generally in the departments, and financial
management. On the issue of consultants, I would like to assure the
chairperson and this House that our department will report back to the
select committee and this House. I personally feel very strongly that we
cannot simply continue as government to appoint consultants when we have
staff we pay to do the job that they should be doing. If we appoint
consultants, it must be for a limited time, it must be to do a specific
job, it must be measurable, and then it must end. And the work must be done
by the department. So consultants must be used wisely. I agree with that
sentiment, and our department will certainly report back to the select
committee on this issue.

On the question of financial management, I would like to report back to
this House that the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, which
will now be split into different parts and merged with other departments,
had a clean audit for the past few years. It is something that I personally
am proud of. We had one this past year again, and it is something that I
would like to continue in the new Department of Tourism.

There was one problematic area, and that was the Marine Living Resources
Fund, the MLRF. From 2002 until about 2004-05, under the previous
management, no financial statements were even submitted. We, the previous
management in this department, intervened, and turned it around. I gave
that undertaking in this House and moved from a situation where no
financial statements were tabled, through a year or two of disclaimers, to
an unqualified report in 2007-08, and I would like to report back to this
House that we also expect an unqualified report for 2008-09.

Then on the issue of transformation in tourism, raised by the chairperson
and other members, the codes of good practice have just been gazetted, and
this means that all the different parts of the industry that will enter
into contracts with the government will now know that those contracts are
legally binding.

The hon chairperson remarked on the slow pace of transformation. Over the
past two or three years, we have seen some major empowerment deals
announced by the big companies, but we still have a challenge with regard
to the small, medium and micro enterprises, SMMEs. This is because much of
this industry is owned by families. So when measuring transformation, we
should not only measure ownership, but the other six elements of
transformation as well: procurement, social investment, and all the other
elements. But we would like to have that kind of discussion with the select
committee, because it is something that we are acutely aware of, and also
dealing with and managing.

On the issue of access for people with disabilities, the different
associations representing the disability sector had a meeting with me three
years ago. We met with the grading council and the other public entities
and SA Tourism. What has happened since is that for five-star
establishments it is now a requirement to have access for people with
disabilities. But let us say to each other that it is not yet enough. We
are continuing that discussion on how we should integrate that requirement
into the grading system to ensure that it becomes more widely applied.

The hon member Adams raised the issue of Pieter from the Cape Flats, who
should know what he can achieve, and what kind of assistance he can get
from government. I mentioned in my introduction that just over the past few
years we have effected transactions of up to R4 billion from the tourism
enterprise programme, just over 5 500 transactions. But my impression is
that people are still not yet aware of the services, of the support
structure, that we have available from the side of government, and we must
certainly make sure that we continue to get that message out.

On the Confederations Cup, I think all of us took note this morning that Mr
Blatter, the president of Fifa, said he gave South Africa seven and a half
out of ten for the Confederations Cup, and that he was full of confidence
that we would be able to host a good World Cup next year. Now I think we
can be a little bit self-congratulatory, because there were so many
prophets of doom who said: “Well, South Africa will not even be able to
host the Confederations Cup.” We surprised all of them, but seven and a
half is not good enough for us. We want ten out of ten. So we take note of
the problems that were experienced with transport, and with accommodation
in some areas. I must just say here that I am confident that we will not
see a repeat of those same problems next year.

One of those areas was Bloemfontein – there are people here from the Free
State. And in Bloemfontein, next year, we shall have available all the
hostels from the university, we shall have available the satellite
accommodation in other towns, and special flights to Bloemfontein on the
day of the matches, so I think we shall deal with that.

But let us also say to one another as South Africans, colleagues, we cannot
build infrastructure and hotels in this country that we will not be able to
use after 2010. Remember, in Korea they built infrastructure that they had
to demolish after their World Cup. And as a developing country, and as
government, we cannot now say to people, build new infrastructure and
hotels and after 2010 there is nobody to use it. Then we would be wasting
money that we should rather use more wisely for housing and other areas.

Let me deal with the issues on behalf of the Minister of Water and
Environmental Affairs. There are two issues there. The issue of air quality
was raised, as well as the issue of climate change.

The chairperson of the other select committee raised an issue regarding air
quality. The department has just reviewed the permits of the biggest
polluters in the country. They are responsible for 80% of the pollution. I
am quite sure that the new department under Minister Sonjica will now take
action on the basis of that review.

The Vaal Triangle and the Highveld area have been declared hotspots with
special measures to start dealing with the pollution there. The department
also announced that 18 ambient air quality monitoring stations have been
introduced. They are in operation already, and they will assist us to
ensure that the new legislation that all of us passed in 2004 will be
phased in properly and come into effect properly.

Then on the issue of climate change which the hon member Worth and other
hon members mentioned, members here may be aware that Cabinet adopted the
long-term mitigation strategy, certain measures that we as government have
to start taking. What some of the colleagues reminded us of today is true.
We have to deal with our carbon footprint, and we have to look at more
sustainable forms of energy. That is why the President announced that there
will be a new department of energy, which will have as one of its key
functions dealing with this challenge of sustainable and renewable energy.

Chairperson, let me conclude on a very collegial note, with the issue of an
alternative government that the hon member Sinclair raised here at the
beginning. I must say it is quite refreshing to hear some political parties
starting to refer, as the hon chairperson Mr Gamede said, to themselves not
only as opposition parties, but also as alternative governments. It is
really quite refreshing.

But it reminded me of a story regarding Henry Kissinger, who was probably
the most famous United States secretary of state responsible for foreign
affairs. Somebody asked him, “Mr Secretary of State, why don’t you consult
more with Europe? The United States is no longer the only superpower. Now
that all these European states are coming together to form the European
Union, you must really consult with them.” Mr Kissinger said: “You know,
it’s very difficult, because when I have to speak to Germany, I know
exactly who to phone. If I have to speak to China, I know who to phone. But
when I want to speak to the EU, who do I phone?” Now, when President Zuma
wants to speak to the ID, he knows exactly who to phone. When he wants to
speak to the DA, he knows he must probably phone Mrs Zille. But if he wants
to speak to Cope, who does he phone? [Laughter.]

I think if you are an alternative government, you must first decide if you
have a leader, and who that leader is. So, I think, Chairperson, the
benefit of that is that either Mr Bloem or Mr Sinclair can get a phone call
from President Zuma. [Interjections.] I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Order! Mr Bloem, I allowed that to
happen, but I hope it won’t happen in the future again.

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Budget Vote No 27 - Land Affairs:

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): May I take the opportunity to welcome
to this House the Minister and the Deputy Minister, and call on the
Minister to open the debate.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, hon members,
as we prepare our way forward in implementing the objectives of our new
Department of Rural Development and Land Reform, we must take stock of what
the Department of Land Affairs has been doing. On that basis, we must
clearly articulate the way forward in terms of the establishment of the new
department.

As reflected in the 2008-11 strategic plan, the department revised the
national land redistribution target to 608 000 hectares in order to align
it with the actual budget.

The Commission on Restitution of Land Rights settled a total of 653 claims,
inclusive of 108 that were dismissed. This resulted in approximately 394
000 hectares of land being approved for restoration, affecting
approximately 30 000 households. Cumulatively, the approved hectares of
land for restitution purposes since 1995 is 2,47 million, representing a
10% contribution to the overall target of redistributing 30% of white-owned
agricultural land to black farmers by 2014.

In terms of forestry claims, great progress has been made with regard to
the implementation of the memorandum of agreements signed between Mondi and
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry on the settlement of these
claims. Much of the deliverables in this regard will be reported on in the
forthcoming financial year.

The commission is left with approximately 4 296 complex rural claims to
settle, with four of the regional offices intending to finalise their
claims by the end of this financial year. These are Gauteng, which is left
with only three outstanding claims; Free State with only 22; the Northern
Cape with 164; and the Western Cape with 573.

While the department developed a postsettlement strategy to effectively
support communities after they took transfer of land, this strategy,
however, could not be implemented for lack of capacity.

The department has recognised that in order to move forward decisively in
the land distribution programme, significant changes will have to be made
to the willing-buyer, willing-seller model of land redistribution. The
department will have to investigate less costly, alternative ways of land
acquisition by engaging with all stakeholders within the sector. We have
heard the landless people; they say the willing-buyer, willing-seller model
doesn’t work. We heard the ANC’s 52nd national conference of 2007; it said
the model does not work. We must now hear the landed folks of our country.

We will be seeking a much more pragmatic formula for land redistribution,
one which should address issues as part of our country’s ongoing national
reconciliation project. It should not be seen as a super profit-making
business venture. Such an approach would lead our country to a dead end in
the long term. Our strongly held view is that land access and ownership
should first of all satisfy the land needs of South Africans. This
objective shall, preferably, be pursued without the need to amend the
Constitution.

Secure land tenure is fundamental to rural development, and it is
imperative that the department reviews policy and legislation relating to
tenure on commercial farms, as well as in commercial areas. As a short-to-
medium-term measure, we will continue to provide legal assistance to the
2,8 million people living without secure tenure on commercial farms in
South Africa. Two most recent Grahamstown High Court judgments in favour of
victims of farm evictions in areas such as Cradock and Seven Fountains are
encouraging in this regard.

Side by side with this aggressive legal protection of the rights of farm
tenants and workers on white commercial farms, the former homeland areas
will become a central focus area for the government’s Comprehensive Rural
Development Programme for the next five years. The strategy for the
implementation of the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme and land
reform involves agrarian transformation, and sustained rapid and
fundamental change in relation to land, livestock, cropping and communities
for sustainable growth and development.

Relying heavily on the Freedom Charter, the 2005 January 8 statement of the
ANC had the following to say in this regard, and I quote:

   The democratic state must take the lead in the transformation of our
   economy away from the fetters of the past, which constrained growth and
   development. Among the mechanisms that the developmental state deploys to
   restore the national wealth of our country to the people are:


      Sustained and substantial investment in economic and social
      infrastructure, built with methods with a bias towards labour-
      intensive technologies; increasing the access of the masses of the
      people to physical resources, particularly land, housing and community
      infrastructure; poverty reduction and eradication through job
      creation, skills development and budget interventions to increase the
      social wage, bearing in mind our limited means; affirmative action,
      broad-based black economic empowerment and other interventions
      designed to fast-track the inclusion of the previously marginalised in
      the mainstream economy and simultaneously transform the structure of
      the economy; and ensuring the growth and development of our economy to
      provide the means to achieve the broad goals indicated by the Freedom
      Charter.
Of course this is what we have to do. As His Excellency, the President of
the Republic, enjoined us during his state of the nation address, we are
committed to speedily returning the land use management Bill to this House
after undertaking the necessary consultations. Without this Bill, we may
not achieve our goal of dealing with the disintegrated apartheid settlement
patterns and the inefficiency with which land use decisions are taken. The
land use management Bill will also enable us to improve the capacity of our
municipalities, especially rural ones, in land use management.

Following the reorganisation of the new administration, we now have a new
department, the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform. The Budget
Vote which I am presenting today is informed by what we consider to be an
interim strategic plan. Our five-year strategic plan for this new term of
office will be influenced by a new strategy based on the new mandate to the
government and its key objectives and strategic goals.

The strategy of the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform is
agrarian transformation. The overall outcome has to be social cohesion and
development. The following strategic goals will be pursued in the quest for
vibrant and sustainable rural communities: firstly, the establishment of
business initiatives, agro-industries, co-operatives, cultural initiatives
and vibrant local markets in rural areas; secondly, the empowerment of
rural people and communities, especially women and youth, through
facilitating and mediating strong organisational and institutional
capabilities and abilities to take full charge of their own destiny;
thirdly, training rural people in technical skills, combining them with
indigenous knowhow and knowledge to mitigate community vulnerability to,
especially, climate change, soil erosion, drought, snow, animal diseases,
flooding, tornados and other natural disasters and emergencies, and hunger
and food insecurity; and, finally, revitalisation and revamping of old, and
the creation of new, economic, social, information communication
infrastructure, and public amenities and facilities in villages and small
rural towns.

We have developed a broad concept of what the new department will look
like. This is work in progress, but we have a clear idea about its core
thrust, thanks to the resolution of the ANC’s 52nd national conference on
rural development, agrarian change and land reform. An important element of
this resolution is the establishment of a Rural Development Agency. Our
work has thus been cut out for us.

Furthermore, we have to speed up the settlement of processed land claims
and expedite the processing of remaining ones. This much has been made well
understood by both the National Land Claims Commissioner and the director-
general.

In addition to the points made above, we have agreed that we need to
improve the manner in which we work as a department. We have agreed that in
both land restitution and land redistribution, we must sort out unnecessary
institutional constraints in the short term, whilst we deal with external
challenges in the medium to long term.

With respect to the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, we have
adopted a three-phase approach. Phase one, which deals with piloting the
Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, is a programme which is being
implemented and piloted in the Greater Giyani Local Municipality in Limpopo
province.

The medium term, which is phase two, is focused mainly on enterprise
development and food security. This programme, which is a joint effort
between the Departments of Rural Development and Land Reform, and of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, will be riding on the back of phase
one. Its complexity and enterprise lie in the fact that it must encompass
the total value added in both crop and livestock farming. The catalytic
tool for this phase is economic, social, information communication, public
amenities and facilities, and infrastructure development. All nine
provinces should commence with this phase very soon.

The long term or the third phase is that the programme will focus on small,
micro and medium enterprises and industries; cultural tourism; co-
operatives and vibrant village markets, and so forth. The catalyst for this
phase, though not exclusively so, is the Rural Development Agency, riding
on the back of phase two. The small rural towns will feature prominently
during this phase.
Hon Chair, let me conclude by stressing that there is nothing romantic
about poverty, inequality, unemployment, cultural backwardness and social
fragmentation. We dare not romanticise these socioeconomic ills, for they
are real and they are very bad. We have to deal with them very decisively,
as the hon President said during his state of the nation address to the
National Assembly, and when he responded to the debate on his speech.

The government has adopted the Giyani pilot as a national government pilot.
This means that rural development will not only be a project of the
Department of Rural Development and Land Reform, but rather a government-
wide project. This has encouraged us to ensure that in our responsibilities
of facilitating, initiating, co-ordinating and catalysing some of these
projects, we will work together with all the departments of government,
municipalities and Premiers’ offices. We cannot perform this responsibility
alone.

But one fundamental requirement and bottom line for a successful and
lasting rural development project is that rural communities themselves have
got to be assisted and encouraged in a sustained manner to organise
themselves into disciplined and productive formations through which they
can express themselves, in themselves and for themselves, in the spirit of
Vukuzenzele, Hi Tihluvukisa, Siyazondla or Phezu Komkhono. Thank you, hon
Chair. [Applause.]

Ms A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, hon
members, officials of the department, comrades and friends, it is a great
pleasure for me to extend my greetings to you all.

I feel honoured for having been awarded this opportunity to address this
House again. I am tempted to say that the recent national general
elections, held on 22 April 2009, were historic and reflected the will of
the people. Hence, they came in large numbers to confound those who have
consistently claimed that, as we move away from the historic events of
April 1994, our people will lose interest in the democratic process. Our
people came out in numbers, in defiance of those prophets of doom who were
a common feature before the elections.

We are an organisation that represents and listens not only to its
constituency but to the entire South African nation. We therefore
incorporated these views in our manifesto. It is for this reason that we
are proud and confident today that the ANC manifesto represents the views
and concerns of the masses of our people.

Xa ndithetha ngomhlaba noMphathiswa, kuza kufuneka sijonge ukuba zisekho na
iindawo ezisahleleleke kakhulu ezisafuna ukuba uMphathiswa azihambele ukuze
ziphuhliswe.

Njengoko ndisazi isakhono soMphathiswa kwezolimo nakuphuhliso lwamaphandle,
akufakwanga mntu ungayaziyo intlupheko yabantu kuba uphuma kwelona phondo
lakhe lahlupheka. Xa isabelo sikaMphathiswa siphinda sibekwa, kuza kufuneka
acele sibe ngathi sithi chatha kuba ziseninzi izinto ekusafuneka zenzek
ile. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[When I mention land to the Minister, we need to establish whether there
are places which are severely marginalised that need the Minister’s visit
in order to be developed.

I know the Minister’s strengths on agriculture and rural development; he is
the right choice because he knows about people’s suffering as he is from
the poorest province. The Minister will have to ask for an increase in the
next budget allocation because there are many things that still need to be
done.]

The Minister has alluded in his address to the total of 635 settled claims,
inclusive of 108 claims which were dismissed.

Siyabulela, Mphathiswa, kuba kuyabonakala ukuba eli sebe lizimisele
ukusebenza kakhulu. [We thank you, Minister, because it is obvious that
this department wants to work hard.]

The Minister also reported in his Budget Vote speech that the department
will be in Riemvasmaak, restoring 46 000 hectares of land to the community.
Together with the community, we shall celebrate the return of their
ancestral land. The community will once again be the custodians of land
that once belonged to their ancestors.

We acknowledge that, despite significant progress made over the past 15
years, people living in rural areas continue to face the harshest
conditions of poverty, and lack of access to land and basic services. We
are also committed to a comprehensive and clear rural development strategy
linked to land and agrarian reform.

As members of this House, especially those on the select committee, we have
a role to ensure that people living in the rural areas access all relevant
services through the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, CRDP, for
the next five years. The strategy for the implementation of the CRDP and
land reform is agrarian transformation, meaning rapid growth and
sustainable development.

While we work on the national programme, it is the provinces who have to
implement this programme. The ANC has represented its standpoint and
approach to rural development, land reform and agrarian change. It has
resolved, among other things, to implement an integrated programme of rural
development, land reform and agrarian change based on these pillars.

Xa ndiza kuvala, ndibulela uMphathiswa ngohlobo azinikele ngalo emsebenzini
wakhe. Zise khona iindawo ezineeprojekthi ezisafuna ukulandelwa kuba
zisifa, kuba kaloku akukho bantu bazijongileyo.
Kuza kufuneka ukuba ezi projekthi ziphinde ziqwalaselwe, kujongwe ukuba
yintoni ebangela ukuba zife okanye yintoni ebangela ukuba abantu bangakwazi
ukuziqhuba. Lilonke, Sihlalo, ndiyasibulela isabelo sakho Mphathiswa.
Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[In conclusion, I commend the Minister for his dedication to his work.
There are still places with collapsing projects that need follow-up because
there is no one doing the monitoring of these projects.

These projects will have to be reviewed to establish the cause for this and
the reason for the failure to run these projects. In all, Chairperson, I
support the Minister’s budget. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr Z MLENZANA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister Mnqarhwana, hon Deputy
Minister and hon members, good afternoon.

Let me start by congratulating hon Mnqarhwana on his appointment as
Minister, particularly of this critical department. I’m doing this because
I’m talking to a person who knows what it means to transform rural areas,
such that a rural person at Gxaku, on the border between Mount Frere and
Mount Fletcher, will not see the need to put up a shack in Mount Frere ...

... kuba eleqa ukuba sedolophini. [... because this person is rushing to an
urban area.]

I am talking to the hon Minister because he knows what it means to upgrade
rural towns, such that the debate about Kokstad is not driven by comparison
of infrastructure. I am talking to the hon Minister because he knows what
it means to develop the village of Mpame in Elliotdale, such that those
deep rural inhabitants see their area as a tourism site.

For me, it means addressing the lack of basic infrastructure like roads,
water, electricity and communication supply, and ultimately dealing with
and defeating poverty. Basic services do not reach all our people on farms
and in rural areas. Access to government services such as education and
health care are very weak. Hence, diseases related to contaminated water,
such as diarrhoea, are prevalent in rural areas.

The Ministry is therefore charged with the responsibility to cut across and
co-ordinate all those government departments and entities that have a stake
in the upliftment of the lives of our people in rural areas, and this
includes rural towns.

Rural municipalities are in a deprivation trap. This means, if not
assisted, they will remain in poverty because of a continuous lack of
expertise, particularly in the fields of engineering and financial
management.

I know that the hon Minister is very passionate about land and agrarian
reform and co-operative development. But, hon Minister, this has to be
given direction and be uniformly and speedily implemented, particularly in
rural provinces. You will notice that most rural municipalities are sitting
on claimed land, and this makes it very difficult, if not a nightmare, for
them to engage in development programmes.

Our rural communities should be empowered to deal with poverty through the
establishment of co-operatives. Land reform should be informed by the
purpose of dealing with, and ultimate defeating, poverty. Hence this
process of land reform has to involve thoroughgoing consultation with all
political parties, organised traditional institutions, and interest groups
involved, so that there is a win-win situation in which everybody can own
the programme at end of the day.

The Freedom Charter says: “The land shall be shared among those who work
it.” It is high time that this noble clause of this noble document be
considered. Our people who are getting their land back through the land
claims processes should be assisted to optimally use and sustain the
condition of the land. The picture of large areas of land lying unused and
ultimately being eroded is very bad. This should change and should include
the affected communities. This will avoid a situation ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr Z MLENZANA: In conclusion, Chairperson, I want to say that this new
Ministry is the hope of rural communities and farm dwellers, as it promises
to create and maintain an equitable and sustainable land dispensation.
Therefore, I hope and pray that you will do us good. Ningasiphoxi. [Don’t
let us down.] I thank you.

Mr B L MASHILE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, members
of the House and guests present, we have been sitting in this House for a
long time today, and we are almost a little tired, but I shall try to keep
your attention a little longer.

South Africa has a rich history, which is written in the minds of the dead
and the living souls. It had been in the interests of the apartheid regime
to institutionally undocument the African history, as seen and told by our
forefathers, and as continuously conveyed to successive generations. The
struggles of the African tribes against invasion and colonialisation still
have to be properly documented to tell the story of the life of an African
after the arrival of the colonial powers in our country. The systematic
massacre of African tribes to steal their land has not been told nor
documented. The perpetual indoctrination and colonisation of Africans to
subhuman status in the land of their birth continued unabated. All these
inhuman acts were calculated to disempower the African tribes socially and
economically. The loss of land and stock broke their resolve to withstand
these greedy colonisers.

Without opening the gaping wounds of the past, the real Congress of the
People held in 1955 declared this, as contained in the Freedom Charter.
This declaration talks to land ownership. It presupposed the reversal of
the land grab by the white minority invaders. We should remember that the
Freedom Charter is not just a historical document, but an important guide
about the direction in which we should take our country. It continues to
provide an enduring vision of our new democratic South African society.

To live up to the issues that the declaration alluded to, the ANC had
identified in its 2009 election manifesto rural development, food security
and land reform as one of the five medium-term policy priorities. It does
make sense for the ANC-led government to make serious interventions on this
matter, as the mandate to do so was received on 22 April 2009. Our
government will intensify land reform programmes to ensure that more land
is in the hands of the rural poor and will provide them with the necessary
technical skills and financial resources to use the land productively.

It is common cause that these interventions will require the commitment of
all citizens of this country, black and white. In keeping with the preamble
of the Constitution, those who benefited during apartheid rule or inherited
land unjustly acquired should recognise the injustices of our past.
Pursuant to this, the following measures will be undertaken to review the
appropriateness of the existing land redistribution programme: introducing
measures to speed up the land reform and redistribution; promoting land
ownership by South Africans; and expanding the agrarian reform programme
and promoting agricultural co-operatives and agroprocessing in the
agricultural areas. These measures will change the face of rural areas for
the better.

Ours is a developmental state that is not shy to intervene. We cannot leave
reform, redress and sharing of state resources to markets. Successful
attempts have been made to undermine the spirit of the land reform
programmes aimed at recognising and redressing the injustices of our past.
State intervention to foster co-operation with the haves cannot be
overemphasised.

Our strategic plan, based on the 2009 Budget, tabled on 11 February 2009,
provides for several programmes of the department flowing from the medium-
term policy priorities, focusing on rural development and land and agrarian
reform, which falls under these seven programmes.

The total number of land claims lodged with the department is just under
80 000. The commission has settled about 95% of these land claims. These
enabled the restoration of at least 2,3 million hectares of land to 302 000
households. We therefore still have to deal with 4 200 tricky and more
difficult restitution claims before the end of 2011. These claims are
mainly affected by budgeting shortfalls, escalating prices, jurisdiction
and boundary conflicts, claims at the Land Claims Court, disputes among
beneficiaries, and, of course, implementation capacity within the
department.

An amount of R1,9 billion is therefore provided for these programmes in the
2009-10 financial year. This amount will enable the department to intensify
stakeholder engagement, accelerate research and gazette all outstanding
plans before the end of this financial year, establish regional price
notches for acquisition of land for restitution purposes, and review
legislation and court processes. This work will be topped with the
implementation of revised postsettlement support in conjunction with rural
development strategies. The land has to be redistributed to the landless
masses of our people. The department has targeted the delivery of 30% of
prime agricultural land by the end of 2014. This translates to 24,6 million
hectares currently held by white farmers. We therefore call upon those who
have land to co-operate with the authority in order for us to conclude this
process. However, we appreciate the co-operation received in respect of the
5,2 million hectares that have already been redistributed. As this
programme is key for food security and rural development strategies more
resources will be required in the next financial years to speedily conclude
land reform in our country.

Hon Chairperson, the above matters of land restitution and redistribution
will require sufficient men and women in the department who have to do
things differently in order to achieve improved results. The department
needs to further reduce the vacancy rate to a figure less than 10% by the
end of this financial year. There is a need to realign certain funded
priorities to release resources to key priorities of the department. A
number of legislative measures which impact on the land question need to be
reviewed and processed to enhance the speedy and successful conclusion of
land reform.

In conclusion, the ANC-led government will move with speed on all
priorities that seek to transform this unfavourable state of affairs. Of
course this will be done within the scope of the limited financial
resources. We should not deny the reality of the global recession, which we
are not insulated against. As stated in his inaugural speech, President
Zuma indicated that the effect of the global recession will impact on the
pace of delivery and not on our direction.

Hon Chairperson, I would like take advantage of this budget debate to
express my appreciation of the improvement in the performance of our soccer
team, Bafana Bafana. There are clear indications that with more practice
and effort they will cause a lot of upsets and pain to other countries come
the 2010 Fifa World Cup soccer tournament. [Time expired.] Working together
we can do more! I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M WALTERS (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members,
this is my first visit to the National Council of Provinces. I am very glad
to be here and I found the debates very informative.

One of the things that runs through this debate, the a golden thread, right
from the very first debate on Minister Shiceka’s Budget Vote, is the fact
that the natural resources of our country could be used for tourism and
agricultural development, and also fund those governance organisations
which are suffering at present. In this regard I would like to refer to
South Africa’s generally poor agricultural resources. We have only 5
million hectares of high potential soil in South Africa. In terms of rural
development, only 30% of this is in the former homelands, and it is not
being utilised to any great extent.

The Agricultural Research Council did trials in the Transkei, where the
local population was getting 350 kg per hectare, and by doing the right
things the yield went up to six tons per hectare and more. Now, those areas
of high potential soil have a potential for producing crops far more
profitable than maize, but if it was brought under maize it would more than
double South Africa’s maize yield, which would also be disastrous.

The Agricultural Research Council presented a proposal to Minister Derek
Hanekom in 1997, as well as to MEC Stofile, and no response was received at
that stage. Very gratifying was the fact that the economic adviser to the
Deputy President asked for an updated version of that proposal last year,
and we hope that something will emanate from that. But the potential for
rural development is immense in those areas where high potential soil is
available. The only restraints are high soil acidity and trace element
deficiencies, and there is technology available for that. It could be
addressed with the right technology and providing the necessary support and
guidance to those communal areas. So I would suggest that that receives
very close attention.

In terms of the Western Cape’s involvement, we would like to improve the
relationship between Land Affairs and the provincial Department of
Agriculture. Currently it is on uncertain ground. This situation is
untenable, as it is preventing a co-ordinated approach to land reform where
the provincial department would assume responsibility for the extension and
related services necessary for successful projects. We see that land reform
is a national competency of the Department of Land Affairs, but a formal
agreement with the provinces and in this case the Western Cape is
absolutely essential if co-ordinated and effective deployment of resources
is to take place.

We would like to see a memorandum of understanding being signed between the
two governments, where the successful land redistribution and utilisation
need close co-operation between Land Affairs and Agriculture. This would
facilitate invitations to and attendance by Land Affairs officials of key
provincial meetings and cement a mutually productive working relationship.

The Department of Agriculture wants to be more involved in the
identification of suitable farms for land reform, and also in the selection
of potential new farmers for these projects. It has on-the-ground knowledge
of resources, constraints and possibilities, and has the expertise and
capacity to contribute in this respect.

We are concerned about the future of certain projects. At Elandskloof
ownership is lacking, as the beneficiaries are grouped together in a
community trust. Land Affairs has placed them under administration.
Internal strife is leading to rapid deterioration and urgent intervention
is required, and the province would certainly be very prepared to help.

The Ebenhaezer claim seems still to be in limbo. Six farms were bought, but
to date no farmers have been identified to operate these farms. These
include all productive grape farms and two tunnel farms, which are all
deteriorating rapidly and they need very urgent attention. The Western Cape
Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs needs to arrive at an agreement
as soon as possible, in which a common approach to land reform projects is
developed, ensuring that new entities that emerge are immediately
productive, and beneficiaries are able to rapidly move to sustainable
economic independence while resources and infrastructure are maintained and
improved. I think this has been one of the problems with many land reform
projects in the past. The land is conveyed but the support systems are not
in place. The province would certainly like to support the national
government in this particular enterprise.

Then, hon Chair, just in conclusion, I noticed the altercation between the
hon member De Beer and the hon member Sinclair when they were arguing about
what vehicles they were using to promote their particular parties’
policies. I think they should think a bit about the words of an Afrikaans
poet, Ronnie Belcher, who wrote:

   Dis ’n druk ding en ’n sluk ding
   Dit bring ’n bietjie verligting
   Ons is op die regte pad
   Maar dalk in die verkeerde rigting.

I thank you, Madam Chair.

An HON MEMBER: Madam Chair, is the hon member prepared to take a question?
The hon member said he would like a memorandum of understanding to be
signed between the Republic of South Africa’s government and some other
government. I wasn’t quite sure what other government he was referring to.

Mr M WALTERS (Western Cape): Hon Chair, I would like to refer the hon
member for Gauteng to the programme, which says “M Walters, Western Cape”.
Does that answer the question? It is the provincial government.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chairperson,
members of the House, I think before I come to making my contribution to
this Budget Vote, let me also just add my concern about the input of hon
Walters. I thought I was somewhere else, not in South Africa. As far as I
am concerned, this is a unitary state with nine provincial governments. I
have never heard of one state signing a memorandum of understanding with a
provincial government.

Our new Department of Rural Development and Land Reform, and its
predecessor, the Department of Land Affairs, whose budget we are tabling in
front of this House today, is central and a key issue in the realisation of
a better life for all South Africans. As already tabled by the hon
Minister, this department and this budget we are tabling here have to do
with a very central asset of the people of this country, which is land,
because without land itself, there is no way in which our people can be
empowered. This is a universal truth, and it is because of that
universality and fundamentality that you found many nations taking up arms
against one another, because once you are dispossessed of your most
valuable asset, which is land, then you are left with nothing else. We have
seen this happening in various parts of the world, through conquests and
colonialism, and South Africa was no exception.

It is because of these wars of conquest and colonialism that this
department has been given the task by the new democratic government of
making sure that we redress the wrongs of the past, and therefore has the
responsibility to see to it that there is an equitable distribution of this
very important asset. We know what many centuries of conquest and
colonialism and apartheid have done, and the many laws which were passed to
try to justify and formalise the dispossession of billions of indigenous
people of this very important asset, the land.

Over the past 15 years, this department and the democratic government have
taken many steps to make sure that this redress can be realised. While a
lot of progress has been made in this regard, as the presentation of the
Minister has indicated, there is still a lot that needs to be done, and it
is very clear that we need to do this much more urgently if we are to avoid
a potential ticking time bomb in terms of land hunger. I am sure all of us
are very familiar with the developments across our boundaries and we don’t
want to find ourselves in that situation. Therefore it is in this regard
that we call upon all South Africans, irrespective of their political
persuasion, to work with us in finding workable solutions in the need to
realise this equitable redistribution of land, and we welcome creative
suggestions, as South African patriots.

As we look forward to the mandate of this fourth democratic Parliament and
the National Council of Provinces and government as a whole, the
expectations of our people are quite clear in terms of redressing these
wrongs of the past. Determination to do that is clearly captured in the ANC
manifesto, which has recently been translated into the Medium-Term
Strategic Framework, MTSF, and was adopted by Cabinet late in March. Both
in the manifesto and MTSF we have placed rural development, linked to land
reform, in the forefront of our priorities over the next five years. We are
very clear that the task the voters have given us is a mammoth one, but we
want to emphasise again that while a lot of progress has been made, a lot
more still needs to be done.

In the area of rural development as well, over and above the question of
land redistribution, we are quite conscious of the fact that a lot of
progress has been made. It is there, it is indisputable for everybody to
see. You just need to go around the various rural areas of our country.
Where there were no roads in the past, today we have roads. Where there was
no electrical power, today we have power. Where there were no clinics or
hospitals, schools and other social amenities, these are there now.

But we are quite conscious of the fact that a lot more needs to be done,
and therefore the decision by the ANC and the President to create a
specific Ministry and Department of Rural Development and Land Reform to
tackle these challenges head-on. The mandate therefore of this new Ministry
and department is to consolidate the gains which have been made to make
sure that, rather than just being one of the areas of attention by a myriad
of departments and spheres of government, there is a champion, a catalyst
who will be able to be the one to accelerate this, to make sure that the
creation of a vibrant and sustainable rural community becomes a reality.

The aim of this Ministry and department is not to reinvent the wheel and do
what has already been done, but to fine-tune those areas which need
attention and make sure that various role-players can be brought together
from within government spheres, from within national, provincial and local
government, from business, from civil society, and from nongovernmental
organisations, ensuring that there is a common cause on which all of us can
focus.

In order for the department to succeed, we shall really have to make sure
that the motto of “working together we can do more” should not just be a
slogan, but should actually be put into practice. We expect, in the long
term, the end result of this intervention to be rural communities that are
comprehensive participants in the full life of our country, in its economic
life and in its social and political life.

We are aware that for our people’s energies to be harnessed, the issue of
food security becomes very central, and, therefore, as our Minister has
already indicated, central to this is the question of agrarian
transformation. It is really our key instrument in realising the
transformation of rural areas. But we want to emphasise upfront that while
agrarian transformation is key to our strategy, we are looking at the
comprehensive development of rural areas to encompass tourism, mining,
construction and other areas of the economy, so that our rural areas are
not relegated to focusing only on agricultural activities. Therefore our
focus is the comprehensive revitalisation of rural areas.

To do this, it is quite clear to us that we need to rely on the empowerment
of our people, because at the end of the day we can bring all sorts of
resources to bear — financial, material and the land itself — but if our
people are not fully empowered, this will just remain a pipe dream.
Therefore the question of social mobilisation and the strengthening of
various institutions of leadership in our communities become very
important. It is very clear therefore that within the department itself
very serious reorganisation will have to be done, and we have already
started in terms of making sure that we are properly organised to focus on
this mandate.

As we were busy with our campaign before the election, it was clear to us
that what our people were looking for was faster delivery. The slogan out
there was “akusheshwe” [make it snappy]. People want to see quick
intervention and quick delivery. This is what we are committing ourselves
to as a department – “akusheshwe” [make it snappy]. It will be a department
for doing things fast. In this process we have already started
repositioning the department in terms of our strategy, our business plan,
and our operational plan, and in this regard we are making sure that we are
also branded appropriately, so that people should no longer look at this
department as a department of land affairs only, but as a department
responsible for comprehensive rural development. We shall also be improving
our communication.

In conclusion, we want to say that we are quite certain that this
department and Ministry will live by the slogan of “working together we can
do more”. Thank you, hon Chair. [Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon
members, the stated aim of the Department of Land Affairs is to create and
maintain an equitable and sustainable land dispensation that results in
social and economic development for all South Africans. Since this has been
identified as a national priority, a new Ministry focusing on rural
development and land issues has been formed to take this mandate forward.
The DA wishes to congratulate Minister Nkwinti on his appointment to this
new portfolio.

The overall Budget Vote analysis for 2008-09 and 2009-10 indicates a 0,2%
decrease in the budget allocations for the department when inflation is
taken into account. The analysis also indicates that the budget for the
land restitution programme has a 46,69% decrease in budget allocation,
while land reform has a 13,48% increase, which may indicate a shift in
priority by the department to land reform.

The Commission on the Restitution of Land Rights has settled over 75 000
claims out of a total of 79 696 claims lodged by the cut-off date, namely
31 December 1998. The commission is projected to settle a total of 1 695 of
the 4 560 outstanding claims – this figure might have changed – during the
2009-10 financial year. Some of the challenges faced by the commission, as
we have heard, include the high cost of land claims that have been referred
to the Land Claims Court for adjudication and disputes involving
traditional leaders.

Deputy Chairperson, South Africa still has a large rural population,
despite the migration to the cities in search for employment. The national
land reform core objective has been to redistribute 30% of the country’s
productive white-owned agricultural land by 2014 to the landless people.
Out of a total land mass of 122 million hectares, South Africa has 82
million hectares of agricultural land. The targeted 30% white agricultural
land amounts to 24,6 million hectares.

While rural poverty and unemployment are prevailing problems across the
country, agricultural development presents the best opportunity to redress
this poverty and to reinvigorate the declining economies of many small
country towns, and to stop the migration of people to the already
overcrowded cities.

Hon Minister, the DA supports the united, profitable and sustainable
agricultural sector in South Africa. The government’s confrontational
stance to commercial agriculture, as well as the threats to do away with
the willing-buyer, willing-seller principle, have resulted in a decline in
confidence in the agricultural sector, to say the least. The problems
highlighted by the agricultural department state, and I quote:

  While agricultural development is the best opportunity to address rural
  poverty, recent reviews of the land reform programmes and the
  Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, CASP, indicate failing land
  reform projects as a result of poor access to farmer support services and
  unco-ordinated programmes. Smallholder farming is not in a better
  condition either because of poor access to the same services, including
  extension services.

While the Washington-based Rural Development Institute stated that, hectare
for hectare, smaller holdings generally produce more than larger ones, this
has certainly not been the case in parts of South Africa. Extracts from the
paper on evaluating land reform’s contribution to South Africa’s pro-poor
growth pattern 2008 show that to date land reform has not significantly
changed the socioeconomic aspects of the large majority of the
beneficiaries, leading to no significant income distribution. Based on an
evaluation of all land reform programmes with a focus on the findings with
regard to the land projects of the Molemole Municipality in Limpopo, the
paper details that out of 42 projects assessed, only three showed
significant development, 20 were entirely abandoned or showed no activity,
with only 0,4% of the official beneficiaries benefiting in any way from the
projects. At the same time land reform has caused a 89,5% decrease in
production as well as many losses on the affected farms.

Several factors contributed to these pessimistic results. Solutions to
overcoming these failures are therefore essential. Owing to the historical
bias and the sensitive sociopolitical character of land in South Africa,
land reform must and will continue.

Deputy Chairperson, I look forward, as a new member of this committee, to
visiting projects that have been successful, as well as those not so
successful, to gain greater insight into their problems.
Hon Minister, the DA also looks forward to a good working relationship with
your department to ensure sustainable land and agricultural reform. This
agricultural reform must be well planned, efficiently managed and
adequately funded, with minimal disruption to food security. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, special
delegates and hon members ...

Malungu ahloniphekile nawe Sihlalo, ngizwa ngifikelwa yizinyembezi uma
ngabe kukhona abantu abakhuluma ngokuthi kuleli lizwe lethu lokudabuka ku
khona abantu okufanele bamukwe amapulazi. Ngonyaka ka-1903, KwaZulu-Natali
- ingxenye yeNingizimu Afrika - ukhokho wami iNkosi uDinuzulu, wabanjwa
waboshwa e-St Helena ngendaba yezwe. Kodwa namhlanje sekukhulunywa ukuthi
kunabantu okufanele bacatshangelwe bese kucindezelwa abantu bakithi. Ngizwa
kushisa izinyembezi emehlweni ami ngoba iNdlondlo enophaphe ekhanda
yabhadla ejele kanti noyise wafika khona lapha eKapa.

Ngiyacela-ke kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi uma sekuza odabeni lwezemihlaba, azi
ukuthi kunamapulazi eduze kwesigodlo si kababamkhulu e-Vryheid. Abantu
bakababamkhulu baxhashazwa nsukuzonke kanti ngokomlando waKwaZulu sabehlula
thina beNkayishana. Uma ngidlula ngiya eMtuba ngilihamba lonke leli
likaMthaniya ngizocela uNgqongqoshe akwenze kube sohleni lwakhe lwezinto
ezibalulekile ukuthi ake ahambe ayolibuka leliya lizwe abone ukuthi
amaphesenti ayi-100 aloya mhlaba ungowabantu bokudabuka lapha eNingizimu
Afrika kodwa ngamaphesenti ayi-13 asebesele nawo njengomhlaba wabo.
Kuyihlazo-ke ukuthi emva kweminyaka eyi-15 yenkululeko abantu bakithi
basacindezeleka ngale ndlela. Angiphaki yona impi kodwa engikushoyo
kumalungu ahloniphekile ukuthi udaba lomhlaba lubucayi kakhulu alubukwe
ngendlela enokwakha. Abantu abangabelwanga umhlaba wabo ngendlela abaphinde
babelwe ngendlela eyiyona.

Ngiyazi-ke ukuthi bakhona abaholi bomdabu abangavumelani nalezi zinto
ngisho neSilo uZwelithini imbala iNkosi yaKwaZulu - ngiyazi ukuthi kuye
kuthi uma kukhulunywa ngodaba lokwabiwa komhlaba angathandi ukubandakanywa.
Bengiyocela ukuthi uNgqongqoshe ahlele umhlangano wokubonisana nabaholi
bomdabu kwazeke ukuthi abantu kufanele banikezwe umhlaba wabo. Ngaleyo
ndlela kube nguMnyango wakho othwala umthwalo wokusombulula le ngwadla.
UMnyango wakho futhi ubalekelele abantu ngogandaganda ngoba izinkabi
azisekho laba bokufika bazijova zonke zaphela. Ngiyabonga Ngqongqoshe
ngifisa sengathi isabelo sakho semali singaba yimpumelelo sikwazi ukuqeda
ububha kubantu bakithi. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Chairperson, hon members, I feel tears burning in my eyes when I hear
people say that in this country, our country of origin, there are people
whose farms must be expropriated. In 1903, in KwaZulu-Natal – a part of
South Africa – my great grandfather King Dinuzulu was arrested and sent to
St Helena because of land issues. But today, people say that there are
others whose cases must be handled with caution, which suppresses our
people in the process. I feel tears burning in my eyes because an old
experienced and vicious mamba was busted in jail and his father was also
captured and sent here to the Cape.

I am, therefore, requesting the hon Minister that when we deal with the
issue of land, he must know that there are farms near my grandfather’s
palace in Vryheid. My grandfather’s people are exploited every day whilst
according to the KwaZulu history, we, the offspring of Nkayishana, defeated
them. When he goes to Mtuba and walks through this land of Mthaniya, I am
asking the hon Minister to place this issue on his priority list. He should
walk around in that part of the land so that he can see that of the 100% of
the land that used to be owned by the indigenous people of South Africa,
only 13% of that land is still in their possession. It is, therefore,
shameful that after 15 years of freedom our people are still suppressed
like this. I am not declaring war, but what I am saying to the hon members
is that the land issue is a very delicate matter; therefore, it needs to be
viewed in a constructive manner. People whose land claims were not properly
addressed should be revisited.

I know that there are traditional leaders who do not agree with these
things – even His Majesty King Zwelithini of the Zulus himself. I know that
when the issue of land distribution is discussed, he does not want to be
involved. I would request the hon Minister to plan a consultative
conference with the traditional leaders to enable people to get their land.
Therefore, it must be your department that shoulders the responsibility of
solving this crisis. Your department should also assist them with the
provision of tractors as they do not have oxen anymore since the settlers
sterilised them and they consequently perished. I am grateful to you hon
Minister, and I wish that your Budget Vote can be approved so that it can
end the poverty our people experience. Thank you.]

Mr G G MOKGORO: Thank you, Madam Chair. This is my maiden speech in this
august House. I am glad that the ANC-led government has identified job
creation and rural development as part of its government’s list of
priorities. In this financial year, there is a clear indication of how
seriously we are regarding both job creation and agrarian reform in this
country. The same sentiments were shared in this House by the President of
the country, President Jacob Zuma, during his first state of the nation
address when he said:

   Working together with our people in the rural areas, we will ensure a
   comprehensive rural development strategy, linked to land and agrarian
   reform, and food security as our third priority.

Rural development revolves mainly around land or is a matter of land
distribution. For that reason it touches the very nerve of our national
side, the fears and hopes shaped mainly by our past. We are cognisant of
this challenge and what is entailed within the context of our democratic
norms and values. We will engage as we see fit to ensure that development
in our rural communities does indeed transform the lives of the majority of
our people.

Rural development and agrarian reform are integral to the objective of a
better life for all for, working together, we can indeed do more to achieve
these objectives. As a matter of fact, history tells us that land
distribution in our country was biased towards the minority section of our
population as a result of the inhuman system of apartheid and separate
development. This, in essence, created limits for the majority section of
the population in accessing land in their country of birth, both for
farming development and residential use. Surely this was done through
biased policies which resulted in today’s skewed land patterns.

Depriving people in their country of birth is like denying them the right
to life. The supreme law of the country, namely the Constitution,
particularly section 25, guarantees the people of this country their right
to land. This, as we are aware, is premised on the old but very important
document of our struggle, the Freedom Charter, citing the victory of our
struggle in overcoming injustices. The Freedom Charter long ago declared:
“All shall have the right to land.” It is in the realisation of this very
objective that questions of rural development and agrarian reform must be
understood. We are aware of the challenges and hurdles before us and indeed
a lot of agricultural land is still in the hands of the minority section of
our population. Yet in the same spirit in which the Freedom Charter was
adopted nearly 60 years ago, we declare: We dare not fail the masses of our
people.

There are a few black people who have acquired land after the introduction
of government’s progressive land policies and we know that this is not
enough. Accessibility to agricultural land is a great hindrance, with most
people having limited opportunity to compete even in the commercial centre.
With government’s rural development programme, this must obviously change.
When we took the resolution that by 2014 30% of agricultural land must have
been transferred to the majority of the population, we understood the
importance of agriculture in transforming the lives of our people. To date
only 5% of that land has been successfully redistributed, and we hope that
the process will be further accelerated to meet the 2014 deadline.

On our part, and as representatives of the people in our oversight function
in particular, we will do what we can to ensure that the deadline is not
missed. Indeed, working together we can avoid this ugly situation
confronting our people. We don’t want to experience the challenges facing
our neighbours regarding the land issue. Therefore, failure to act
effectively and efficiently to deal with this matter will take our country
nowhere. This country must be dealt with equitably, and handled very
delicately and as openly as possible. Success in respect of the land issue
will be measured by the gains from our progressive legislation, as passed
by our Parliament. It is for this reason that the ANC made a special
request for the review of land reform projects at its conference in
Polokwane.

Esi sigqibo sigxininise ekubeni kukhawuleziswe ukusasazwa kweenkonzo,
ingakumbi iindlela kunye nezinye iinkonzo ezifana nombane namanzi
okunkcenkceshela, ukuqinisekisa ukuba amaphandle ayesaya kuba ngoozimele
geqe ayakwazi ukuba abe nezisetyenziswa ezizezawo, nokuba amafama ayakwazi
ukuba azuze kwezi nkonzo simahla. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[This decision is focused on speeding up service delivery, more especially
in roads infrastructure and other services such as electricity and water
for irrigation, in order to make sure that the former homelands have their
own facilities, and that farmers can benefit from these services for free.]

Madam Chair, let me reiterate that land reform is attached to the idea of
fighting poverty and equality. We must act decisively to address this
challenge. It seems recurrently that the issue of land redistribution in
our country is clouded by unnecessary speculation ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.
Mr G G MOKGORO: Last paragraph, Madam Chair! [Interjections.] ... and this
has led to the delay of agricultural programmes for the people who need
these. In order for the government to accomplish this work successfully a
commitment from all stakeholders will be required. Thank you, Madam Chair.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Thank you, hon Chair. I
wish to thank the hon members for their contributions and their advice. We
have been taking notes and we will do the best we can to take on board all
the views that have been shared with us here.

Starting with the hon chair, and the issue of postsettlement programmes, we
have the strategy, as we said in the report, but we did not have the
capacity to implement it. We are building that capacity now. We think that
this is one area that will receive a lot of our attention over the next few
months.

Indeed, the policy speech is very clear on basic infrastructure: economic
infrastructure, social infrastructure, even ICT, and public amenities. We
think that these are very vital things to open the minds of especially our
young kids in rural areas.

With regard to the question of access to government services by the hon
Mlenzana, indeed we see ourselves as catalysts in this regard. We see
ourselves as co-ordinating these kinds of functions, and getting other
departments involved in rural areas. We think, given the fact that the
President himself has profiled rural development, the challenge we have
been experiencing historically of not participating — at least from the
point of view of national and provincial government departments and
integrated development plans —will be resolved. The experience, hon Chair,
of Giyani is very instructive in this regard.

Hon Mashile, it is true regarding the vacancy rate. You know, directors are
very important in a department, because they are the people who do the
actual work, not the planning as such but basically managing and running
the projects. This is an area in which we have been found to be wanting and
we have taken a strategic decision that we will focus on this area.

Hon Walters, of course the hon members have dealt with the question of
government to government. We have spheres of government, one government
with three spheres. Therefore it is correct for us to work together, but at
the same time to understand the nature of the relationship that has been
created by our Constitution in South Africa. We will definitely work with
the provincial government of the Western Cape.

The Lutzville-Ebenhaezer land claim has been partially settled. Those
farmers who have accepted our offer have been paid out. At the moment we
are working with Agri Wes-Kaap to develop a mentoring arrangement with
those farmers. So, there is progress being made in that regard.

This is the challenge. In the policy speech we are making the point that
one of the things that will have to be done in order for us to expedite the
settlement of claims is to improve the manner in which we work. We are busy
with an analysis, and in our analysis we have found that if we could
improve in this area it could make a huge difference in all the provincial
offices. We are looking at the provincial offices and how they work, how
they actually do the work of research and interacting with people, and also
how they make people understand the status of their claims, because this is
key. People don’t understand. We think people don’t understand because they
don’t have the information. From our point of view, we think this is an
area we need to deal with.

Of course, when it comes to willing-buyer, willing-seller, there is a myth
about investors and markets. Investors want certainty; that is what they
want. They want to know about the policy of this country. We need to get to
a point where we make it clear to them so that they understand - because
investors do understand - that this government is unable to raise R71
billion over the next five years, between now and 2014, in order for it to
be able to buy 30% of the 82 million hectares of land. We need to make
people understand, even those who own the land, that it is impossible for
us to achieve this target, because we don’t have the money. I think it
should be very clear to everyone that this is the route we are going to
have to go.

We have to go to them and say: “Fellow South Africans, we are unable to buy
this land with this amount of money, especially under the current economic
recession in the world.” But at the same time we must continue to
contribute to national reconciliation, and therefore convert this whole
notion of land as a superprofit-making venture by becoming part of the
effort of all South Africans to work together and reconcile the haves and
the have-nots.

You know, Anton Rupert said: “If they don’t eat, we won’t sleep.” [As hulle
nie eet nie, sal ons nie slaap nie.]

He was talking about the fact that if we continue to deny the majority of
our people, particularly black people, in this country access to and
ownership of land, we will not even enjoy that which we do have. It will be
a matter of time. That will happen. As government we must avoid that. We
must lead the country away from a situation where the one who doesn’t eat
causes the one who can eat, not to sleep.

The hon Deputy Minister is actually in charge of arranging a workshop with
our chiefs so they can talk about this to see how we can correct this,
because the kings are the traditional leaders. In the rural areas the
chiefs own the land on behalf of the people, so it is important that we
meet and decide how we are going to democratise the way in which we use
this land, because in the rural areas there is no question of ownership. We
must democratise the manner in which land is utilised so that everybody has
a say in it, so that no one can say that they cannot access land in our
country for them to live on. [Interjections.]

The workshop is coming, Sir, you should not worry. We have addressed 13% of
that. We hope that when we arrive in these rural areas and tell the chiefs
that we would like to use their land so that the people can benefit from
this land, the chiefs will agree. [Applause.] Thank you very much.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Thank you, hon Minister, Deputy
Minister, MECs, hon members and officials for the work you have done and
the contributions you have made.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 19:17.
                                 __________

                 ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS, COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            MONDAY, 29 JUNE 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

   1. Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Constitution Seventeenth Amendment Bill of 2009, submitted by
         the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Development.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Departments of Education for 2009 – 2013
        and the Operational Plan of the Departments of Education for 2009 –
        10.

2.    The Minister of Higher Education and Training


    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Departments of Education for 2009 – 2013
        and the Operational Plan of the Departments of Education for 2009 –
        10.

3.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Eskom’s 2009/10 tariff increase and amended pricing structure
        for municipalities with effect from 1 July 2009, in terms of
        section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
        Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

                            TUESDAY, 30 JUNE 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

 1. Membership of Joint Committees:

    (1)     The following members have been appointed as the NCOP component
        of the Constitutional Review Committee:

        Member                    Province                    Party


        Mnguni, Mr B A            Free State                  ANC
        Nesi, Mr B                     Eastern Cape
        ANC
        Chaane, Mr T E            North West                  ANC
        Zulu, Prince M M M        KwaZulu-Natal               IFP
        De Beer, Mr C J                Northern Cape
        ANC
        Mokgobi, Mr M H           Limpopo                     ANC
        Watson, Mr A              Mpumalanga                  DA
        Bloem, Mr D V             Free State                  COPE
        Matila, Mr A G            Gauteng                     ANC

    (2)     The following NCOP members have been appointed to serve on the
        Joint Rules Committee

|Member                       |Party           |Province             |
|                             |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr. M. J. Mahlangu      |                |                     |
|(Chairperson of the NCOP)    |ANC             |Limpopo              |
|Hon. Ms T. Memela (Deputy    |ANC             |KwaZulu-Natal        |
|Chairperson)                 |                |                     |
|Hon. Ms N. W. Magadla (House |ANC             |KwaZulu-Natal        |
|Chair of Committees)         |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr R. J. Tau (House     |ANC             |Northern Cape        |
|Chairperson on Oversight)    |                |                     |
|Hon. Ms N. D. Ntwanambi      |ANC             |Western Cape         |
|(Chief Whip of the NCOP)     |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr S. S. Mazosiwe       |ANC             |Eastern Cape         |
|(Programming Whip)           |                |                     |
|Hon. Ms D. Z. Rantho         |ANC             |Eastern Cape         |
|(Provincial Whip: Eastern    |                |                     |
|Cape)                        |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr P. Jacobs (Provincial|ANC             |Free State           |
|Whip: Free State)            |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr S. D. Montsitsi      |ANC             |Gauteng              |
|(Provincial Whip: Gauteng)   |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr L. P. M. Nzimande    |ANC             |KwaZulu-Natal        |
|(Provincial Whip:            |                |                     |
|KwaZulu-Natal)               |                |                     |
|Hon. Hon. Ms. L. Mabija      |ANC             |Limpopo              |
|(Provincial Whip: Limpopo)   |                |                     |
|Hon. Ms M. G.  Boroto        |ANC             |Mpumalanga           |
|(Provincial Whip: Mpumalanga)|                |                     |
|Hon. Mr  G. G. Mokgoro       |ANC             |Northern Cape        |
|(Provincial Whip: Northern   |                |                     |
|Cape)                        |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr  T. E. Chaane        |ANC             |North West           |
|(Provincial North West)      |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr. T. Harris           |DA              |Western Cape         |
|(Provincial Whip: Western    |                |                     |
|Cape)                        |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda (Party  |ID              |Northern Cape        |
|Representative: ID)          |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr. D. V. Bloem (COPE:  |COPE            |Free State           |
|Party Representative)        |                |                     |
|Hon. Mr A. Watson (DA Party  |DA              |Mpumalanga           |
|Leader)                      |                |                     |

    (3)     The following NCOP members have been appointed to serve on the
        Joint Subcommittee on the Review of the Joint Rules

|Member                               |Party     |Province          |
|Hon. Mr P. Jacobs (Provincial Whip:  |ANC       |Free State        |
|Free State)                          |          |                  |
|Hon. Ms. L. Mabija (Provincial Whip: |ANC       |Limpopo           |
|Limpopo)                             |          |                  |
|Hon. Ms M. G.  Boroto (Provincial    |ANC       |Mpumalanga        |
|Whip: Mpumalanga)                    |          |                  |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda (Party          |ID        |Northern Cape     |
|Representative: ID)                  |          |                  |
|Hon. Mr A. Watson (DA Party Leader)  |DA        |Mpumalanga        |

    (4)     The following NCOP members have been appointed to serve on the
        Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests:


   |Member                         |Party     |Province                |
|Hon. Mr. B. L. Mashile         |ANC       |Mpumalanga              |
|Hon. Mr. T. A. Mashamaite      |ANC       |Limpopo                 |
|Hon. Mr. T. D. Harris          |DA        |Western Cape            |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda           |ID        |Northern Cape           |
|Hon. Mr. S. H. Plaatjie        |COPE      |North West              |
|Hon. Mr. D. D. Gamede          |ANC       |KwaZulu-Natal           |
|Hon. Mr. M. H. Mokgobi         |ANC       |Limpopo                 |
|Hon. Mr. G. G. Mokgoro         |ANC       |Northern Cape           |
|Hon. Ms. N. W. Magadla         |ANC       |KwaZulu-Natal           |

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

               a) Strategic Plan of the Departments of Water Affairs for
                  2009 – 2014.


