---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 06 February 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2009-02-06
---

FRIDAY, 6 FEBRUARY 2009
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 11:00.

The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces took the Chair.

The Speaker of the National Assembly requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

                          CALLING OF JOINT SITTING

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, the President has called a Joint Sitting of the
National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces in terms of section
84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, read
with Joint Rule 7(1)(a), to enable him to deliver his annual address to
Parliament. I now call upon the hon the President to address the Joint
Sitting. [Applause.]
                    ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker of the National Assembly; Mr
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces; Madam Deputy President;
Deputy Speaker and Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces;
Chief Justice Langa; the former Deputy President of the Republic of South
Africa and president of the ANC; Premiers of provinces; members of Cabinet
and Speakers of provincial legislatures; the former Chief Justice and
former Presiding Officers of Parliament; Your Excellencies, Ambassadors and
High Commissioners and visiting foreign dignitaries; honourable leaders of
political parties and Members of Parliament; traditional leaders; Your
Worship the Mayor of the City of Cape Town; religious leaders and
representatives of civil society; comrades and friends; and distinguished
guests, I am privileged to address the Joint Sitting of the Parliament of
the Republic of South Africa at the beginning of this last session of our
third democratic Parliament.

I stand before the people of South Africa with humility at the opportunity
I have had to occupy the highest office in the land as a consequence of the
unique circumstances arising out of the decision of the leading party in
government to recall the former President.

Mine is the responsibility, within a matter of a few months, to lead the
national executive in completing the mandate accorded the ANC in the 2004
elections, and in laying the foundation for the post-election
administration to hit the ground running.
That we were able five months ago to ensure a seamless transition and
continuity in the systems of government is thanks to the maturity of our
constitutional system, reflected in part in the co-operation of members of
the executive, old and new, and the steady hand of our public sector
managers.

As we look back over the past 15 years, I wish to acknowledge the
commitment and hard work of Presidents Nelson Mandela and Thabo Mbeki and
the many women and men who played their role in steering the ship of state
under democracy - in the executive and the administration, the legislatures
across the three spheres of government and the judiciary - driven by the
desire to improve the quality of life of all South Africans.

Above all, I stand before you with pride and confidence that the South
Africa we celebrate today – worlds apart from the divisions, conflict and
exclusion of a mere 15 years ago – is a product of the labours and toils of
South African women and men from all walks of life. These South Africans
represent the hope and resilience that characterise our nation.

Within the galaxy of outstanding South Africans are members of our
democratic Parliament to whom we have had the misfortune since last
February to bid the final farewell. They include Brian Bunting, Billy Nair,
Ncumisa Kondlo, John Gomomo, Joe Nhlanhla, Cas Saloojee, John Schippers and
Jan van Eck.

To these, I would also like to add Ms Helen Suzman, a truly distinguished
South African, who represented the values of our new Parliament in the
chambers of the old.

It is these and other patriots who should take the greatest share of the
accolades when we pronounce that, whatever economic storms may pound our
shores, whatever political uncertainties may visit our collective
consciousness in a transition, our nation is in a good state. [Applause.]

However, we should not underestimate the challenges we face. The global
economic meltdown does pose serious dangers for our economy in terms of job
losses and the quality of life of our people.

Naturally, the uncertainties of a political transition can pose more
questions than there are currently answers.

As a consequence, some of us may be mesmerised by the transient waves of
stormy weather and hunch our shoulders in the face of these headwinds of
economic turbulence and political tumult.

But ours is a journey of hope and resilience.

We may even say that, in a strange quirk of fate, many aspects of our
constitutional order have been tested in the recent past, and every one of
them has passed the test to reveal a democracy that is exceptionally
resilient.

Our democracy is healthy. It is steadily growing stronger, underpinned by a
Constitution hardly equalled in the world.

Indeed, the robustness of our political engagement during this season of
electoral contest – which we all agree should be dignified and peaceful –
is the surest guarantee of the continued survival and deepening of our
democracy.

It is South Africa’s people who have ensured its progress, and it is they
who shall secure our democracy in the years to come.

Allow me, Madam Speaker and Chairperson, in this context to urge all
eligible South Africans to register and to vote in the coming national and
provincial elections, so that we can shape our destiny ourselves.

This we should do every working day in the municipal offices, before the
voters’ roll is closed. But we should also take advantage of the special
registration weekend arranged by the Independent Electoral Commission of
South Africa, the IEC, tomorrow and Sunday, 7 and 8 February respectively.
I should also like to take this opportunity to indicate that I will in the
next few days conclude consultations with the Independent Electoral
Commission and the provincial Premiers and announce the date of the
elections.

Hon members, we owe our being as a democracy to the people of South Africa
who, on 27 April 1994, for the first time collectively took their destiny
into their own hands.

Through that simple but profound act of casting a ballot for a government
of all the people of our country, we turned our backs on a past that
dehumanised us all.

It is therefore appropriate on this occasion to celebrate the 20th
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of the OAU Ad Hoc Committee
on Southern Africa on the Question of South Africa, adopted in August 1989
– commonly known as the Harare Declaration. [Applause.] That initiative
laid the foundation for global consensus, through the United Nations, on
the approach to negotiations in South Africa. Within South Africa, it also
informed the content of the 1989 Conference for a Democratic Future,
bringing together patriots from virtually all walks of life.

All this led to the negotiation process which culminated in our first
democratic elections in 1994.

In this regard, we should salute the late president of the ANC, Oliver
Reginald Tambo, for initiating and piloting through continental and world
bodies what became a compass for the peaceful resolution of the conflict in
our country. [Applause.]

That courageous step to devise a framework that would seek peace and
reconciliation, in the place of war and conflict, reversed for good the
false dawn of a hundred years ago: that is, the conclusion in 1909 of the
National Convention, which presaged the formation of the Union of South
Africa. While that Convention defined the territorial integrity of South
Africa as we know it today, it was based on racial oppression and
exclusion.

And so, 15 years into our democracy, we can assert that the fear, the
insecurity and the loathing that 100 years ago generated an exclusive and
illusory peace among the colonial masters, were not only unfounded, but
truly misplaced.

Those fears and insecurities gave rise to decades of resistance. In this
regard, we salute that brave son of our people, Solomon Kalushi Mahlangu
... [Applause.] ... who went to the gallows 30 years ago with his head held
high, in the proud knowledge that his blood would nourish the tree of
freedom.

Allow me, therefore, to acknowledge in our midst Lucas Mahlangu, brother of
Kalushi, representing the family. [Applause.]
Solomon Mahlangu was continuing a tradition of the warriors of yesteryear,
among whom we count those under King Cetshwayo, who in 1879 defeated the
British army in Isandlwana, in defence of the freedom of the indigenous
people of our country and the sovereignty of their lands.

A hundred and thirty years on, we can only marvel at the hope and the
resilience that infused those stout hearts.

In the centres of learning, the same resistance fuelled the rekindling of
mass struggle during the cold winter after the banning of the liberation
movement and the imprisonment of most of its senior leadership. A group of
valiant students broke away from Nusas to found the SA Students’
Organisation 40 years ago.

Within this generation are the early leaders of Saso, which included Strini
Moodley, Prof Barney Pityana, Steve Biko, Onkgopotse Tiro, Harry
Nengwekhulu, Themba Sono, Mapetla Mohapi, Mosiuoa Lekota, Johnny Issel and
Mthuli ka Shezi, to name but a few. For inspiring hope in a period of
despair, we salute them. In this regard, we wish to acknowledge that in our
midst today we have Pat Tlhagwana, who is Onkgopotse Tiro’s cousin and
represents the family. [Applause.] We also wish to acknowledge the late
Ephraim Mogale, the founding president 30 years ago of the Congress of
South African Students, and his peers. [Applause.]

In the towering memory of these students of yesteryear resides an abiding
message, that the thirst for freedom and knowledge burns even stronger in
the bosoms of our youth. The message of their heroic deeds rings true today
as it did those many years ago, that we should together expand the
frontiers of opportunity; that we should indeed, in the words of the
Freedom Charter, open ever wider “the doors of learning and of culture”!

We call to mind these organisations and leaders to emphasise the spirit of
hope and resilience that infused the democratic struggle even when
everything looked bleak; to underscore the responsibility that rests on our
shoulders to advance the ideals that so many sacrificed for, refusing to be
cowed by setbacks and hardships.

And so, Madam Speaker and hon Chairperson, we should ask ourselves: How
have our actions defined the path of South African society’s evolution in
the 15 years since the birth of our democracy, and how have we advanced the
cause of human development and human dignity since the 2004 democratic
mandate?

We do have today a well-functioning democratic system, based on principles
of transparency and openness, with numerous platforms for public
participation and independent institutions mandated by the Constitution to
support democracy.

Over the years we have steadily improved the structures of governance. We
have built a system of healthy intergovernmental relations across the
spheres, and improved integration within and among them.

Indeed, government can be proud that we have changed the demographic
composition of the Public Service, which in virtually all respects
approximates the character of our society.

However, while women constitute about 34% of all senior positions in the
Public Service, this falls short of the target of parity that we have set
ourselves.

At the level of the national and provincial legislatures, indications are
that the nation will this year surpass the women’s representation level of
32% achieved in 2004 and, hopefully, even the 40% achieved in the 2006
local government elections. We hope that all political parties will, as
they finalise their electoral lists, make their contribution to this noble
endeavour! [Applause.]

Though some progress has been made, at 0,2% the situation is less
impressive with regard to people with disability employed in government,
measured against the 2% target we set ourselves.

On both counts, the private sector is lagging far behind.

Various measures have been put in place to improve the efficiency of the
Public Service, including financial management, Thusong Service Centres and
other service delivery innovations, izimbizo and, as currently in the
Department of Home Affairs, firm leadership.

However, much more needs to be done to improve the service culture and
orientation of some public servants, especially those at the coalface of
direct interaction with the public.

As hon members will be aware, our government has made the fight against
corruption one of the core areas of focus. This is reflected, among others,
in legislation, rules and regulations governing public servants and
political office bearers alike, and partnerships with civil society and the
business community, as well as anticorruption hotlines.

It may well be that the systems of preventing and punishing corruption are
still inadequate, but from the point of view of government systems we can
draw solace from the fact that over 70% of cases of corruption reported in
the media become public because government has detected the wrongdoing and
is in fact acting against it.

The same challenges confront the private sector. In the end, the challenge
is as much about regulation as it is about consistent enforcement.
Hon members, I am certain that we are all agreed that the wellbeing of our
society depends, critically, on the progress we make in expanding the
nation’s wealth and ensuring that the benefits of economic growth are
shared by the people as a whole.

It is common cause that, after the economic stagnation of the late 1980s
and early 1990s, South Africa has experienced the longest period of
sustained economic growth since the recording of such statistics started in
1940. In the first decade of freedom, economic growth averaged 3% per year,
and this improved to 5% per year on average from 2004 to 2007.

While the consumer boom, impelled by rising employment and incomes, and low
inflation and interest rates, played its part in this regard, we are
encouraged by the broad canvas of opportunities for further expansion going
forward.

These include, in the first instance, higher rates of investment by both
the public and private sectors. In this regard, some five years ago we were
hovering around 16% of gross fixed capital formation as a percentage of
gross domestic product. Such has been the acceleration in investment that
today this figure stands at 22%, closer to the 25% that we projected to
attain only in 2014. [Applause.]

This is in part a consequence of deliberate programmes by government to
expand public infrastructure. It is also a result of policies to improve
the climate for private sector investments, and to conduct fiscal and
monetary policy in a manner that expands access to services and reduces the
inflationary burden, while at the same time ensuring macroeconomic
stability and sustainability.

The focus on microeconomic reforms in the past decade and the efforts,
especially since 2004, more systematically to remove the variety of
obstacles to growth have had a positive impact.

It is in this context that the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative is
being implemented, ensuring that all the critical blockages such as
infrastructure bottlenecks, integrated industrial policy and programmes,
the skills challenge, regulatory gridlocks and efficiency of government
services are addressed in a focused and systematic manner.

Our economy has become more open, and since 1994 it has steadily become
integrated into the global system. Our financial institutions are a force
of good example which has somewhat sheltered us from the global economic
storms.

Yet, the extent of their reach within our society remains far below
expectations. Our economy remains largely reliant on mining and agriculture
for exports. Except for the services sector, we have not seen a large
enough expansion in critical sectors, especially
manufacturing.

As such, the rate of growth in exports has not been as high as in
comparable countries. It is precisely this weakness which accounts for the
large current account deficit, particularly when we entered higher ranges
of growth. And because we have a low savings rate, we have had to rely on
short-term capital flows to finance the deficit as well as our investment
programmes.

These are challenges that our country will certainly have to address going
forward.

Of critical importance is the question: What in fact should economic growth
be about? Wealth is created in order to improve people’s quality of life.
Thus, the question of whether growth is equitably shared should form a
central pillar of all our economic considerations.

Importantly, sharing the benefits of growth should entail labour-
absorption, ensuring that there is decent work. Indeed, it is a matter of
proud record that between 1995 and 2003, the economy created about one and
a half million net new jobs and, even more remarkably, about 500 000 jobs a
year between 2004 and 2007. [Applause.]
In this latter period, for the first time since the attainment of
democracy, more jobs were being created than the number of new entrants
into the labour market, thus reducing the unemployment rate from 31% in
2003 to 23% in 2007. [Applause.]

Of course, this should not detract from our obligations to continue
interrogating the issue of the quality of these jobs, including the rights
and benefits that workers enjoy.

Sharing the benefits of growth should also include accelerated
implementation of affirmative action, including broad-based black economic
empowerment. [Applause.]

This is not in pursuit of a so-called racial agenda. In reality, a country
that does not ensure the involvement of all of its population at all levels
of economic activity is certainly going to perform well below its actual
potential. [Applause.]

The fact that the private sector lags behind in changing the demographics
of management and skilled occupations, in enterprise development and so on,
in part makes our country a laggard in the high growth stakes.

Sharing the benefits of growth also means an efficient and equitable role
for the state in using the fiscus as an instrument of redistribution and
sharing the burden of providing public goods.
Hon members will be familiar with most of the data on matters relating to
the social wage. I will, however, cite a few instances again to sketch the
nature of the progress we have made and the challenges that we face.

Government is painfully aware that abject poverty is still too widespread
in our society, and the level of inequality is too high.

We have in the past 15 years done our best to attack this scourge through
the social wage. To quote work conducted by a team of academics at the
University of Stellenbosch, led by Prof Servaas van der Berg:

   Firstly, money-metric poverty declined substantially since the turn of
   the century. The reduction is to a large extent due to a dramatic
   expansion in social grants expenditure from 2002 onwards. This
   improvement is mirrored in access to basic services – a rapid decline in
   asset poverty even preceded the decline in money-metric poverty.
   Secondly, although the reductions in poverty have been substantial,
   aggregate inequality increased during the 1990s. Thirdly, the dynamics
   underlying the poverty and inequality trends determine the broad policy
   outlook ... [Poverty has decreased since the transition, but ...
   inequality has not improved.

The researchers continue:

   ... Among households that include children (defined as those aged 17 and
   younger), the number of households reporting that a child went hungry
   declined dramatically (from just over 31 per cent to 16 per cent) between
   2002 and 2006. This suggests that the poverty situation has improved
   remarkably, particularly among people experiencing the greatest degree of
   welfare deprivation. The prevalence of hunger among children has
   virtually halved over four years.


This is from Poverty trends since the transition: What we know, p 25, by
Prof van der Berg of Stellenbosch.

Indeed, these observations are confirmed by our own research, which shows
that income poverty, especially among African and coloured communities, has
declined, partly as a result of higher rates of employment and access to
social grants. While the number of grant beneficiaries was 2,5 million in
1999, by 2008 this had increased to 12,4 million. [Applause.]

This is largely a result of massive expansion in access to the child
support grant, which increased from 34 000 beneficiaries in 1999 to 8,1
million in 2008. [Applause.]

As part of the contribution to the income of the poor, the target of 1
million work opportunities through the Expanded Public Works Programme was
attained in 2008, a year earlier than envisaged in the 2004 electoral
mandate. This has created the possibility of expanding this programme and
improving its quality.

With regard to household access to basic services, the figures speak for
themselves. For instance, access to potable water has improved from 62% in
1996 to 88% in 2008. [Applause.]

Evidence of the social wage is also seen in massive improvements in access
to primary health facilities. Ninety-five percent of South Africans now
live within 5 kilometres of a health facility, and we are informed that all
clinics now have access to potable water. Child immunisation coverage has
steadily increased to about 85%, and malaria cases have massively declined.

We are also heartened that research into HIV prevalence demonstrates
stabilisation and a slight reduction in rates of infection. Further, our
antiretroviral treatment programme is not only the largest in the world,
but it is expanding all the time, with over 690 000 patients having been
initiated on antiretroviral treatment since the commencement of the
programme.

Yet many health facilities do not always have the required medicines,
appropriate staffing levels, and a constant supply of basic services such
as clean running water and electricity. In some of these facilities,
management is poor and staff attitudes need improvement.
In education, we have seen a drop in the educator-learner ratio; almost
universal access in enrolment at primary school level; and an improvement
in the number of pupils passing mathematics, to quote a few examples.

At the same time, much effort has been put into improving infrastructure in
poor areas.

Of course, we do know that the drop-out rate, particularly at secondary and
tertiary levels, is unacceptably high, and the educational system has yet
to produce the requisite kinds of skills needed by society.

In addition, trends in performance, both in terms of teaching and learning,
show a worrying persistence of the social divisions of the past.

Ironically, precisely the areas where education is most needed to help
break the cycle of poverty is where infrastructure, administrative and
teacher capacity are least impressive.

Government’s social programmes have also improved the asset base of the
poor in the form of housing, with 2,6 million subsidised houses provided.

We should of course acknowledge that the land redistribution programme, as
well as postsettlement support, could have been handled faster and better.

Overall, we are proud of the advances in our social programmes. But we
cannot satisfy ourselves merely with quantitative change. Be it in
education, health, housing, water or sanitation, the central question that
confronts us every day is how to improve the quality of these services. On
this we still have some way to go.

Hon members, the scourge of crime remains a major source of insecurity for
South Africans. Daily experience, in poor and affluent neighbourhoods
alike, is one of apprehension at the possibility of violent attack.

Within public and private institutions, the possibility of nefarious
schemes siphoning off resources through corruption is always a source of
great concern.

Of course, the overall crime rate, having peaked in 2002, has consistently
declined. All kinds of statistics can be cited to attest to this. But we do
know that the reduction has not been fast enough, not even at the 7-10%
rate that we set ourselves for various categories of contact crime. The
fact that incidents of violent robberies in households and businesses have
been on the increase, and crimes against women and children have not abated
in any significant measure, is a matter of grave concern.

This points to weaknesses in our neighbourhoods, especially in building the
bonds of community solidarity that would assist us in preventing and
combating crime. It points to systemic weaknesses in the criminal justice
system, from investigation of crimes to rehabilitation of offenders. It
points to weaknesses in the efficiency of the court system, both in terms
of technical and other infrastructure and management. These are the issues
that the comprehensive revamp of the criminal justice system has started to
address.

Yet, in being brutally self-critical, we should not lose sight of the fact
that what we are assessing is a system that enjoys, by far, better
legitimacy than ever experienced in our country. [Applause.]

This is because of the transformation these institutions have undergone, in
terms of their doctrines based on a human rights culture, their demographic
composition, and their systems of accountability.

But let us not delude ourselves: As with the rest of our social life, such
transformation is still in its nascent stages. We still have a long way to
go.

I am certain that hon members will agree that the humanity of our
democratic dispensation should find expression in the extent to which we
pay attention to the most vulnerable in society.

In this regard, we have through legislation, international conventions,
regulations and campaigns ensured that concrete efforts are made to improve
the conditions of children, women, people with disability and the elderly.

Through advocacy campaigns, and indeed as a result of the partnerships we
have built with organisations representing these vulnerable groups, we have
improved awareness around issues that affect them, and progressively
encouraged the mainstreaming of these concerns.

It is a matter of proud record that, for instance, female-headed households
have received a bigger-than-average share of the social wage, including
housing and health care, and that among the most successful programmes have
been campaigns on child immunisation and nutrition.

Yet access to employment weighs heavily on rural women, youth and people
with disability. HIV impacts young women most severely. Violence against
women and children is much too high.

All these are assignments for the coming period.
Madam Speaker and hon Chairperson, these then are some of the advances that
democracy has brought, and the progress that government has made in
fulfilling the mandate of the electorate. There is no gainsaying that by
any measure the progress made since 1994 has been impressive. But neither
can there be doubt that the challenges remain immense.

It is apt, therefore, to remind ourselves of that instructive observation
on hope and resilience, continuity and change, by our former President,
Nelson Mandela, in his biography, Long Walk to Freedom, and I quote:

   I have walked that long road to freedom. I have tried not to falter; I
   have made missteps along the way. But I have discovered the secret that
   after climbing a great hill, one only finds that there are many more
   hills to climb. I have taken a moment here to rest, to steal a view of
   the glorious vista that surrounds me, to look back on the distance I have
   come. But I can rest only for a moment, for with freedom comes
   responsibilities, and I dare not linger, for my long walk is not yet
   ended.

[Applause.]

In a few months from now the people of our country will pronounce on the
leadership they prefer to carry forward the noble work of this great
freedom fighter and other founders of our democracy.
While our approaches may differ, the objectives that we need to aim for are
clearly and unambiguously set out in our Constitution: to create a united,
nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and prosperous society that plays a
positive role in building a better world.

Six years ago, leaders of our people came together in a Growth and
Development Summit and reached agreement on the tasks all of us should
undertake to improve the quality of life of South Africans, particularly to
halve unemployment and poverty by 2014. These include:

       • creating more jobs, better jobs and decent work for all through
         higher rates of investment, public works programmes, sector
         partnerships and strategies, local procurement, small enterprise
         promotion and support for co-operatives;


       • addressing the investment challenge by improving savings, and
         appropriately deploying resources from pension and provident funds,
         housing, financial sector contributions and black economic
         empowerment;



       • advancing equity, developing skills, creating economic
         opportunities and extending services; and


       • local action and implementation for development, including
         provision of infrastructure and access to basic services.

I am certain that, as part of and in addition to these objectives, South
Africans would hardly differ regarding the need to improve our education
system; to provide efficient, decent and equitable health care; to develop
our rural areas and ensure food security; and to intensify the fight
against crime and corruption.

I cite these issues, not because they are all-encompassing or that by
identifying them we will cure all the ills of our society. Rather, I have
chosen to do so to emphasise the point that South Africa does not suffer
from a poverty of vision. Our challenge is to translate this vision into
programmes and projects for effective implementation. [Applause.]

These ideals are shared by virtually all of humanity, as reflected in the
United Nations Millennium Development Goals. And yet humanity today faces
the danger that the attainment of these objectives could be postponed by
many years, if not decades, as a consequence of the economic crisis that
has engulfed the global village.

What on the surface started off as a financial crisis among a few lending
institutions has exploded into a global credit crunch, with severe
consequences for actual production and trade.

We can decry the greed, the short-termism and the carelessness of managers
of big corporations which precipitated the crisis. We can condemn the
policies of governments which took their eyes off the ball and allowed the
rapacious licence of unregulated markets to wreak havoc on financial
systems. We can do all this; and we will be perfectly justified.

Yet our central and immediate task is fully to appreciate the consequences
of these developments for our own economy and our region, and devise
responses that will minimise their impact, especially on the most
vulnerable sectors of our society.

What we do know is that the regulatory environment in our country and the
countercyclical budget policies we adopted have helped us avoid the worst
impact of the crisis.

But we are all too aware that, because we are strongly integrated into the
world economy, demand for our exports has declined; access to finance and
inflows of capital have turned for the worse; lower demand has precipitated
a scaling down of production; the creation of jobs is negatively affected;
and in some sectors retrenchment has become a reality.

These difficulties have coincided with a period in which inflation and
interest rates are still too high. Thanks to the Governor of the Reserve
Bank - yesterday he at least dropped them by 1%. [Applause.]
Combined, these developments bode ill for the revenues we need in order to
expand the provision of services and to implement our infrastructure
projects. That being the case, we have been forced to tone down our
forecasts in terms of growth and job creation.

We know too that South Africa is less severely affected than many other
countries. Indeed, in a period in which others are experiencing or
projecting recessions, South Africa and the rest of the continent are still
poised for growth, even if at a slower rate.

In this regard, hon members, I am happy to report that in the interactions
between The Presidency and the leaders of various social partners we have
agreed jointly to devise interventions that will minimise the impact of
this crisis on our society. The task team dealing with these matters is
still hard at work, and the following broad categories of responses are
under discussion.

Firstly, government will continue with its public investment projects, the
value of which has increased to R690 billion for the next three years. In
this regard, where necessary, we will find creative ways to raise funds.
This will include support by our development finance institutions and loan
finance from international agencies, as well as partnership with the
private sector and utilisation of resources controlled by workers, such as
pension funds.
Secondly, we will intensify public sector employment programmes. On the one
hand, plans to expand employment in sectors such as health, social work,
education and law enforcement agencies will continue. On the other, we will
speed up the introduction of the next phase of the Expanded Public Works
Programme.

Thirdly, mitigating actions can be undertaken within the private sector to
counteract an excessive investment slowdown and unnecessary closures of
production lines or plants.

For its part, government will adapt industrial financing and incentive
instruments to help deal with challenges in various sectors, and also
encourage development finance institutions to assist firms in distress
because of the crisis.

Alternatives to layoffs will be explored, including longer holidays,
extended training, short time and job-sharing. This will be combined with
the promotion of the Proudly South African campaign and stronger action on
illegal imports.

Fourthly, government will sustain and expand social expenditure, including
progressively extending access to the child support grant to children of 18
years of age and reducing the age of eligibility for the old age pension to
60 years for men. [Applause.] [Interjections.] Of course, since I will be
60 this year, it means I am due for retirement! [Laughter.]
In addition, we will more widely utilise the social distress relief grant
and food security measures, specifically also to target those who are
either unprotected by the Unemployment Insurance Fund, or who have
exhausted their benefits.

We shall also continue to pay special attention to the challenge of
anticompetitive behaviour on the part of some of our corporations. In this
regard we wish to commend the Competition Commission for the firm hand that
they are showing in ensuring that culprits are brought to book. [Applause.]

We do hope, though, that civil society will enhance its own level of
activism to ensure, among other things, that as input prices decline, the
benefit is felt by the population.

These immediate measures will be informed by the principle of a
countercyclical fiscal policy. However, we will ensure that the levels of
borrowing by government are prudent and sustainable. This also implies a
rapid reduction in government debt levels whenever conditions turn for the
better.

Our efforts will also be informed by the appreciation that measures to
protect the environment and mitigate the impact of climate change can also
contribute to job creation.

In both the G20 meetings and other interactions in multilateral
institutions, our government has argued for appropriate and urgent
interventions, particularly in the developed countries whence the crisis
originated and where it is most severe. We believe that the time has come
to strengthen domestic regulation and supervision of the financial system,
but beyond this, that stronger surveillance and action on a global scale
have become unavoidable and necessary.

Critically, we should also safeguard the integrity of the world trade
system, complete the current negotiations on the Doha Round of world trade
negotiations, and ensure that development aid is not scaled down.

The abiding lesson from this experience is that we need stronger
partnerships among economic role-players on a domestic and global scale,
not only to stem the impact of the crisis, but also to put in place
measures that will obviate a recurrence.

In our own country we will embark on these undertakings as part of the
process of setting our society on a higher growth and development path. The
length of time towards attaining a higher trajectory may have been
stretched somewhat, but we are not in doubt that that moment will yet come,
sooner rather than later.

In this regard, how we position our country to take advantage of unique
opportunities that have come our way will be of paramount importance. I
refer here in particular to the Fifa World Cup in 2010, as well as the
Confederations Cup a few months from now. Virtually all the projects and
plans are completed or nearing completion – from stadia, transport
infrastructure, security measures and issues of accommodation to health and
immigration plans – confirming the confidence of the global soccer
fraternity that ours will be a truly successful tournament. [Applause.] And
we believe that, after five consecutive wins ... [Applause.] ... the
national soccer team is now more confidently gearing itself to perform
above expectations! [Applause.]

But beyond this, the true legacy of this spectacle will be in our ability
to showcase South African and African hospitality and humanity – to change
once and for all perceptions of our country and our continent among the
peoples of the world. That depends on all of us, and to that we can attach
no price! [Applause.]

We also wish in this regard to congratulate all our sporting teams which
have asserted South Africa’s pursuit of excellence over the past year.
Special accolades are due to our cricket team, which has climbed to the
apex of global rankings. [Applause.]

We are of course Rugby World Champions. [Applause.] Giniel de Villiers and
his team have won the Dakar Rally. [Applause.] Our Paralympians continue to
do us proud ... [Applause.] ... and our under-20 soccer team has done quite
well in an extremely competitive environment. [Applause.]

Madam Speaker and hon Chairperson, just two weeks ago South Africa
completed, with Mali, part of the archives to preserve the
ancient manuscripts of Timbuktu. This rich heritage points to Africa as a
beacon of science and literature, philosophy and commerce, interrupted by
the slave trade and the scramble for Africa’s wealth.
This initiative should spur us on to act in concert with other countries on
our continent and further afield to better the human condition.

Indeed, over the past 15 years we have spared no effort to ensure that
Africa experiences her renewal in what should in actual practice be the
African Century. Steadily but surely, our continent is progressing towards
her renaissance, with the interests of her people rising to the top of
their leaders’ agenda, asserting her hope and her resilience on the world
stage.

It is this, and this alone, that has informed our persistence in assisting
the people of Zimbabwe to find a lasting solution to the crisis in that
country. [Applause.] We wish in this regard to congratulate all the parties
in Zimbabwe for concluding negotiations, delivering the ultimate prize that
has always been the wish of the people of that country and the subcontinent
as a whole: that is, a stable and legitimate government geared to
addressing the challenges that the people face. We are truly heartened that
yesterday the Zimbabwean parliament passed amendment 19 of their
constitution ... [Applause.] ... laying the basis for the installation of
an inclusive government.

Special mention in this regard is due to the SADC facilitator, former
President Thabo Mbeki, and the team that tirelessly and patiently helped to
bring the process to a successful conclusion. [Applause.]

Now the work of reconstruction can start in earnest, and South Africa
stands ready to assist wherever we can. In this respect, there is an urgent
need to assist in dealing with the humanitarian crisis in that country. We
are confident that, because it cares, the international community will
partner the people of Zimbabwe as they blaze a new trail.

We are also encouraged that, whatever fits and starts may seem to
characterise the progress of the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on their march to stability and prosperity, that progress is
inexorable.

The partnership built in the recent period between the leadership of the
DRC and Rwanda holds out a promise for advances in matters of security and
in dealing with the humanitarian crisis, but hopefully also with regard to
political dialogue. In the same measure we will continue to work with other
countries and the African Union to pursue these objectives in Burundi,
Sudan, Western Sahara, Côte d’Ivoire, Somalia and elsewhere.

As will have been evidenced by various developments in the past few months,
South Africa will use the privilege of chairing SADC to strengthen this
critical regional institution, with particular emphasis on implementing
summit resolutions and cementing regional strategic cohesion.

At the same time we will improve SADC’s interaction with the Common Market
for East and Southern Africa, Comesa, and the East African Community. These
initiatives will be undertaken in order to extend rather than weaken the
deep-seated of relations that we enjoy within the Southern African Customs
Union.

We wish on this occasion to extend our congratulations to the people and
the leadership of Zambia, Ghana and, of course, the United States of
America on elections, the symbolism of which transcends the narrow
boundaries of their nation states. We will, as always, seek to strengthen
co-operation with these and other countries in pursuit of that which is
good for humanity.

We are privileged that this year we conclude celebrations of the first
decade of our diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of China.
[Applause.] Over these years it has become clearer than ever before that
there is much mutual benefit to be gained from our partnership.

We also wish to affirm our commitment to the close relations that we have
forged with Brazil and India through Ibsa, and indeed to the strengthening
of the bonds that our country has been forging with Russia and countries in
Asia and the Middle East, as well as Latin and North America.

We have on countless occasions expressed our concern at the persistence of
conflict in the Middle East in general and in Israel and Palestine in
particular. The depth of our disappointment at the recent escalation of the
conflict and massive loss of life, especially of civilians – including
children, women and the elderly – indeed defies description. There can be
no justification for such acts of wanton destruction and savagery.
[Applause.] We do hope that this time round, the renewed efforts of the
international community to find a lasting solution to this conflict will
bear fruit, so that Israelis and Palestinians can enjoy peace and security
as neighbours within their sovereign territories.

Our special congratulations to the government and the people of Cuba on
this the 50th anniversary of the attainment of their sovereignty ...
[Applause.] ... and, with it, the freedom to choose their path of
development.

We were able in the past year to conclude further negotiations with the
European Union on our strategic partnership, and we do hope that the spirit
which informed that engagement will prevail as we finalise the multilateral
negotiations on the economic partnership agreements with countries in our
region. We look forward to further strengthening this partnership when we
host the South Africa-EU Summit later this year.

Along with other countries of the South, we will continue to pursue the
cause of the restructuring of the United Nations, the International
Monetary Fund and other multilateral institutions so that they reflect the
changed and changing global reality and operate in a democratic, equitable
and transparent manner.

We also commit ourselves to meeting the objectives of international
agreements, including the Kyoto Protocol and its successors, for the
benefit of future generations among our own people and the peoples of the
world.

Madam Speaker and hon Chairperson, informing these endeavours are two basic
principles: the need for us to complete the mandate accorded this
government in 2004; and the imperative to ensure that the government that
comes in after the elections finds a ready platform to implement its
programmes without undue delays. [Applause.]

In the coming few months, pending the national and provincial elections, we
will endeavour to complete that popular mandate. As part of the many
detailed projects contained in the government’s Programme of Action, we
will pay particular attention to the following:

        • creating the capacity necessary for improved service delivery and
          better integration within and across the spheres of government,
          including national strategic planning;


        • continuing with the War on Poverty campaign and finalising the
          draft of the Comprehensive Anti-Poverty Strategy through the
          public consultations now under way;

        • implementing the comprehensive programme we have put in place to
          eliminate the incidence of cholera in various parts of the
          country;


        • continuing research and consultations on the comprehensive social
          security system, including the matter of national health
          insurance;


        • intensifying the campaign to save energy, so as to manage the
          current difficulties and change our own behaviour, while at the
          same time speeding up the projects to build new capacity and
          utilise alternative energy sources, recognising that in addition
          to the consequences of climate change, resources such as fossil
          fuels and water are declining in the same measure as demand is
          increasing;

        • integrating into the work of the relevant clusters the findings
          of research on second economy interventions such as the community
          works programme, support for small and micro enterprises and
          rural development initiatives;

        • intensifying efforts to revamp the criminal justice system,
          including better forensic capacity, a rapid increase in the
          number of detectives, optimal utilisation of information and
          communications technology, and better management of the courts;
          and
        • facilitating the processes aimed at strengthening the machineries
          dealing with matters of gender equality, such as 50/50
          representation in decision-making structures ... [Applause.] ...
          youth development, the rights of people with disability and
          children’s rights – including completing consultations on the
          National Youth Policy, preparing for the implementation of the
          African Youth Charter once it has been processed by Parliament,
          and for the setting up of the National Youth Development Agency;
          submitting the SADC Protocol on Gender and Development to
          Parliament; strengthening advocacy on the rights of people with
          disability; and increasing the number of municipalities that have
          set up Children’s Rights Focal Points beyond the current 60%.

These and other programmes, including the Apex Priorities identified in the
state of the nation address last February, form the bedrock of our efforts
to conclude the popular mandate and lay the foundation for the future.

We will intensify our efforts inspired by the enthusiasm, the hope and the
resilience of the South African people in pursuit of that which is good for
all of our people. This, and this in the main, is the source of our
confidence when we say that the nation is in a good state. Our democracy is
healthy. It is steadily growing stronger.

And so, in the words of former President Mandela, “[we] dare not linger,
for [our] long walk is not yet ended”. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I now take this opportunity to thank
the hon President. After I have adjourned the Joint Sitting, members and
guests should please remain at their seats until the procession has left
the Chamber.

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces adjourned the Joint
Sitting at 12:08.

