---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 September 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-09-15
---

TUESDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2009
                                    ____

                    Proceedings of the national assembly
                                    ____

The House met at 14.02.

House Chairperson Mr K O Bapela took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S J MASANGO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates the way Government intends to sustain the number
  of jobs created under the Expanded Public Works Programme after the 2010
  Fifa World Cup Tournament.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates municipal responses to the global crisis.
Mr J SCHMIDT: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

  That the House –

     1) notes that Eskom has repeatedly ignored a series of confidential
        internal memos clearly indicating that Eskom internal practices were
        precipitating an energy crisis in South Africa, which has had and
        continues to have a devastating impact on economic growth and the
        country as a whole; and


     2) resolves that an independent judicial commission of inquiry into
        Eskom be appointed to investigate the reason for the energy crisis
        and to determine who is responsible and the action that should be
        taken against them.

Ms C DUDLEY: Chairperson, on behalf of the ACDP, I hereby give notice that
on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:

  That the House –

     1) notes that Wednesday 9 September was World Foetal Alcohol Syndrome
        Day; and


     2) calls on this House to debate whether or not the Department of
        Health’s strategy to combat Foetal Alcohol Syndrome is sufficient
        and effective considering shocking estimates that 25 000 babies are
        born in South Africa every year with Foetal Alcohol Syndrome.

Mr E NYEKEMBA: Chairperson, on behalf of the ANC, I hereby give notice that
on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates human trafficking, with its derivatives of child
  labour and sex slavery, as a threat to the establishment and stability of
  a national democratic society.

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, on behalf of the ANC, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates rural development and agrarian reform as an
   integral part of our efforts to create a better life for all.

Mr P J RABIE: Chairperson, on behalf of the DA, I hereby give notice that
on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates the high volume of illegally imported clothing and
  textiles, the review of the present system of import tariffs placed on
  imported textiles and possible solutions to stem the tide of job losses in
  the clothing and textile industry.
Mr M C MANANA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates the current global crisis: an opportunity in
  search of a just, humane and equitable world order - a world with greater
  security, peace, dialogue and better equilibrium among all nations of the
  world.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, on behalf of the ANC, I hereby give notice that
on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates poverty and inequality as a threat to the
   stability of our country and the region, immediately and in the long-
   term.

        SPRINGBOKS’ TRI-NATIONS VICTORY OVER NEW ZEALAND IN HAMILTON

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House –


      1) notes that on Saturday, 12 September 2009, the Springboks won the
         2009 Tri-Nations when they beat the All Blacks 32-29, in Hamilton,
         New Zealand;


      2) further notes that it is the first time since 1949 that the
         Springboks scored three successive victories over the All Blacks;


      3) recognises that these consecutive victories secured Captain John
         Smit’s team their place as one of the greatest of all Springbok
         teams;


      4) further recognises that this victory was secured by the tries
         scored by Fourie du Preez and Jean de Villiers, plus the accurate
         goal-kicking of Morné Steyn and the phenomenal kicks by Francois
         Steyn;


      5) acknowledges that the Springboks have once again made their
         country and its people proud;


      6) congratulates Coach Peter de Villiers, Captain John Smit and the
         team on their outstanding performances throughout the series, and
         their triumphant victory; and


     7) wishes them a well deserved rest and all the best for their future
        rugby matches and tournaments.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you very much. Indeed, they
have made us proud as a nation. We will make sure that the message reaches
them.

Agreed to.

       UNTIMELY DEATH OF FOOTBALL ADMINISTRATOR, MR VINCENT BAARTJIES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

    1) notes with  profound  sadness  the  untimely  death  of  a  renowned
       football administrator and struggle activist Mr Vincent Baartjies on
       Thursday, 3 September 2009;


    2) further notes that he  passed  away  after  a  long  battle  against
       cancer;


    3) recognises that Mr Baartjies, an honorary life member of  the  South
       African Football Association (SAFA), played a key  role  in  uniting
       soccer in this country;


    4) recalls that Mr Baartjies  worked  tirelessly  with  and  for  young
       soccer players in the country and that he is  credited  with  giving
       the  likes  of  Benny  McCarthy  the  opportunity  to  play  in  the
       professional league and that it is his behind-the-scenes efforts  as
       an administrator that will not be forgotten;


    5) believes that it is because of his work and  dedication  that  South
       Africa could become a member of Fifa and as  a  result  of  that  we
       could participate  in  the  1998  World  Cup  and  2002  World  Cup,
       respectively, and that it is also because of his  contribution  that
       we were able to bid for the hosting of the 2006 and 2010 World Cup;


    6) supports the efforts to rename the Athlone stadium  after  Baartjies
       in time for next year's World Cup; and


    7) conveys its condolences to  the  Baartjies  family  and  the  soccer
       fraternity.

Agreed to.

                        WORLD SUICIDE PREVENTION DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs C Dudley: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the House –

     1) notes that World Suicide Prevention Day was last Thursday, 10
        September 2009, and that research by Professor Lourens Schlebusch
        of the Department of Behavioural Medicine at the Nelson R Mandela
        School of Medicine, University of Natal, on suicidal behaviour in
        South Africa shows that stress and suicidal behaviour among black
        South Africans, for whom lower rates were reported in the past, is
        a neglected area of concern and an increasingly serious problem and
        that suicidal behaviour is under-researched among the majority
        black population, compared to other major ethnic groups;


     2) further notes that in South Africa 20 suicides take place each day
        and for every one recorded, there are 20 more attempts and that
        twice as many men as women commit suicide and the most common age
        for suicides in South Africa is 18 to 35 years with a third of
        attempted suicides being among teens, and that Professor Schlebusch
        says black youths are at particular risk due to significant demands
        that are made on them educationally and socio-economically; and


     3) calls on the Government to consider the need for increased
        implementation of suicide prevention programmes in schools and to
        put more call lines in place to help youth in crisis and at risk.

Agreed to.

   THIRTY-SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF THE DEATH OF RENOWNED SOUTH AFRICAN ANTI-
                        APARTHEID ACTIVIST STEVE BIKO


                             (Draft Resolution)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes with profound sadness that on Saturday, 12 September, 32
        years ago, renowned South African philosopher, leader and anti-
        apartheid activist Steve Biko died as a result of a massive head
        injury suffered whilst in police custody;


     2) further notes that the true circumstances surrounding his death
        would never have come to light had it not been for then journalist
        Helen Zille's investigative journalism;


     3) recognises that his writing and activism initiated the Black
        Consciousness Movement, and made an invaluable contribution to the
        restoration of African consciousness globally;


     4) further recognises that his untimely death opened the eyes of the
        world to the brutality of the apartheid regime; and


     5) calls on all South Africans to honour Biko's legacy by recommitting
        to our Constitution's values, and to continue the fight against all
        forms of racism with renewed vigour.

Agreed to.

                 THE SATYAGRAHA PASSIVE RESISTANCE CAMPAIGN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


    1) notes that on 11 September 1906 Mahatma Gandhi led the Satyagraha
       Passive Resistance Campaign against the introduction of the Asiatic
       Law Amendment Ordinance in the then Transvaal, effectively extending
       pass laws to Indians;
    2) further notes that the law stipulated that every Indian male, female
       and child over eight years of age had to register with the Registrar
       of Asiatics and had to show their registration certificate to any
       policeman who asked to see it;


    3) recognises that Satyagraha is a form of political struggle that
       requires practitioners to abstain from violence even under extreme
       provocation;

    4) believes that Satyagraha is a method of struggle that was pioneered
       in South Africa but was applied in India, the United States of
       America and other parts of the world;


    5) remembers that it is because of the work and dedication of leaders
       like Mahatma Gandhi that South Africa is a democracy today; and


    6) wishes that the world community can draw lessons about conflict
       resolution from Satyagraha.

Agreed to.

 DEATH OF ZAKES ZULU MOKAE, ONE OF SOUTH AFRICA’S MOST ACCOMPLISHED FILM AND
                                STAGE ACTORS

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes with profound sadness the death of Zakes Zulu Mokae, one of
        South Africa’s most accomplished film and stage actors at the age
        of 74 in the United States;


     2) further notes that Mokae, who had been awarded the Order of
        Ikhamanga II Silver for his excellent contribution to South African
        theatre and achievements in the field of acting, was born in
        Johannesburg where he worked closely with Athol Fugard before going
        into exile in the United Kingdom in 1961 where he trained at the
        Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and that in 1969 he moved to the
        United States where he quickly distinguished himself on stage and
        in films and that he was also part of a collective with Fugard that
        focused on dissecting South Africa’s political problems;


     3) recognises that despite his numerous achievements abroad, he
        remained largely unknown in South Africa;


     4) calls on the people of South Africa to take note of this South
        African legend’s major contribution; and


     5) conveys its sincerest condolences to his wife, Mandy, and two sons
        during this very difficult time.

Agreed to.

       MORTAL REMAINS OF THE COSAS TWO AND PEBCO THREE HANDED TO THEIR
                             FAMILIES FOR BURIAL


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that on Saturday, 12 September 2009, the Minister of  Justice
        and Constitutional Development handed over the  mortal  remains  of
        the COSAS Two, Topsy Madaka and Siphiwo Mtimkhulu,  and  the  PEBCO
        Three, Sipho Hashe, Champion  Galela  and  Qaqawuli  Godolozi,  who
        disappeared in 1982 and 1985, respectively, to their  families  for
        burial;


     2) further notes that the COSAS Two and the PEBCO Three activists were
        abducted by members of the Eastern Cape Security Police in 1982 and
        1985, respectively, and that they were taken to the  Post  Chalmers
        Farm where they were interrogated, tortured, drugged and shot  dead
        and their bodies burnt on a wood fire;


     3) recognises that the search for  missing  South  Africans  is  being
        undertaken by the unit established within the National  Prosecuting
        Authority to locate the human remains or whereabouts of people  who
        disappeared under mysterious  political  circumstances  during  the
        apartheid era and where those cases had been reported to the  Truth
        and Reconciliation Commission (TRC);


     4) notes that a memorial service for the five will be held on Heritage
        Day, 24 September 2009, and the funeral will be on 3  October  2009
        in Port Elizabeth;


     5) believes that the families of the PEBCO Three and the COSAS Two
        will find closure when they finally receive and bury the mortal
        remains of their loved ones; and



     6) conveys its condolences to the families of these five heroes and
        gallant fighters to the end.



Agreed to.


                            PRESIDENTIAL HOTLINE
                            (Member’s Statement)


Ms D G NHLENGETHWA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government always
insists on putting people first in service delivery and ensuring courteous
and efficient service from front-counter staff in the provision of service
in all government departments.

The Presidential hotline launched yesterday allows members of the public to
lodge an enquiry or complaint directly to the President’s Office. So far,
it has received more than 7 261 calls in its first three hours. The public
response to the hotline is overwhelming. It is not a public relations
exercise, but is meant to improve the way the government works and make it
more accessible.

About 2 420 calls were attended per hour; 40 calls a minute since the
hotline became operational around 09:00 in the morning. This demonstrates
the commitment to the culture of service delivery by the ANC, which puts
every elected official and public servant to work for our people so as to
ensure accountability to our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

              SALARY INCREASE FOR ESKOM CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S C MOTAU (DA): Chairperson, Eskom is operating in an accountability
vacuum, if we note the billions of rand lost due to mismanagement and the
resulting load-shedding that cost South Africa R2 billion a day. And, yet,
the CEO, Mr Jacob Maroga, gets a 27% pay hike!

Is this the message being conveyed by the ANC government - that it rewards
a slapdash manager with a pay increase that is double the inflation rate?
How is it remotely conceivable that such actions would lead to
accountability at other state-owned enterprises if their managers are
rewarded for wasting money?

South Africans need seriously to ask if this is the kind of government they
deserve; one which increases electricity prices during one of the toughest
times faced by consumers, but goes out of its way to protect and reward
incompetence. I thank you.

                 LOWERING OF MATRICULATION DISTINCTION RATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N Y VUKUZA-LINDA (Cope): Cope notes with concern the radical plan
reported in the Sunday Times, dated 13 September 2009, of the Department of
Basic Education to lower the traditional matriculation distinction from 80%
to 70%. There is a similar concern about a report that the Minister of
Basic Education has been unaware of this move.

In view of this bungle, we call upon the Minister to stop this idea as it
could have serious implications for university intake and education in
general. [Applause.]

         65TH ANNIVERSARY OF AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS YOUTH LEAGUE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M T KUBAYI (ANC): Chairperson, the African National Congress Youth
League, ANCYL, is celebrating its 65th Anniversary this month, September
2009. It is the oldest youth movement in our country, which was formed in
1944.

It was the 1944 ANCYL generation that discouraged the pacifist nature of
the struggle which was employed by the ANC until then. The significance of
the foundation of the ANCYL in 1944 brought change in the ideological
conceptualisation of the ANC itself; particularly on tactical issues
relating to the advancement of the liberation struggle.

This year’s theme for the celebrations is, “Celebrating a vibrant youth
voice 65 years down the block”. This represents the continued celebration
of the vibrancy of the youth in South Africa. All ANCYL structures, namely,
at branch, zone, regional and provincial levels will, in September and
October 2009, undergo a political education which will place particular
emphasis on the 1944 ANCYL manifesto and the 1948 Basic Policy Document.

The ANC is calling on the Youth League to remain militant and true to its
role of generating leadership for the ANC. The ANCYL should define its role
in the current environment of the ANC and society, and continue to help
young people to acquire skills and abilities required to participate in the
economy.

We remain confident that the ANCYL will spare no energy in its efforts to
ensure that young people are taken seriously and continue to devise
mechanisms which will help in advancing the development of young people. I
thank you. [Applause.]

          DEATH AND INJURIES IN STAMPEDE DURING REED DANCE CEREMONY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI (IFP): The IFP wishes to extend its heartfelt
condolences to King Goodwill Zwelithini, the Zulu royal family and the
family of the 15-year-old girl who passed away during the annual Royal Reed
Dance in KwaNongoma on Saturday.

The IFP’s thoughts and prayers are with the families during this sad and
difficult time. Furthermore, the IFP wishes the 11 women who were seriously
injured in the stampede at the Enyokeni royal residence all the best and a
speedy recovery.

The cultural heritage of the Zulu people expressed through the annual Reed
Dance, uMkhosi woMhlanga, teaches young women to have pride in their
womanhood, while playing a critical role in the fight against HIV and Aids.
It is therefore imperative that the authorities and the organisers of the
event have improved and more stringent security measures in place at next
year’s festival, so that we can protect the young maidens who take part in
this rich cultural ceremony.

Whilst the IFP applauds the SAPS for stepping up security measures by
deploying extra police officers, members of the intelligence unit, and the
National Intervention Unit as well as public-order police officers at this
year’s event, it was not sufficient to protect all the participants. We
therefore call for a full and urgent investigation to be completed so that
we prevent a similar tragedy from repeating itself in future. I thank you.
[Applause.]

 SALARY INCREASE FOR ESKOM CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER IN SPITE OF POOR SERVICE
                                  DELIVERY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L B GAEHLER (UDM): The UDM is disturbed by the news that the CEO of
Eskom is to receive a massive salary increase. We condemn such a massive
salary increase on several grounds.

Firstly, it is patently unjust for the management of an institution to give
itself a salary increase which is more than double what it gave its
workers. At a time when the domestic and international economy is in
crisis, such a move smacks of hypocrisy and disregard.

Secondly, it must be remembered that Eskom’s CEO already receives a
handsome salary to the tune of millions. We speak often in this country
about the gap between the haves and the have-nots, hence even private
companies face pressure from their shareholders to moderate executive
packages. Yet, in the view of shareholders - us, the South African public -
it seems no such restraint is applied in the parastatals.

Thirdly, we are talking about an institution which has had a very poor
track record over the past number of years. They have caused the South
African public untold economic harm with poor service delivery and shoddy
work. Thank you.

            PROMOTION OF ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL TIES WITH SWEDEN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr G W KOORNHOF (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government will work
together with the countries of the South to promote South-South relations
and North-South co-operation and will continue to advocate for a fairer and
humane international trade and financial system.

Last week Thursday, President Jacob Zuma held a bilateral meeting with
Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt in Cape Town.

Amongst the issues they discussed were the following: bilateral, political,
economic and trade relations, and co-operation on climate change and the
environment. South Africa’s regional role in the promotion of democracy,
peace, security and respect for human rights on the African continent was
also discussed.

Sweden was amongst the strongest and most reliable supporters of the ANC
during the struggle for our democracy in South Africa. Their funds would
underwrite the education, health care and upkeep of freedom fighters in
Africa and elsewhere. The people of South Africa appreciate the attention
which Sweden pays to African affairs, especially the emphasis on poverty
reduction, the promotion of democracy, trade, peace and security.

The ANC believes that economic and political co-operation with other
countries can improve the lives of our own people and it will continue to
work towards a better life for all, a better Africa and a just world
without hunger, disease, conflict and underdevelopment. I thank you.
[Applause.]

              SOUTH AFRICAN SATELLITE TO BE LAUNCHED INTO SPACE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M R SHINN (DA): Chairperson, in 215 minutes’ time the South African
satellite, SumbandilaSat, blasts into space. This is an exciting
achievement for our nation’s scientific vision, ingenuity and engineering
skills. It is an inspiration for our future scientists, and all involved
are to congratulated.

This is how the exciting programme is covered on space.gov.za, the
government’s website dedicated to the nation’s space initiatives, and I
quote: “A small South African earth-observing satellite is currently under
development.” The countdown has already started - it is t minus 214 and
counting.

But this is not the only government website that is failing to keep pace
with the real world as we embark on our future as a space-faring nation.
Parliament’s own website would have us believe that the South African
National Space Agency Bill is sitting in the President’s in-tray, waiting
to be signed. Former President Motlanthe signed this Bill into law last
December.

These examples illustrate the basic characteristics of ANC governance: Lots
of flash and enthusiasm upfront, and waning interest in maintenance that
ensures delivery and return on investment.

Our scientists are stretching their minds and squeezing every last bit of
use out of ageing instruments so that South Africa can compete with the
best scientists in the world. They need government’s commitment and active
support to ensure we gain and maintain our hard-earned space. It is t minus
213 and counting! [Applause.]

          LEGALISING PROSTITUTION IN PREPARATION FOR FIFA WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): The SA Law Commission has been weighing the attitude
of South Africans on the issue of decriminalising prostitution, as pressure
has been exerted to do so before 2010. Not even two years after Germany was
announced as the host nation for the 2006 Fifa World Cup Final,
prostitution was legalised in preparation for the tournament. Is South
Africa in danger of following suit?

The ACDP supports the view that the entire sex industry must remain
criminalised and the relatively new laws in South Africa, which target the
user, including clients, pimps, procurers and traffickers, must be
enforced. In addition, however, a mechanism is needed whereby prostitutes
can be diverted into an exit programme to help victims of prostitution
rebuild their lives. Provision for the criminal offense to be expunged on
completion of the programme should be an incentive.

An overwhelming body of international evidence shows that the terrible
abuse and exploitation of women and children trapped in prostitution does
not decline where there is decriminalisation; in fact, the opposite is
true. Countries that have experimented with decriminalising this practice
have found that trafficking in women increases to meet the demand created
by a legalised sex industry.

It also makes it difficult to hold traffickers and pimps accountable, as
they evade prosecution by using the legality as a cover, claiming women
knew what they were getting into. Public sentiment in South Africa is
clearly opposed to legalising prostitution, but the multibillion dollar
industry concerned is looking for friendly territory to ply their lucrative
trade.

          GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TO IMPROVING PUBLIC HEALTH SECTOR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E RASOOL (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government will work together
with all key sectors in our society through a social contract to continue
to transform our health care system for the better. In Durban, the
Department of Public Service and Administration has organised a week-long
8th Public Service Senior Management Service conference, focusing on the
public health services sector.

The theme for this year’s conference is: “Building collaborative leadership
within the Public Health sector”. Senior managers in the public health
sector are already contemplating participating in collaborative leadership
with their employees, so as to achieve the commitments that have been set
by government, particularly the Millennium Development Goals, by 2014.

The government will always ensure democratic governance and improved
management and leadership skills at all levels of the health system, as
well as meeting the national standards of quality care. Thank you very
much.

         GOVERNMENT SHOULD SPEED UP PROCESSING OF IDENTITY DOCUMENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M MNQASELA (DA): Chairperson, the DA is outraged by the large number of
people who, some at an advanced age - at the age of 40, in some instances -
are still nowhere near to being recognised as being legitimate citizens of
this country, in the form of the basic necessity and right known as an
identity document.

Apartheid left us with a terrible legacy in this regard, but we now find
that the current government is exacerbating the problem by way of this
dismal failure to provide this essential service to our people. We simply
cannot afford to sit back and allow this situation to continue while
carrying out people’s mandate.

Chairperson, we are not elected as leaders to live in luxury and deliver
nothing to the people. People have been patient for so long, and we should
allow people the right to demand leadership from us, even if it does
sometimes involve taking some unpopular decisions that enable us to deliver
a quality service to our citizens.

Citizens have been extremely patient for 15 years, but that patience is
rightfully wearing dangerously thin at present, and Mr Mhlongo’s tragic and
unnecessary suicide is a case in point. We need to take note that this,
among many other cases, will continue to be a slur and confound us in our
efforts.

Chairperson, people are losing faith and confidence in government because
of their unwillingness to provide this service. The ANC has been promising
people in elections that they would provide good governance. When will this
happen? [Interjections]. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

  CONGRATULATIONS TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES ON COMBATING CASH-IN-TRANSIT
                                   HEISTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L RAMATLAKANE (Cope): Chairperson, the gains made against criminals by
the police in our country in the past weeks are indeed momentous. The
resolve, determination and commitment shown by law enforcers to close down
the space for criminals in our country are highly commendable. We are
deeply gratified.

In the two cities, Johannesburg and Cape Town, police have scored signal
victories against criminals. It is unfortunate that fatalities occurred in
Johannesburg and Cape Town. The police were shot at and had to respond by
firing back.

Incidents of cash-in-transit heists, in particular, have continued to
spiral, and the fact that six of those who carried out the heist paid with
their lives, on this occasion, must serve as an unmistakable warning to
others that they will meet the sternest measures possible, if they persist
with their criminal acts.

In all these instances, tip-offs and intelligence played a crucial role in
the success of the police operation against the mobsters, gangsters and
criminal syndicate members. We, therefore, encourage people to continue to
provide information against all criminals so that the law enforcement
agencies of our country can work effectively to neutralise them.

We congratulate the police on their sterling efforts. We are, indeed, very
proud of their achievements of last week, and we trust that what we saw
last week will become a regular occurrence.

Law enforcers need to have the upper hand with our criminals, because they
are, in fact, the criminals among our people. Thank you. [Applause.]

       LAUNCH OF NATIONAL LIQUOR REGULATORS’ FORUM AWARENESS CAMPAIGN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr X MABASO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government encourages
communities to adopt healthy diets, to exercise, and to participate in
campaigns against alcohol, drug, and substance abuse.

The DTI is to launch its annual liquor campaign which aims to raise
awareness of the social ills associated with alcohol abuse.

The National Liquor Regulators’ Forum was launched yesterday, Monday 14
September 2009. The theme of the campaign is: “Empowering the communities
on their rights and duties with regard to liquor regulation.”

The department believes that empowering communities, including civil
society structures, with regard to the prescripts of liquor legislation,
will encourage them to play an active role in liquor regulation.

The ANC supports and will work for the acceleration of the campaigns on
health promotion and disease prevention by changing social values and norms
through common community action. Thank you.

   IMPACT OF INTRODUCTION OF SPECIAL MUNICIPAL FUEL LEVY IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Chairperson, the dire state of the world economy has
caused great harm to millions of ordinary South Africans, many of whom have
to struggle daily just to purchase the basic foodstuffs they need to
survive. Yet, despite this situation, certain municipalities in KwaZulu-
Natal have suggested that a special fuel levy be introduced in order to
increase their income-generating capacities.
This suggestion is not only short-sighted, but also selfish, as it does not
seem to take into account the impact that such a levy would have on
ordinary people in the province.

In the current economic climate this levy would serve to compound the
economic woes that so many people are experiencing. It would increase the
cost of transport and food, amongst other things, and ultimately push many
more South Africans into despair and poverty, with the poorest members of
our society once again being the worst affected. This cannot and must not
happen.

If the municipalities are looking for extra funds, they should start
examining their internal systems and how to improve them; they should not
treat the public as cash cows that should fund their cash shortfalls.

Better and more efficient debt collection, greater transparency and
accountability with regard to spending and improved performance in their
delivery of services are just some of the areas municipalities must improve
upon, which would have a positive impact on their cash flow. Innovative
thinking and good management are needed in municipalities if they are to
deliver to the public. Thank you.

 UNACCEPTABILITY OF GRANTING A SALARY INCREASE AND BONUS TO MR JACOB MAROGA,
                      CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF ESKOM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF Plus): Agb Voorsitter, die bekendmaking van die
reuse salarisverhoging van mnr Jacob Maroga, hoof uitvoerende beampte van
Eskom, van 26,7%, is nie net skokkend nie, maar total onaanvaarbaar, omdat
dit die verbruiker is wat daarvoor moet opdok.

Die verbruiker word mislei om te glo dat die 31%-prysverhoging
elektrisiteit ’n noodsaaklikheid is om die kragvoorsiening te verseker. Dit
kom eerder voor asof dit gedoen word vir reuse salarisverhogings van die
hoof uitvoerende beampte. Dit is reeds bekend dat Maroga onbevoeg is vir sy
pos, en dat hy niks gedoen het toe hy vroegtydig gewaarsku is oor die
destydse steenkoolkrisis wat Eskom sou tref nie.

Hoe is dit moontlik dat ’n hoof uitvoerende beampte wat ’n landskrisis –
waarvan die verlies ongeveer R50 miljard was – veroorsaak het, ’n basiese
salarisverhoging van R3,914 miljoen na R4,96 miljoen kry? Op die koop toe
kry hy ’n bonus van R681 446 in aandele!

As die ANC-regering ernstig is met dienslewering aan die publiek, sal die
agb Minister van Openbare Ondernemings, me Barbara Hogan – en ek sien die
agb Minister is hier – dadelik ingryp en die verhoging aan mnr Maroga
afkeur en hom ook van sy pos onthef.

Die verbruiker word reeds swaar belas en dit is onbillik om van die
verbruiker te verwag om die hele tyd onbekwaamheid en onbevoegdheid te
finansier.

Die VF Plus versoek die agb Minister om mnr Jacob Maroga onmiddellik,
sonder ’n goue handdruk, te ontslaan, aangesien hy nie geskik is om ’n hoof
uitvoerende beampte van enige openbare onderneming te wees nie. Dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Hon Chairperson, the announcement of the
enormous 26,7% salary increase for Mr Jacob Maroga, chief executive officer
of Eskom, is not only shocking, but totally unacceptable, because it is the
consumer who will have to pay up.

The consumer is being misled into believing that the 31% increase in the
price of electricity is essential in order to ensure the supply of
electricity. It would rather appear as if it is being done because of the
enormous salary increase of the chief executive officer. It is already
known that Mr Moroga is unfit for his position and that he did nothing when
he was warned in good time of the coal crisis which was about to hit Eskom.

How is it possible that this chief executive officer, who caused a national
crisis and a loss of about R50 billion, is now receiving a basic salary
increase from R3,914 million to R4,96 million? And into the bargain he will
receive a bonus of R681 446 in shares!

If the ANC government was serious about service delivery to the public, the
hon Minister of Public Enterprises, Ms Barbara Hogan – and I see the hon
Minister is here – would have stepped in immediately by rejecting Mr
Moroga’s increase and also removing him from his post.

The consumer is already being heavily taxed and it is unfair to expect the
consumer to continue financing incapability and incompetence.

The FF Plus requests the hon Minister to dismiss Mr Maroga immediately,
without a golden handshake, because he is not fit to be a chief executive
officer of any public enterprise. Thank you. [Applause.]]

              SALARY INCREASE FOR ESKOM CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

              SALARY INCREASE FOR ESKOM CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
          CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER IN SPITE OF POOR SERVICE DELIVERY

 UNACCEPTABILITY OF GRANTING A SALARY INCREASE AND BONUS TO MR JACOB MAROGA,
                      CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF ESKOM

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, I want to respond to the
issue of the salary increase of the CEO of Eskom. For those of us who were
in the committee today, I think the explanation was given there that the
Cape Times headlines was a misleading one in so far as the increase for Mr
Maroga was 9% for this year.

When Mr Maroga was appointed late in 2007, he had a salary below that of a
CEO. It was agreed then that his salary would not be immediately put on the
scale of a CEO, but that it would be phased in over a two-year period.

That period is now. The second phase of the increase in the salary is now.
Those people who are concerned about the salary increase should bear in
mind that for the last two years he was not being paid at the salary level
that the CEO is paid at. [Interjections.]

Secondly, let me say that his salary was ... [Interjections.] Could I have
some protection, Chair?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, hon members!

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Let me say that this salary is being
paid at the medium level of a person at his level of a CEO. His salary for
this year is simply a 9% increase, which is less than what the public
servants are getting at the moment. I thank you. [Applause.]

          LEGALISING PROSTITUTION IN PREPARATION FOR FIFA WORLD CUP

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, first of all, let us
also join those who are congratulating our national team. I would add other
national teams that achieved great victories over the last weekend. They
have done us very proud.

I would also like to indicate that long before the League of Nations and
the UN started talking about a Bill of Rights, the ANC had been advocating
and lobbying to establishment of a Bill of Rights for all human beings to
protect their dignity.

It is in that light that the ANC has not been involved in lobbying for the
legalisation of prostitution before 2010 and has not endorsed any such
discussions. Indeed, we also do not encourage the legalisation of human
trafficking. On the contrary, we call upon the law enforcement agencies to
be more vigilant and stringent in clamping down on these antisocial
activities that undermine the human dignity of other people.

Last but not least, we really want to remind members of the ANC that this
is the programme of paid lobbyists who are trying to make a profit out of
these activities. In terms of our own code of conduct that the ANC adopted
in December 1994, members of the ANC are not allowed to get involved in
these activities. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

       LAUNCH OF NATIONAL LIQUOR REGULATORS’ FORUM AWARENESS CAMPAIGN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I want to welcome the
statement by the hon Mabaso, on the National Liquor Regulators’ Forum
Awareness Campaign.

As many hon members would know, we have an extremely high level of alcohol
abuse in this country. It doesn’t matter whether this is measured by the
fact that one in ten children who are born in De Aar are affected by foetal
alcohol syndrome, or by the fact that nearly half of all unnatural deaths,
be they motor accidents or murders, are caused by people who had abnormally
high levels of alcohol in their blood.

The campaign is motivated by the proposition that the more effective
enforcement of laws and regulations governing the production and
distribution of liquor would make a contribution. Ahead of the launch of
the campaign, the liquor regulators conducted a blitz in the Free State.
They visited only 29 premises and made seven arrests, they closed five
premises and confiscated 6 000 litres of illegal alcohol. This points to an
unacceptably high level of disregard for our basic rules and regulations.

So the campaign is aimed at tightening this up. It is premised on the
proposition that the regulators can’t do this alone and that we need the
communities to be involved, by identifying the problems and contacting the
regulators and the police. I would encourage members of Parliament also to
be involved in this campaign which will be taking itself to all the other
provinces of the country in the period between now and March next year. I
thank you very much.

          LEGALISING PROSTITUTION IN PREPARATION FOR FIFA WORLD CUP

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, I would also like to respond to the statement made by the hon
Dudley regarding the SA Law Commission’s investigation into adult sex work.


We absolutely reject the insinuation that the SA Law Commission has been
pressurised into finalising its investigation before the 2010 World Cup.
This is a complex and serious social issue that affects many women and
others in our society. The SA Law Commission has approached this matter
with the seriousness and the rigour with which it approaches all the tasks
given to it.

It has produced an issue paper and it is engaging in extensive
consultation. We would urge the hon Dudley to take the inputs that she made
in this House today and submit them for consideration by the SA Law
Commission and to await the outcome of the commission’s report. That will
enable us to engage on this matter in an informed way. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

          GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TO IMPROVING PUBLIC HEALTH SECTOR

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, the
Senior Management Service Conference is an annual forum where senior
managers in the Public Service come together to engage on issues that
affect their work with a view to sharing ideas that contribute to improving
service delivery.

This year’s conference, held in Durban, focused on public health. We have
to indicate that this was the first time that senior managers engaged on
issues in a focused manner, looking at and focusing on a particular issue,
public health in this instance, as I have indicated.
They made a call at the end of the conference to say that collaborative
leadership, as that was the theme of the conference, is something that
needs to be promoted at all levels - vertically, horizontally, in all
sectors and across spheres. In that regard, we, as Parliament, also have a
responsibility to share our views in as far as how we would like to see
ourselves contributing to the improvement of the approach and the practice
of improving services to our people.

Next year’s conference is going to focus on education. The resolution by
the conference has been that the approach should not just be an event, but
should also be a process that has a build-up process from January until the
conference is held. We therefore make a call that members of Parliament
should also take part in this. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                 LOWERING OF MATRICULATION DISTINCTION RATE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, I am rising to
respond to the statement by hon Vukuza-Linda. I just want to say two
things. Firstly, it is very important for members not to rely on what they
read in the newspapers.

When you have read something in the newspaper, you don’t bring it here as
if it is the gospel truth. It would have been much better if the hon member
could have tabled a question so that she could get a proper answer about
the matter she is raising. [Applause.] You know, if you are a political
leader and you rely on reading newspapers as your guide, you are bound to
make lots of mistakes.

Secondly, what I would also like to say is that we are not going to be
distracted from what we want to do in education by this scare tactic that
through whatever progressive measures we want to introduce in general we
want to lower standards. This government wants to increase access, as well
as raise the level of education standards in our country. Ngiyabonga,
Sihlalo. [Thank you, Chairperson.] [Applause.]

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND
    TRAINING-STRATEGIC PLANNING WORKSHOP AND PROPOSED FIVE YEAR PROGRAMME

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I move:

  That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 14:53.
                                 ___________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Consumer Tribunal
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Regulator for
        Compulsory  Specifications (NRCS) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for the seven month period ending 31 March
        2009 [RP 153-2009].


2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        180-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
        Theatre for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009 [RP 57-2009].


3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
        Foundation for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009.


4.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards
        Board for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-2009 [RP 63-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud for
        Financial Services Providers for 2008-2009, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.

COMMITTEE REPORT

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T090911e-insert1 – PAGES 802-826


                         TUESDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Prevention and Combating of Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2009,
         submitted by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
         Development. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
         Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Development.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

      (1)   Mr G Oliphant was elected as the chairperson of Portfolio
        Committee on Public Works on 15 September 2009.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
         Commission (FFC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2008-2009 [RP 183-2009].

2.    The Minister in the Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Government
         Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2008-2009,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information of Vote 6 for 2008-2009 [RP
         194-2009].

   3. The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund
         (UYF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
         for 2008-2009.

4.    The Minister of Correctional Services

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
         Correctional   Services for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information of Vote 18 for 2008-2009 [RP 197-2009].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    RESOLUTION OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS ON MEASURES
   TO REDUCE INTERCONNECTION RATES IN SOUTH AFRICA, DATED 15 SEPTEMBER 2009

   The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having received briefings on
   15 September 2009 from the Independent Communications Authority of South
   Africa (ICASA), the Competition Commission and the Department of
   Communications on measures that can be taken to reduce the high cost of
   interconnection and call termination rates in South Africa -


   Believes that:

   i) interconnection rates in South Africa set at R1.25 per minute during
      peak times are exorbitant and excessive, resulting in extremely high
      telecommunication prices;


   ii)      this is the consequence of apparent historical collusion between
      dominant mobile operators in the country - which has placed profits
      and greed above people - and the incapacity of ICASA to effectively
      regulate this matter;


   iii)     the high costs of mobile and fixed line telecommunications has
      impacted adversely on the South African economy and negatively on
      citizens, particularly the poor and marginalized; and


   iv)      there is unanimity in industry, government, other relevant
      stakeholders and the regulatory authority that the present situation
      is socially indefensible and economically unjustifiable.

   Resolves that the Committee holds public hearings on the 13th and 14th of
   October 2009 on the following proposals:

   1) mobile and telecoms operators drop the interconnection rates with
      effect from 1 November 2009 to 60 cents per minute during peak times;
   2) interconnection rates be further reduced by 15 cents annually on the 1
      November for each successive year until 2012; and
   3) as a general rule the progressive reductions in interconnection rates
      between 2009 and 2012 should yield concomitant reductions in the
      actual consumer (retail) prices of telecommunications.

   Further resolves that:

   i) the Minister of Communications finalises the performance management
      system of ICASA Councillors as embodied in the ICASA Act (No 4 of
      1999) and the Department of Communications should report on the matter
      to the Portfolio Committee by the 30 November 2009; and
   ii)      ICASA should act professionally, effectively and boldly to
      regulate interconnection rates in South Africa as a matter of urgency.

   The Committee declares that it is willing to introduce in the next
   session of Parliament, a Committee Bill to amend the Electronic
   Communications Act (No 36 of 2005) so as to enable ICASA to act swiftly
   in this matter.

2.    The Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military
   Veterans on the Protocol of Amendments of the International Hydrographic
   Organisation Convention, dated 15 September 2009:



    The Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans, having
    considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Protocol of
    Amendments of the International Hydrographic Organisation Convention
    recommends that the House, in terms of section 231 (2) of the
    Constitution, approve the said Agreement.


Report to be considered.


