---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 September 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-09-08
---

TUESDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr W G JAMES: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move the following motion:


  That the House debates the status of the Global Political Agreement in
  Zimbabwe.

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move the following motion:

   That the House debates the increasing number of jobs lost due to the
   present economic recession and comes up with possible solutions.

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

                           SAPS COMMEMORATION DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, hon Deputy President, I
move without notice:


   That the House -

     1) notes that on Sunday, 6 September 2009, the South African Police
        Service, led by the Minister of Police, held a memorial service for
        its fallen comrades;


     2) recalls that in the past year a total of 105 police officers were
        murdered, 41 of those while on duty;


     3) remembers that the SAPS commemorated the day with grieving families
        and friends of their former colleagues by laying wreaths at the
        Union Buildings;


     4) recognises that the SAPS commemoration day is a tribute to our
        women and men in blue uniform who sacrifice their lives so that we
        can live a better life; and


     5) conveys its condolences to the families who lost their loved ones
        in the battle against crime.


Agreed to.

                  CELEBRATION OF INTERNATIONAL LITERACY DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, hon Deputy President, I move
without notice:

   That the House -


     1) notes that today, Tuesday, 8 September, is International Literacy
        Day;


     2) recalls that literacy is a cause for celebration since there are
        now close to four billion literate people in the world;


     3) remembers that basic education is crucial to nation-building and
        that literacy for all is at the heart of creating literate
        environments and societies and is essential for achieving the goals
        of eradicating poverty, reducing child mortality, achieving gender
        equality and ensuring sustainable development, peace and democracy;

     4) recognises that literacy is crucial to the acquisition by every
        child, youth and adult of the essential life skills that enable
        them to address the challenges they will be facing later in life;
        and


     5) urges all governments of the world to mobilise adequate national
        resources, develop more inclusive policy-making environments and
        devise strategies for reaching the poorest and most marginalised
        sections of the population in an effort to achieve the goals of the
        decade.


   Agreed to.

                     2009 NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION’S
                         LIFETIME ACHIEVEMENT AWARDS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -
   (1)      notes that Professor Njabulo Ndebele has been honoured with the
        2009 National Research Foundation’s Lifetime Achievement Award, and
        Professor Thokozani Majozi of the University of Pretoria and
        Professor Tebello Nyokong of Rhodes University have been presented
        with the National Research Foundation’s President’s Awards for their
        contribution to the transformation and development of science in
        South Africa;

   (2)      further notes that these academics have all received wide
        acclaim across the globe, including numerous awards and honorary
        doctorates;


   (3)      congratulates them on receiving these well-deserved awards; and


   (4)      thanks them for their invaluable contribution to the development
        of our young scientists and academics, and to the world of
        literature.

Agreed to.

                           EARTHQUAKE IN INDONESIA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:
   That the House -


   (1)      notes with sadness that last week Indonesia was hit by a
        devastating earthquake registering 7.0 on the Richter scale,
        resulting in considerable destruction and loss of life;


   (2)      further notes that the city of Bandung, home of the historic
        first Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement in 1955, was
        particularly hard-hit;

   (3)      conveys its sincerest condolences and deepest sympathy to the
        families of victims and all those affected by this calamity;


   (4)      expresses solidarity with the people of Indonesia; and


   (5)      trusts that they will be able to overcome this disaster and
        rebuild their lives.

Agreed to.

                         NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLANNING

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Mr Speaker,
hon Deputy President, Ministers, Deputy Ministers and hon members, today we
table in this House the Green Paper on National Strategic Planning and a
policy paper on performance monitoring and evaluation.

On 5 June 2009, and again on 24 June 2009, in the debate on the Budget Vote
of the Presidency, both Minister Chabane and I provided a detailed
introduction to the work of our Ministries. We set out the rationale for
the establishment of our functional areas, noting that the key reason for
the establishment of these two Ministries in the Presidency is to improve
the overall effectiveness of government in achieving our short-, medium-
and long-term objectives.

Today, admittedly slightly later than we had envisaged, we return to this
House to present more details on what we envisage and how we plan to
proceed. This time, we table papers that have been extensively canvassed in
the executive, including discussions with provincial premiers, metro
mayors, the leadership of Salga and the leaders of all political parties in
this House.

The Green Paper on National Strategic Planning is a discussion document
that sets out the rationale for planning and the institutional structures,
processes and outputs of the national planning process. The Green Paper is
not a plan for the country. It must be seen as the nuts and bolts – the
“how” part of developing a plan or plans.

Also critical is to understand that the outputs of the planning function
are not just a single document in the form of a national plan, but a
variety of products ranging from annual programmes of action and a medium-
term strategic framework to research papers on strategic issues and matters
to do with the spatial dynamics of our development path.

We should also emphasise at the outset that the planning function is not
conceptualised as a bookish and pedantic process with bespectacled men and
women poring over tomes and computer screens in their offices to emerge,
abracadabra, with eureka moments about solutions to the problems our
country faces.

Strategic planning is a dynamic process of engagement with society,
government departments, provinces, municipalities and a myriad of
stakeholders in our country. To the extent that the vision for our country
should inspire and inform the actions of all citizens, so should its
development, derived from active citizen participation.

Even though we dealt in some detail previously with why South Africa needs
a plan, today’s input would be amiss if I didn’t repeat some of the key
reasons for why we are setting up the capacity in the Presidency to drive
national strategic planning. After 15 years of democracy, we take comfort
in the successes that we have achieved. Not only have we set up important
institutions of democracy and governance, but we have also improved the
lives of millions of people through a growing economy and improving access
to basic services.

We are keenly aware, however, of the overwhelming evidence that we have not
yet achieved our key objectives for transforming our society, economy,
space and communities. Poverty, inequality and hardship remain stark
realities across the length and breadth of our country.

We have made progress, yes, but we still have a long way to go in
eradicating the effects of apartheid on the lives of all of our people. And
so, we have to do more and better. Improved national strategic planning
would provide a basis for increased policy coherence, better co-ordination
from the centre of government and clear priorities upon which we can act as
one in budgeting, implementing programmes and policies and monitoring the
outcomes of our work.

Furthermore, a national plan will help focus our collective mind on long-
term challenges facing our country and provide clear frameworks to take the
tough decisions today that will enable us to realise a better country
tomorrow.

Over time, all governments develop institutional rigidities that need to be
shaken from time to time. The development of a coherent strategic plan at
national level is also about breaking through the walls that we erect
between departments, spheres, agencies and institutions.

Our Constitution implores us to work together in pursuit of the ideals it
so eloquently articulates. The Green Paper on planning describes an
institutional framework that aims to get us away from the perspective of
where we each work alone, striving to achieve what is otherwise an outcome
also dependent on the input of others in government and, indeed, society at
large.

We need to elevate the discussion and the style of work to what needs to be
done collectively and variously to get our country working. This approach
has been welcomed by all metro mayors, provincial premiers, Salga and
government Ministers.

The question regarding what we are planning for has arisen frequently in
discussions leading to the finalisation of the Green Paper. Our
Constitution sets out the raison d’être of our government and the South
African state per se. It is to build a prosperous, nonracial and nonsexist
democracy, where the opportunities available to each South African are free
from the shadow of history.

When we attempt to describe the South Africa we desire in 20 years’ time,
it is remarkable how similar the aspirations of all South Africans are. A
long-term vision can serve as a unifying tool to get us to confront the
more difficult challenges we face in the immediacy of current pursuits.

A long-term vision and plan for the country is the first output described
in the Green Paper. The National Planning Commission, NPC, chaired by the
Minister in the Presidency - National Planning Commission and consisting of
commissioners from outside of government, is proposed to develop the
national plan.

The Green Paper emphasises that Cabinet is the seat of policy in the
executive and hence the National Planning Commission’s role is advisory.
The NPC, unencumbered by the constraints of individual Ministries and not
beholden to short-term interests, can help develop a national plan that is
genuinely long-term in nature, technically consistent and reflective of the
broader aspirations of society.

The national plan will then go through a process within government before
it is adopted by Cabinet in session with representatives of the other two
spheres of government. A ministerial committee on planning is proposed to
provide collective political support to the Minister for planning and to
help process the outputs of the commission before they are tabled in
Cabinet. It is envisaged that the President and Deputy President will be ex
officio members of both the commission and the ministerial committee.

The Green Paper recognises that the five-yearly Medium-Term Strategic
Framework is a document of the executive, drawing on the electoral mandate
of the ruling party. Similarly, the annual programmes of action are
processed and adopted by the executive. It is proposed in the Green Paper
that the process whereby these two important documents are put together is
co-ordinated by the Minister in the Presidency responsible for planning.

Again, the ministerial committee on planning will provide political input
into this process, drawing on the work of clusters, departments, state-
owned enterprises, provinces and municipalities.

Planning is a dynamic function that requires constant updating, taking on
board new data, research and perspectives to nudge policy to achieve better
longer-term outcomes. There will be a need for continuous research on cross-
cutting topics that affect our medium- and long-term development plans,
such as demographic change, climate change, energy sources, water security,
food security and long-term defence capabilities.

The Minister for planning will work with that commission and relevant
clusters, and departments will draw on the excellent research capacity that
exists in the country to produce a series of baseline studies and research
papers on these types of cross-cutting topics that would help shift policy
to take account of long-term trends and objectives.
Apartheid planning was effective at distorting the country’s spatial
geography, with major economic and social consequences. The creation of
dormitory townships far from places of work and the Bantustan system is a
legacy that will not go away on its own. It requires a concerted plan
informed by a spatial planning framework. One of the functions of the
planning process is to develop high-level spatial perspectives to guide
infrastructure investment and other socioeconomic programmes.

A small, professional secretariat to be called the national planning
secretariat is to be established in the Presidency to support the work of
this entire cluster of activities. The secretariat will serve at the
institutional centre for strategic planning in government and will work
closely with technical experts in institutions such as the Development Bank
of Southern Africa, the CSIR, Human Sciences Research Council, HSRC,
universities and other think tanks.

We do not envisage a top-down planning process through which the Planning
Ministry employs thousands of people who review every plan by every
department, province or municipality. We envisage a dynamic and iterative
process of strategic engagement that shapes the plans and resource
allocations of government departments, spheres, state-owned enterprises and
agencies through the provision of clear, coherent priorities.

The planning function would not, on its own, be responsible for co-
ordinating the implementation of the national plan. Cabinet would
collectively be responsible for implementation. The Minister, the
commission and the planning secretariat, working closely with the Minister
in the Presidency - Performance Monitoring and Evaluation and
Administration, would from time to time report on progress in implementing
government plans and strategic frameworks and advise government on gaps in
implementing key priorities.

A long-term plan for this country is only implementable if it is
technically sound, coherent and has a broad societal buy-in. It has to
avoid the risk of being, like motherhood and apple pie, full of broad
niceties that everyone agrees to. It has to go beyond that by tackling the
key challenges and confronting the difficult trade-offs we face as a
society. For this to work, a national plan has to find resonance beyond
party-political structures and even beyond government.

The institution best placed to facilitate such a broad societal input into
a planning process is Parliament. It is for this reason that robust
engagement, taking into account the views of broader stakeholders, should
be led by Parliament. For a start, this Green Paper, while not a national
plan, should also be subjected to broad consultation and scrutiny.

We have a unique opportunity under the leadership of President Zuma to
change the way in which we work, to raise our game in terms of planning and
performance and to achieve better results as a people. Within government we
have an opportunity to break the institutional rigidities that seem to have
cemented over the past 15 years.

Such change is critical if we are to make a meaningful impact on people’s
lives in this five-year term, given the economic uncertainties we face and
the resource constraints confronting us. Above all, we will need to do so
informed by who and where we are as a nation, and who and where we want to
be in more than a decade.

The development of a long-term national plan and better strategic planning
in general would help align government’s efforts towards achieving the type
of society that we all desire in the future. This Green Paper is an attempt
to open up the discussion on the institutional arrangements – the “how” and
“what” of national strategic planning. We urge all South Africans to become
part of the process of debate and engagement on this important initiative.
We look forward to Parliament’s leadership role in structuring such an
engagement.

We remain fervently of the view that working together towards a clear set
of goals we can do more to raise the quality of life of all of our people.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, the DA appreciates this
initiative and the manner of its introduction to political parties, and
also that it amounts to an unfamiliar admission of failure. The duration of
this debate, however, detracts from the value and importance of this very
important initiative.

The debate around the national planning strategy is currently essentially
abstract and esoteric as the appointment of the national planning
commission and the development of a 2025 vision will be key to its success.
Recent presidential appointments and the manner in which they have been
made hardly bode well for the appointment of an appropriately diverse group
of people with the appropriate experience and expertise.

The appointments of the SABC interim board, the Judicial Services
Commission and the Chief Justice are instructive in this regard.
Furthermore, the status of this Ministry currently has a veneer of
credibility due to the image of the incumbent Minister. Will this hold in
the future under the leadership of someone like Julius Malema, for example?


The determination of a national vision must be inclusive and transparent.
If it is to be a vision for “our people” and not “all the people”, it will
be stillborn. Eventually, this means that what we need is a national
vision, and not a nationalist vision. Therefore, the vision and planning
model must be based on the outcome of a national debate on what kind of
country we want our children and their children to live in, in 2025. This
we must base on the nation’s needs and aspirations, recognising that
6,3 million South Africans voted for opposition parties. This vision cannot
simply reflect that of the ANC’s Polokwane conference.

Minister, you would do well also to recognise that the road to hell is
paved with good and bad intentions, and that national, international and
economic realities determine what can realistically be achieved.

The current lack of cohesive nationhood is caused by the cognitive
dissonance brought about by the perceptions and experiences of citizens
regarding the current state of governance and service delivery in our
country, despite perennial ANC electoral promises.

For example, the political and administrative meltdown in the North West
province has been ascribed to the ANC provincial executive’s factional
deployment of incompetent cadres, nepotism, corruption and secret looting.
I assume and trust that this was not planned.

Dié stand van sake kan net toegeskryf word aan power politieke leierskap,
swak dissipline en onverantwoordelikheid in die Staatsdiens.

Minister Chabane het onlangs gesê dat die nodige strukture en maatreëls om
sulke mense vas te vat, reeds bestaan – ons stem saam – en dat sy
ministerie uiterste gevalle na sulke strukture sal verwys. Die vraag is: En
dan wat?

Julle twee kan beplan en monitor so veel as wat julle wil; indien julle nie
die inkoop, ondersteuning en vertroue van die President, the Kabinet, die
Parlement, die provinsies, en die munisipaliteite kry nie, sal die hele
inisiatief in duie stort. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This state of affairs can only be ascribed to poor political leadership,
bad discipline and irresponsible actions within the Public Service.

Minister Chabane recently said that the necessary structures and measures
to clamp down on such people already exist – we agree with him – and that
his Ministry will refer extreme cases to such structures. The question
remains: And what then?

The two of you can plan and monitor all you want; unless you get the
President, Cabinet, Parliament, the provinces, and the municipalities to
buy into, support and have confidence in it, the whole initiative will
collapse.]

Planning priorities will require trade-offs, and careful arbitration will
be required, both within the tripartite alliance, as well as between the
public and private sectors.

This will be complicated by the widening division between government, trade
unions and the private sector. It is imperative that trade unions
understand the often unpalatable realities and also take the private sector
on board with them by creating transparency and developing trust.

Both sectors need to understand the role of the developmental state; it is
essentially a helping hand, and not an iron fist. For example, government
promised 500 000 new jobs by the end of the year, on the one hand. This is
just not materialising, while on the other hand a war of words has
developed between government and the DA on the matter of banning labour
broking.

This R23 billion sector is actually creating jobs, of which, though
initially casual, 30% become converted into decent jobs after an average of
eight months. Surely in this economic climate and considering the
unacceptably high rate of unemployment, you should be planning on how to
improve and regulate this industry rather than shutting it down.

My recent visits to sites of poor service delivery confirm that poor
planning and performance monitoring result in poor governance and service
delivery.

This state of affairs will compromise the R5 billion capital infrastructure
investment in the King Sabata Dalindyebo Municipality, which is intended to
address the collapse of the infrastructure network and should not only
ensure proper service delivery, but should also assist in attracting
economic investment to an extremely depressed area.

In conclusion, the DA supports this initiative in principle and appeals to
all concerned to support it honestly and to commit to ensuring its success.
For example, the newly appointed chief operations officer in the
Presidency, the spinning Jessie Duarte, will have to confine herself to
reality and not become a reincarnation of Aesop’s Fables.

This initiative will mean that the ANC government will have to be prepared
to take tough decisions and address the issue of constraining legislation
to make a difference. Are you prepared to do so, hon Minister?

In conclusion, we appreciate the recognition that this House needs to be
informed.  Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Rev H M DANDALA: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon Minister and
members, when we reflect on the past 15 years, with all the progress that
has been made, we agree that we have not lived up to our full potential as
a country.

Our governments, in their successes, failed to reach the many goals that
they had set for themselves. This was not because there were no resources,
as most government departments would each year return funds to the fiscus,
but mainly due to incoherent planning and a lack of co-ordination.

Cope welcomes the much anticipated clarity that the national planning
Ministry has provided in its Green Paper regarding its mandate and how it
will function. In seeking to right the wrongs of the past – as in those of
apartheid – it is indeed heartening that government also recognises the
injustice of punishing the people of South Africa for mistakes made by
recent governments and their institutions, such as the recent electricity
price hikes by Eskom and that to rectify these, long-term planning has to
be embraced that will guide not only the government, but also the South
Africans, in the challenge of rebuilding their country.

The wisdom of defining where one is going and how one will get there can
never be overstated. The operative word that the Minister uses in this
process is inclusivity. It will require a conscious paradigm shift for all
South Africans to move from partisanship to a sense of national
consciousness that seeks to design a process that will take all to such a
common destiny and a sense of common good.

The Ministry in the Presidency is the custodian of this collective desire
of the people of South Africa. The ideas outlined in the Green Paper have
to be examined in an open spirit and through transparent processes that in
the end will legitimise them in the eyes of all South Africans.

We urge the Minister to ensure that this commitment is not compromised. The
people of South Africa must be assured that this process will not be used
to stifle innovation and that all efforts will be made to ensure authentic
inclusivity and that, indeed, the process will not be used merely as a tool
for co-option. I thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Speaker, hon colleagues, in the last century, the concept of
state planning was often very contentious, especially with the Soviet
Union, its satellites and fellow travellers giving the concept a very bad
name.

Planning, however, is of course an intrinsic part of government. As the
saying goes, “If you fail to plan, you are actually planning to fail.” The
issue then is not whether you engage in planning, but rather the “when”,
“how” and “what” of planning.

The IFP believes there is much to agree with in the proposed National
Planning Commission. We endorse the inclusivity and nonpartisanship the
Minister spoke of. We support the eschewal of “commandism”; we agree on the
need to avoid institutionalising bureaucracy. But really, in the end,
success or failure will depend in a large part on the composition of the
commission and government’s response to what it has to say.

In respect of appointments, we are pleased that government is seemingly
intending to desist from employing party hacks or rewarding narrow sectoral
interests. But equally, of course, it is critical that government listens
to what the commission has to say. If the intention is that government
avoids being trapped by its own institutional perceptions, then it has to
be open to new ideas.

So, colleagues, this is an important initiative, and it is one that we
support in principle. We wish the Minister well. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: The ID certainly welcomes the creation of this Ministry as
we believe it is vital that we adopt a long-term approach towards South
Africa’s development. As recent events have shown, the world around us is
changing fast and we need to be alive to the challenges and opportunities
that this change will bring.

The ID implores you, Minister, to give due cognisance to the fact that our
model of development needs to be radically restructured to deal with an
impending natural resource crunch that the global economy will be subjected
to over the next few decades.

It is, therefore, vital that the National Strategy for Sustainable
Development is driven by your Ministry and that, as Thomas Friedman states
in his recent book, “our ability to outgreen other countries ultimately
leads to us outcompeting them.”

The ID will enjoy exploring this and other issues with you as we develop a
truly comprehensive national plan. I thank you.

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Mr Speaker, Deputy President and hon members, the UDM
welcomes the new-found commitment by government to pursue a more holistic
and integrated policy and service delivery. This is a longstanding concern
of the UDM. As we have argued on countless occasions, the country’s most
pressing challenges - from unemployment to crime and poverty - require
multipronged and innovative solutions. Even among related government
departments, for example the economic cluster, there are countless
discrepancies in objectives and approaches.

Our concern with the national planning strategy is twofold. Firstly, there
is an issue of accountability. Existing structures and elected officials
cannot simply become the mindless pawns of a central state bureaucracy. The
autonomy and accountability of existing structures as enshrined in the
Constitution must be protected. It would be a sad day if elected
institutions at local and provincial levels became mere cogs in the
national government machine. That was never the intention of our
Constitution.

Secondly, there is the question of consultation. Any plan that claims to be
a national strategy must have the broad and informed support of the whole
nation, which means it will need to be widely debated.

South Africans have grown tired of a distant style of governance that
decides for them what they need and how they will get it. A national
strategy that takes a one-size-fits-all approach would be disastrous. The
rural village in Limpopo that receives unnecessary housing when they are in
the midst of a water crisis is an example.

The UDM supports the initiative. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Speaker, die VF Plus verwelkom natuurlik, soos
enige ander politieke party, die inisiatiewe geneem deur die agb Minister.
Dit is ’n positiewe stap in die regte rigting. Daar is ongelukkig ’n
negatiewe aspek daarby, en ons moet sê dat dit eintlik ’n erkenning is van
die regering dat daar nie eintlik beplanning in die verlede was nie.

Selfs na 15 jaar van regeer, neem die ANC nou eers ’n besluit en besef nou
dat daar behoorlike beplanning moet wees.

Ons het nie twyfel aan die bevoegdhede van die agb Minister nie; ons sal
egter moet kyk hoe dit in die praktyk gaan eindig. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Speaker, the FF Plus, like any other party,
naturally welcomes the initiatives taken by the hon Minister. It is a
positive step in the right direction. There is unfortunately also a
negative aspect attached to it, and that, we must add, is an
acknowledgement from the government that there was in fact no planning in
the past.

Even after 15 years of governance, the ANC is only deciding and realising
now that there should be proper planning.

We do not doubt the capabilities of the hon Minister; however, we will have
to see how it will end in practice.]

As the former Minister of Finance, I think the Minister will understand
when I say, “Talk is cheap but money buys the whiskey”. We will check it.
Thanks.

Mr S N SWART: Speaker, hon Minister, there can be no doubt that challenges
such as climate change, energy supply, food security and structural
inequalities such as systemic poverty require longer-term planning. The
absence of a coherent and clearly articulated long-term strategic plan has
negatively impacted upon government’s ability to provide clear and
consistent plans across all sectors.

The ACDP trusts that this Green Paper will start to address this matter and
put an end to short-term planning and lack of co-ordination that has seen
many good policies flounder due to defective implementation. It is also
necessary to involve independent experts, strategic thinkers and think
tanks to determine the country’s long-term planning priorities and to draw
up a national strategic plan.

The ACDP appreciates that this document is intended to elicit a national
discussion and that wide consultation will be held before mapping out a
long-term vision for the country. We support this initiative, Minister, and
we will participate in its process. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T A MUFAMADI: Mr Speaker, I realise that on the speakers’ list I’m
supposed to speak Afrikaans. For the record I just want to say that
Tshivenda is not Afrikaans.

Let me first express our appreciation as the ANC for the visionary
leadership of President Jacob Zuma and his administration. Not only did
they show political leadership, but, most importantly, commitment and
decisiveness, impressive planning, co-ordination and monitoring at the
centre of a developmental state as priority number 1. This is in line with
our objectives of realising the goals as set out in the national democratic
revolution.

Secondly, we highly appreciate the consultative process by the Office of
the President on soliciting views and advice from structures on how best
government can improve its delivery systems and therefore build the
required capacity. This process has allowed the broader South African
society to come forward and participate in the making of a new South Africa
and its administration. This is a position that we, as the ANC, have always
believed in - that it is the people’s wisdom and their collective
intellectual capacity that a better South Africa can be founded upon. This
is a South Africa where nonracialism, nonsexism, democracy and prosperity
can be cherished.

Let me respond to some of the issues that have been raised. It was said
that the National Planning Commission’s vision should not be based only on
a collective or a collection of a few individuals. But the document itself,
the Green Paper, does envisage a process through which we seek to mobilise
all the people of our country, and I believe opposition parties should be
part and parcel of the people of this country. They are, therefore, invited
to participate in making an input and enriching this document that is
tabled before us.
There is an issue around service delivery matters that we also hear about
in terms of some provinces and the country as a whole. This document begins
by admitting that in the past 15 years, whilst we have made serious inroads
in reducing poverty and creating job opportunities in the country, there
remain glaring disparities between the rich and the poor. As the leading
and governing party, we did not need anybody to tell us about this.

We came out, and this document does speak to these issues. Therefore, the
issue of long-term planning is not something we are thinking about today;
it is but part and parcel of strengthening the capacity of government in
order to respond to the challenges that we need to respond to as of now.

This document also says what it is that we need to do. We need a coherent
plan to achieve the ideals enshrined in our Constitution. Experience has
proven to us that the legacy of apartheid cannot and will not self-correct
because it requires fundamental changes that not only the market forces can
respond to. The state must lead in developmental initiatives. The state
must provide leadership. We agree with the proposal in the document that
the Presidency cannot shirk its responsibilities of leadership.

In terms of the ownership and leadership of the programmes of government,
we also agree that Parliament must ensure that society as a whole
participates in ensuring that we have the necessary capacity to respond to
the challenges that we are confronted with, especially now under the
current global circumstances. Under these circumstances, we are expected to
achieve more with the little resources we have; and indeed we must achieve
more.

The hon member from the DA also raised the issue about North West, saying
that some of the failures in the provincial government and local
municipalities are as a result of corrupt activities of ANC councillors. I
must put it on record in this House that wherever the ANC acts it acts in
the interests of the people. It is the ANC that discovers and exposes
corrupt activities and acts accordingly. [Applause.]

In terms of the 500 000 job opportunities which the President has directed
that we should have created by the end of December, I must say to those who
want to say that labour broking has actually created job opportunities, it
cannot be that casualisation of jobs can be regarded as a safety network
for our people. [Applause.] It cannot be that exploitation in a new form of
modern slavery can be regarded as job opportunities for our people. Labour
broking is nothing but a new form of exploitation, and it must be known as
such. [Applause.] Thank you, Mr Speaker.

Debate concluded.

    ESTABLISHMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER AND REPORT ON THE GREEN
                    PAPER ON NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLANNING

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President,
with leave, I move without notice:

  That the House establishes an ad hoc committee to consider and report on
  the Green Paper on National Strategic Planning - September 2009
  (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 4 September 2009, p 705),
  the Committee to -


(1)   consist of 14 members in the following proportions: ANC 8; DA 8; ...
        DA 2 ...

[Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I think that the DA would far prefer the first
suggestion by the hon Chief Whip.

The SPEAKER: Continue, hon Chief Whip.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We are generous. Let me continue:

        ... ANC 8; DA 2; Cope 1; IFP 1; and other parties 2;

     2) exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist it in carrying
        out its task; and


     3) report to the House by no later than 22 October 2009.

Agreed to.

                      IMPROVING GOVERNMENT PERFORMANCE

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION AND
ADMINISTRATION: Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, hon members, earlier this year, on the occasion of the tabling
of our Budget Vote before this House, we committed ourselves to returning
and providing details of our approach to improving government performance.

We had committed ourselves to returning in this month of September. Today I
am pleased and honoured to address this House having kept our promise,
honoured our commitment and met our deadline. This, in our view, is a
demonstration of government’s commitment to ensuring that we improve and
monitor our performance and simplify government’s work and processes.
I present to you our approach as contained in the Green Paper, which we
have released for public comment and discussion, entitled Improving
Government Performance: Our Approach. The paper outlines, we believe, the
mandate of the Ministry for performance monitoring and evaluation and how
we will carry out our function.

The paper describes the process we have developed to ensure that we
translate our mandate into a clear set of outcomes and crucial output
measures that will help us to keep track of our commitment to deliver
better services to our people.

In a conscious effort to address interactions and a continuum between
planning and performance monitoring, the two Ministries within the
Presidency are both tabling these papers that lay out our views and
approaches. Members will note that we are committed to our joint challenge
to improve the effectiveness of government. As we know, monitoring starts
where planning ends, and planning starts where monitoring ends.

Our government takes the task of planning for our future and improving our
current performance very seriously. The Green Paper on improving government
performance paves the way for our single and focused desire to deliver on
our mandate to the people of South Africa. Government is committed to
ensuring that we have a performance that makes a meaningful impact on the
lives of our people.
Since 1994 we have made very serious and numerous advances. We have also
improved the lives of our people. But we recognise that in some areas our
outcomes have been below standard. Budget increases and expenditure on
services have not always brought the results we wanted or which our people
expected.

We need to understand and accept why we have sometimes not met our
objectives for delivering quality services. Reasons vary from, amongst
other things, a lack of political will, inadequate leadership, management
weaknesses, inappropriate institutional design and misaligned decision-
making. The absence of a strong performance culture with effective rewards
and sanctions has also played a part.

While building on work already done, we need to focus more on positive
outcomes as we use our time, money and management. Our approach is to now
have a single-minded focus on driving outcomes. We also need to understand
the key steps in the delivery chain that will allow us to deliver on these
outcomes. Then we will develop a set of simple measures to assess on a
regular basis that we are on track in delivering the outcomes. This sounds
straightforward. But it takes great policy insight and expertise to
identify those crucial steps that bring about the improvements we are
seeking.

Based on the already approved Medium-Term Strategic Framework, we will
identify 20 to 25 outcomes which will be the focus of our work to assist
government to achieve its objectives. The question then arises: How are we
going to assess progress and success? For each sector, an individual
Minister, group of Ministers or cluster of Ministers or MECs will be
receiving a letter from the President outlining expected and agreed
outcomes and the measures we will be using to assess success. There will be
focus meetings between the President and the political leadership sector to
assess progress on a six-monthly basis.

In each sector, political principals will call together a service delivery
forum of key people who are involved in delivery in the sector. Each forum
will negotiate a delivery agreement between all role players that will
outline the roles and contributions that each will make to the achievement
of the outcomes. We see these forums as enormously important in mobilising
the wider South African society to work together in achieving our
developmental goals. We are especially concerned with what we have
identified as priority areas - education, health, safety, economic growth
with the creation of decent jobs and rural development. We believe that if
we deliver and achieve desirable outcomes on these priorities in a focused
manner, we will make a meaningful impact.

To illustrate our point, we are now going to describe in more detail the
approach we envisage taking in the health sector, for example. We should
provide the type of health services that support our citizens to lead
longer, healthier lives. It is borne out by statistics that life expectancy
has dropped significantly in the past few years. While we recognise that
there are many approaches to improving our health system, we will be
selecting outcomes that can provide an adequate focus to drive change in
behaviour within the overall system.

We need to turn our hospitals into functional institutions and increase the
number of hospitals and clinics that get a positive audit based on a
national set of norms. These audit norms will include health outcomes as
well as operational measures.

We will also ensure that our hospital managers have the right to make
decisions that will enable them to manage their institutions effectively.
Hospital managers need to be able to buy the appropriate medicine, fix
equipment, hire the right staff and fire staff, if there is a need.

To assist us to achieve our goals, we recommend the creation of a delivery
unit to respond to a few carefully selected areas of blockages in delivery.
It will partner with appropriate delivery institutions in working towards a
turnaround strategy. More importantly, its interventions will create models
for improving delivery that can be followed by others.

The delivery unit will consist of a small team of experienced officials who
can facilitate change at a national, provincial or local level. The unit
will analyse failures in delivery and lessons from successes.

In partnership with all relevant role-players, it will identify, at most,
five areas where it will partner with political heads and officials to
drive change that brings significant and sustained improvements in
delivery.

We would like to emphasise that our approach is not to police anyone but to
work together to find solutions and identify problems on time without
waiting for the Auditor-General’s reports. We will collectively introduce
an agreed-upon set of interventions to assist in areas that have been
collectively identified. It should be clear that this measure will not mean
the unit has to assume responsibility for what needs to be done but rather
it has to facilitate delivery.

We recognise that this approach will require a principled and firm
leadership, making tough choices and holding people accountable for
delivery. We remain resolute in our commitment to improve the quality of
life for all the people of our country, especially the poor.

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity and make an appeal to the hon
members to engage with the Green Paper and make comments and submissions
that will help us consolidate our mandate. Similarly, we invite the people
of South Africa to make submissions and engage with the public process this
institution will embark on.

We would also like to thank colleagues and the people who participated in
assisting us to put together the assessment of the work we are supposed to
do and bringing together the Green Paper. This includes institutions and
individuals. We would also like to thank the people from departments –
almost all departments have been central to putting together these
proposals. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairman, the DA welcomes the new,
more focused desire of government to deliver on its mandate, as well as its
candid assessment that it must become more effective in its actions, and
that it must expand access to services and improve the quality of services.

Government’s candour in understanding and accepting why it has, in the
past, not met its objectives in delivering quality services is also
welcomed, albeit an indictment of itself.

The document acknowledges that the reasons include lack of political will,
inadequate leadership, weak management, inappropriate institutional design,
misaligned decision-making and, importantly, the absence of a strong
performance culture with effective rewards and sanctions. The last point is
important as a performance management system works only if there is a
mechanism to hold responsible persons to account.

The Minister states upfront that the government’s performance has to be
guided by a few non-negotiable principles: leadership making tough
decisions, co-operation across the three levels of government, a
partnership between government and civil society, transparency which
demands truthfulness, dealing with limited funding and resources, and a
skilled and motivated workforce. We endorse these principles.

There has often been, however, a disjuncture between these guiding
principles and government’s past behaviour. First is the acknowledged need
for co-operation across the three levels of government. Co-operation is not
co-option.

In respect to the performance management system, government’s role is to
indicate the required outcome and framework, but government needs to
respect provinces’ ability to mould policy according to a province’s
political mandate to achieve the outcome. Here, mechanisms need to be
developed to enhance co-operation.

In respect of accountability throughout the service chain, we welcome the
shift to focus on outcome, but we must walk the talk. Eskom’s agreed
outcome, surely, is a sustainable supply of electricity, yet when the
lights went out across South Africa, no one was suspended, sanctioned or
fired - from the Minister downward.

In exercising accountability, we welcome the agreed need for increased
measurement and management instruments internal and external to government.
Enhanced external citizen oversight can only be achieved, as the model
suggests, by increased publication of outcome data. Critical, also, is
improved data architecture. We endorse the statement that the proposed
management system can only function if there is credible, validated, timely
information on outcomes and other elements of the results chain.

We endorse also the statement that there should be a free flow of data
rather than the current situation in which data is not adequately shared.
Ironically, this means that crime statistics, a key police department
outcome, have to be credible, validated - and, importantly - released
timeously.

Ironically, also, we are still waiting for the Presidency to release a
report on the 2009 development indicators mid-term review - key data to
enable us to measure government’s performance in a number of important
areas. Yet the report is long overdue, and questions submitted to the
Presidency remain unanswered.
In any change management, monitoring and evaluation presents challenges,
none more so than achieving compliance with regard to people, leadership
and a shift in Public Service management culture that must take place.
Tough, principled leadership is required that walks the talk, that requires
accountability and sanction. This is difficult, even more so when the
current predominant culture is one of cadre deployment, cronyism and
nepotism.

In one of the examples in the document illustrating how the system works,
the Department of Basic Education is cited. One of the key activities to
achieve an outcome is teachers in class, on time, for seven hours a day.
Here’s the rub: Will government challenge Sadtu on this and will inspectors
be allowed once again to re-enter schools and do their monitoring work?

Finally, let me comment on the link with the intergovernmental budgeting
agenda. We welcome the Minister of Finance’s signalled need for a
comprehensive expenditure review. The point made in this section is that
strategic and long-term development plans create incentives for organs of
state to create plans they may not be able to afford in their budget.

This is particularly apt at present when government is struggling to
maintain fiscal prudence in the face of declining tax revenues and
burgeoning expenditure pressures. Debates around topics like the national
retirement fund and, more recently, the national health insurance are
particularly apt at this point in time.

Monitoring and evaluation is about promoting excellence. The essential
precepts to achieve this are set out in the Minister’s document, but the
Minister in government must realise that these precepts can’t be treated
like a smorgasbord. To be successful, there has to be a commitment to all
the principles enunciated. Government has to walk the talk. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Rev H M DANDALA: Hon Chairman and all the hon members, Cope once again
acknowledges that the steps outlined in the monitoring and evaluation
Ministry’s paper are steps in the right direction. South Africans need to
be assured that all public servants are held accountable, including
Ministers, in their implementation of Vision 2025.

Our failures as a country, often characterised by high levels of corruption
and failure to meet set targets, have to be eliminated. With the
President’s promise that his administration will not tolerate mediocrity
and corruption, it is critical and essential that this department works
swiftly to increase a sense of accountability in the Public Service while,
at the same time, engendering an acceptable work ethic.

While the Green Paper on National Strategic Planning provides South
Africans with adequate content to discuss and deliberate on, there is a
greater need to pitch our standards higher when it comes to implementation.
We cannot just be satisfied with the mantras and slogans which have
purported to put people first and yet have not done much to put people
first in actual service delivery.

We affirm the approach that we will seek to measure delivery, not only in
quantitative terms but also in quality of output and its impact on
envisaged outcomes. For instance, the quality of the RDP houses will
forever remain an indictment of how we South Africans scale and measure the
worth and dignity of our people. We would, therefore, wish to suggest from
the outset that not only will the envisaged commission do the planning, but
also that a similarly independent structure involving major stakeholders
from civil society assists in monitoring the implementation of these
performance principles.

It is imperative that this process involves our people at all levels of
society so that we will have not only an all-embracing buy-in, but also
meaningful monitoring of this process by the people of South Africa. It is
imperative that even at local government level ways are found to make our
people feel that they are monitoring that which is being done in their name
and for them. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Hon Chairperson, though government has indeed
achieved much over the past 15 years, its performance in many areas has
been unsatisfactory. Many departments and institutions have failed in their
attempts to deliver to ordinary South Africans and to fulfil the duties
that they have been mandated to fulfil.

The service delivery protests which have been experienced in many parts of
the country are evidence that the people are fed up with this unacceptably
bad service they are receiving. Overspending and underspending, as well as
mismanagement, are just some of the crises which need to be solved if
government is to improve its performance. For this to happen, the oversight
and monitoring mechanisms must be improved, and managers and staff who do
not perform their duties properly must be dealt with accordingly. They must
not be allowed to continue in their positions if they are not performing,
and they must be held accountable for their failures.

A good starting point in this regard would be to improve and strengthen the
mechanisms tasked with monitoring and evaluating performance. The IFP
supports this initiative. It is critical to the success of government. I
thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chair, the ID welcomes the new Cabinet structure and
believes that if it can function effectively, it will hold the promise of
delivering on the aspirations of our people. This new structure, however,
also brings with it the threat that there could be a duplication of roles,
turf battles and institutional confusion around who is responsible for
what.

The ID, therefore, hopes that this new Ministry will take as one of its
tasks the monitoring of how effectively all the Ministries work together
and consider institutional changes wherever necessary.

The ID also welcomes the emphasis this Ministry has put on the outcomes of
policies as opposed to simply outputs, particularly in the areas of
education and health. We therefore look forward to a productive
relationship with the Minister, and we hope that he will be open to the
idea of us as MPs being the eyes and ears of his department by bringing
some of our constituents’ problems with government departments to his door.
I thank you.

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Chairperson, hon Deputy President and hon members, the UDM
cannot fault the intention to improve government performance. South
Africans have become deeply frustrated with poor service delivery.
Communities have been wracked by violent protests.

We have also witnessed the personal tragedies of individuals, such as that
of the young man in KwaZulu-Natal, who recently committed suicide because
government repeatedly and maliciously failed to perform its duty of issuing
him with an identity document.

The UDM welcomes the Minister’s willingness to enter into a debate about
the roles and functions of this new portfolio. We would like to caution
against certain dangers. Firstly, monitoring performance should not mean
that we set minimum standards and then tolerate mediocrity, as long as it
meets these minimum standards.

A culture of excellence and continual improvement must become the hallmark
of governance. The track record of Sars over the past decade serves as a
shining example of what can be achieved.

Secondly, the existence of such a monitoring mechanism within the executive
should not dilute the role of Parliament to exercise oversight over
government. We hope that the Minister will foster a fruitful ...
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, ek wil vir die Minister sê dat ek dink as
daar een ding is wat die mense van Suid-Afrika verwelkom, is dit dat daar
behoorlike monitering en evaluering gaan wees van dienslewering.

Ek wil vir die agb Minister sê dat hy eintlik ’n verrassing gaan kry, want
hy gaan by party plekke wil evaluering doen en dan gaan hy agterkom dat
daar niks is om te evalueer of te monitor nie, want daar is nie
dienslewering nie.

Ek wil ook vir die agb Minister sê dat ons daadwerklik sal moet kyk dat
hierdie inisiatief tande het. Dit help nie die agb President Zuma, bring ’n
verrassingsbesoek aan ’n munisipaliteit van die burgemeester wat vroeg
geloop het, en dan kom die agb Minister op televisie en sê daar is nie
opgetree teen die burgemeester nie, want niemand het ’n klag gelê nie.
Minister, u moet nie wag dat daar ’n klag gelê word nie, u moet optree.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I want to say to the Minister that if
there is one thing that the people of South Africa would welcome, it would
be the proper monitoring and evaluation of service delivery.

I want to say to the hon Minister that he will really be surprised when he
does evaluation at some places and will then realise that there is nothing
to evaluate or to monitor because service delivery is nonexistent.

I also want to say to the Minister that we will really have to see to it
that this initiative has the teeth. It doesn’t help if the hon President
Zuma pays a surprise visit to a municipality where the mayor has left
early, after which the hon Minister announces on television that no steps
were taken against this mayor because nobody has lodged a complaint.
Minister, you should not wait for a complaint to be lodged, you should
act.]

To ensure success, you have to be proactive not only reactive. I thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon Chairperson, the ACDP welcomes hon Minister Chabane’s
reported admission that the billions of rands directed at service delivery
since 1994 have not always resulted in better service delivery for
citizens.

The Minister has to know that we appreciate the challenges that he will be
facing when he will be required to demand acceptable outcomes, efficiency,
productivity and value for money from all stakeholders.

The Minister will need courage and great determination to act against or
remove popular nonperforming individuals and replace them, sometimes, with
the not-so-popular but better qualified and able professionals.

The Minister will have to set an example for Public Service supervisors who
have been reluctant to act against their subordinates, who either have
contravened policies or were incompetent.

People out there are demanding service. Hon Minister, we are wishing you
well as you demand quality service delivery for our people. Thank you.

Mr T W NXESI: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President, Ministers and members,
in the recent past, our country has been engulfed with service delivery
protests, and the serious challenges we still face as government were laid
bare from the remotest villages to the urban centres. What was critical to
note during these manifestations of our people’s anger was the absence of
councillors and provincial and national government officials to account to
the people.

Invariably, those that the fingers were pointed at are some of the ANC
cadres whom the ANC assumed would, of necessity, implement ANC policies.
Alas, it was left to the ANC officials to engage directly with our
communities to get to the bottom of their unbridled frustrations.

What these protests have demonstrated in no uncertain terms is the fact
that accountability with regard to nondelivery of services spans across the
three spheres of government, and that no sphere is more or less important
than the other, as provided for in the Constitution. It has brought to the
fore the reality of the serious disjuncture between our spheres of
government.

This brings me to the fledgling Ministry for performance monitoring and
evaluation. As the ANC, we have obviously followed the reams of media space
that have already been spent on this Ministry. Its location in the
Presidency is no mistake - just to remind most of you in this House. Its
centrality, mandate and scope require that location in the Presidency.

It is appropriate that we provide a historical perspective in relation to
the evolution of this critical service delivery-driven instrument. I want
to emphasise, this is an instrument! Firstly, the ANC is a movement with a
proud tradition steeped in evaluation, monitoring and consultation. A
seminal moment in this regard was the congress of the people in Kliptown in
1955, which gave birth to the Freedom Charter. As the late giant of the
revolution and the former president of the ANC, Oliver Tambo, then spelt it
out, and I quote:

  ... because it comes from the people, it remains still a people’s
  Charter, the one basic political statement of our goals to which all
  genuinely democratic and patriotic forces of South Africa adhere.

This vision was reaffirmed in Polokwane where specific and deliberate
evaluation took place over five days. After that exhaustive evaluation,
monitoring and consultation of the ANC policies and governance over the
last 15 years, the ANC was given an overwhelming mandate by the people of
our country in April 2009 to deepen this process.

This evaluation is reflected upon in detail in our election manifesto: the
ANC’s summary policy position. In our view this Ministry is evidence of an
organic evaluation, always consultative and inclusive.

Monitoring, evaluation and performance management are not alien concepts to
the ANC. On the contrary, if in the pursuit of the objectives of the
national democratic revolution we abandon these, the people shall judge us
harshly. This is, therefore, being imbued with the revolutionary morality.
It is our duty to ensure that this fledgling Ministry is given the teeth to
execute this government’s mandate without fear or favour.

The broad objectives are obviously spelt out in the executive summary of
the Green Paper together with the basic steps relating to the outcomes of
performance management. And of particular interest to me - allow me to be
subjective - is the fact that basic education is chosen as an example,
which is where I am coming from.

Informed by these broad objectives, we would like to know from the hon
Minister how he aims to engender a renewed value system and behavioural
changes throughout our Public Service. Currently, as we all know, the
Public Service is being crippled by a lack of work ethic and discipline,
the cancer of corruption and the pervasive culture of entitlement. The ANC
admits that, and that is why it has come up with this particular
instrument.

These human pathologies have had an eroding impact on service delivery.
Furthermore, we need to check whether an audit has been done in relation to
the impact of this major lack of service. Having said that, we appreciate
the critical underpinnings of interventions as provided for in the Green
Paper to be transparent, but more importantly, that interventions will be
corrective rather than punitive. But if necessary, we will have to be hard
on everyone, even on ourselves here in Parliament. If necessary we will
have to impose sanctions because we say this must happen across all spheres
of government. Everyone must be accountable.

Moreover, we are optimistic that the emphasis of a revised paradigm of
service delivery will clearly engender a spirit of dynamism in our civil
society. Certainly, hon Rev Dandala, this will enhance creativity, not
stifle it. This in turn will trickle down to our communities who have
invested their faith in all of us.

The current scenario of oversight and monitoring of portfolio committees
surely emboldens us to raise evidence of deviation from their mandates by
departments and state entities, without encroaching on your turf. We are
raising this as a question, not necessarily as a contestation of space.

As Parliament, we are expected to play our role constructively, not only to
tabulate departments’ achievements and underachievements, but more
critically to assess their impact where our people live.
I want to challenge the opposition, let’s stop continuing like a scratched
CD, talking about cronyism and nepotism. All we have to do is give evidence
and use the law to challenge whatever we are having.
We appreciate the support - not just lamentations – that you, as
opposition, are giving on this one; but we want inputs to improve the
document where there are gaps. We are open to you making inputs and not
lamenting.

There is certainly no intention from the ANC to co-opt anybody, but we are
talking about co-operation. It is in the Constitution and that is the
spirit which this Green Paper is following. We are not going to co-opt you,
but the national policy is there to be implemented by all spheres of
government. You can’t click and choose. [Applause.]

Please do not start talking about sanctions, this and that, and what is
going to be done. Don’t jump the gun. Make inputs so that you put all those
in the document, which we are all going to follow. Thank you.
Debate concluded.

     IBSA CO-ORDINATION WITH REGARD TO INTERNATIONAL AND REGIONAL ISSUES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N B FIHLA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, on Monday and Tuesday, 31 August
and 1 September 2009, India-Brazil-South Africa, Ibsa, foreign Ministers,
meeting in Brasilia, Brazil, affirmed that Ibsa,  as a forum of developing
democracies from three different continents, has become an important
mechanism for strengthening co-ordination with regard to international and
regional issues. This forum fosters South-South co-operation to amplify the
collective voice of the South.

Furthermore, the Minister noted that challenges such as the international
financial and economic crises require a co-ordinated approach and
partnership response that involves both developed and developing countries.

The ANC, therefore, will continue to work with other countries to promote
the transformation of the global order away from unilateralism and
conflict. We will indeed continue to seek a path of hope and human
solidarity. I thank you. [Applause.]

   CALL FOR EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR MANUAL TAX RETURNS BECAUSE OF STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr D T GEORGE (DA): Deputy Speaker, yesterday, employees of the SA Revenue
Service, Sars, embarked on industrial action in pursuit of a wage increase,
which is continuing today. The DA supports the right of employees to take
appropriate industrial action. This right, however, must not interfere with
the rights of others.

Our economy is in its deepest recession in living memory and Sars performs
a crucial function in its collection of the income that is required by
government to function effectively, and in its activities at border posts
to ensure that our tariff regime is properly implemented. This function is
to the benefit of all South Africans, especially given that we will
experience a significant revenue shortfall this year.

The deadline for individual taxpayers to submit their manual tax returns is
next Friday, 18 September 2009. Many taxpayers must make use of tax offices
across the country to assist them with completing their documentation, and
take leave to do this. Reports indicate that service at Sars offices across
the country has virtually ground to a halt.

The rights of hardworking taxpayers must not be ignored in this dispute.
The DA calls on Sars to extend the manual submission date by at least one
day for each day of the strike. This will demonstrate that Sars is
sensitive to the needs of its customers, many of whom simply cannot afford
to sit and wait for a service to which they are entitled. Thank you.

      SUPPORT FOR ENDEAVOURS TO OBLIGE JSC TO PROBE CHARGES OF POSSIBLE
                      MISCONDUCT AGAINST JUSTICE HLOPHE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M S SHILOWA (Cope): Deputy Speaker, very small wrong turns can have
disastrous consequences for a nascent and still very fragile democracy.

Our country, our Constitution, our democracy and our judiciary have not
come out smelling of roses after the odd ruling by the Judicial Service
Commission, JSC, that it will refuse to continue to probe the charges of
misconduct against Justice Hlophe.

In fact, by not fully resolving the issue, the point raised by both
Justices Jafta and Nkabinde remains unanswered, while the credence of what
Justice Hlophe said appears to have been accepted. This is juristically
untenable.

At a more fundamental level, the question of whether Justice Hlophe had
indeed been given a political mandate to approach the two justices
privately and, as was alleged, to intimidate them, remains unanswered.

Cope, therefore, supports the endeavour by Freedom Under Law to approach
the courts to assess objectively whether or not the JSC fulfilled its
mandate to look at the issues as raised by them. The law has to take its
course.

We, therefore, commend Freedom Under Law for raising these issues of great
legal importance. When there are two versions of an event, there is a duty
to determine where the truth lies. There cannot be a correct version by
Justice Hlophe and another correct version by Justices Nkabinde and Jafta;
only one has to emerge. Thank you. [Applause.]

   IMPLEMENTATION OF IMMUNISATION AND MEDICATION PROGRAMME DURING NATIONAL
                              CHILD HEALTH WEEK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P TSHWETE (ANC): Madam Speaker, in order to reduce infant mortality in
our country, the ANC-led government is implementing an immunisation
programme during National Child Health Week. The ANC-led council in the
City of Johannesburg is to offer deworming medication and catch-up
immunisation, and administer vitamin A to children under the age of 12
during National Child Health Week.

The city’s health department also indicated that each child’s road-to-
health chart or clinic card will be checked at each campaign post to ensure
that the child is up to date with the immunisations. If any immunisation
was missed, then it will be administered at the post and be recorded on the
card.

Vitamin A will be given to children from the age of one to five, as this is
essential for eye health and the proper functioning of the immune system,
thus reducing the severity of childhood illnesses.

The ANC-led government will continue to ensure that free medical care is
given to all, with special care for mothers and young children. I thank
you. [Applause.]

     SAPS IMAGE TARNISHED BY HIGH NUMBER OF MEMBERS INVOLVED IN CRIMINAL
                                  ACTIVITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof C T MSIMANG (IFP): Hon Madam Deputy Speaker, the fact that out of the
6 699 police officers who came before disciplinary hearings between 2008
and 2009, 538 were found guilty of the charges against them, including
serious crimes such as murder and rape, is not a good sign and casts
serious doubts on the integrity and reputation of the SAPS.

The public must know that the police officers are not above the law and
that the criminal activities of police officers will not be tolerated. The
SAPS must lead by example, if their integrity and reputation and the
public’s confidence in our police officers are to be restored.

The IFP believes that the Minister must make the effort to determine
exactly how many of the officers who were found guilty were charged and
convicted. The public has the right to know. I thank you.

             CALL FOR REVIEW OF ESKOM’S CURRENT BOARD PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, the choice of South Africa’s
future energy path is one of the biggest determinants of our country’s
economic success or failure, with investments in the new generation plant
locking us in for the next 30 to 40 years.
It is, therefore, vital that all factors are considered when making these
decisions, including such priorities as job creation, industrial policy,
environmental concerns, effects on our balance of payments and energy
affordability.

The ID, therefore, calls for a review of Eskom’s current board programme as
we don’t believe that Eskom should be allowed to solely determine our
country’s future on this issue.

At the moment the public is being held to ransom by Eskom, with its demand
for a blank cheque for its expansion plans. As a country, we need to decide
on both what these expansion plans should include and the manner in which
they should be funded.

Once again, Eskom has shown no commitment to renewable energy by using the
present financial crisis as an excuse to cancel its solar and wind energy
projects. Its concentrated solar power project has, however, been on the
drawing board for over 10 years and the board has never chosen to allocate
the funds to it.

Its record on energy efficiency is equally dismal, as evidenced by the poor
performance of its solar water heater project. It is now time for the
government and the nation as a whole to thoroughly debate our energy future
and ensure that Eskom is not given free rein to make choices that will
affect all of us for decades to come. I thank you.

       INCREASE IN ACCESS TO INTEGRATED EDUCATION AND TRAINING SYSTEM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A C MASHISHI (ANC): The ANC-led government is working for the
realisation of an integrated system of education and training that provides
equal opportunities to all children irrespective of race, colour, sex,
class, creed, language, age, religion and geographical location.

Last week Wednesday, Statistics SA released a survey that indicated an
increase in children attending school between the ages nought and nine
years. The percentage of children between nought and four years has
increased from 7,4% in 2002 to 16,9% to date; while for the same period,
for the ages between five and nine years it has increased from 79,9% to
88,6%. This survey indicates that our efforts to provide universal access
to education are making good progress and we are on course to realising one
of the Millennium Development. Ke a leboga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

                    POOR MANAGEMENT OF N2 GATEWAY PROJECT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M FIGLAN (DA): The DA is concerned about the manner in which the N2
Gateway Housing Project is being managed. The quality of its houses is in a
shambles and it undermines human dignity. The project is riddled with poor
workmanship, nonpayment of monthly rental fees by tenants, the collapse of
infrastructure, subletting, and so the list goes on. My request to the
Minister is that these deficiencies must be addressed with immediate
effect.

Ndithunywa ngabantu baseJoe Slovo, phaya kwiifleti ezisecaleni ko-N2. Bathi
mandikuxelele ukuba badiniwe kukuphathwa gadalala ngurhulumente kwaye ukuba
uMphathiswa woBonelelo ngeeNdawo zokuHlala akenzi nto ngale nyewe,
sakuqabuka sekophulwe. UMphathiswa ebekhe watyelela kwi-N2 Gateway, ngoko
ke sifuna ukuqonda ukuba undawoni na malunga notyelelo lwakhe. Enkosi
kakhulu. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)
[I have been asked by the residents of Joe Slovo, in the flats along the
N2, to tell you that they are sick and tired of being ill-treated by the
government and if the Minister of Human Settlements does not intervene, the
worst might happen. We would like to know what progress has been made, as
the Minister has visited the N2 Gateway. Thank you very much.]

      EXCESSIVE EXPENDITURE ON LUXURY VEHICLES FOR MINISTERS AND SENIOR
                                 POLITICIANS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S Z NTAPANE (UDM): Deputy Speaker, the continuing revelations about
ministerial cars is an embarrassing situation for the ruling party who
campaigned on a pro-poor ticket.

The countless individual reasons that have been advanced for buying
expensive vehicles demonstrate that the system of ministerial perks and
packages is flawed. For instance, it simply doesn’t make sense when people
claim they are spending R1 million on a car for security reasons when the
car has not been built to be bulletproof. It is clear that these vehicles
are simply bought at the whim of individuals.

As the UDM we call on government to standardise the packages of Ministers,
premiers and MECs. The system that is used by responsible countries is to
require a pool of state vehicles that are standardised. It also means that
the state can make a bulk acquisition, which in turn would enable it to get
the vehicles at a discounted rate.

The vehicles must have a standardised colour scheme and bear the
ministerial logo as well as the South African flag, like official vehicles
in other responsible countries. No elected official member of the state
should be shy about being seen in a car ... [Time expired.]

                             IEC CHARITABLE ACTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr Z L MADASA (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, umbutho wesizwe i-ANC uliqhwabela
izandla ... [Deputy Speaker, the people’s organisation, the ANC, applauds
...]

... sorry, Deputy Speaker, somebody just stood in front of me.

Ngulaa mntu weemoto. Umbutho wesizwe i-ANC uliqhwabela izandla iphulo
labasebenzi beKomishoni yoNyulo eZimeleyo kwiphondo laseMpuma Koloni,
lokundwendwela kwanokunikezela ngezinto kubantu abangathathi ntweni kwiveki
ephelileyo, kwingingqi yaseMonti. Aba basebenzi beKomishoni yoNyulo
eZimeleyo banikezele ngeengubo, ukutya kwakunye neempahla kubantu baseMonti
abangenazo iindawo zokuhlala.

Eli phulo laqalwa ngabasebenzi bale komishoni kwixesha leminyaka
emithandathu egqithileyo, kwiindawo ezahlukeneyo ezifana neengingqi
zaseMonti, eMoltino, eMthatha naseQumrha, nabecandelo labantwana
kwisibhedlele saseCecilia Makiwane eMonti. Eli phulo liqhutywa minyaka le
ngabasebenzi ngemali abayidibanisayo ephuma kwiipokotho zabo. Kulo nyaka,
bagqibe ekubeni bandwendwele yaye bolule isandla kwabo bahlala ezitalatweni
eMonti.

I-ANC ilothulela umnqwazi eli phulo kuba iinkonzo ezisiwa ngurhulumente
ebantwini ziya kukhawuleza xa abantu ngokwabo bethabatha inxaxheba. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[It is that person connected to the story of cars. The people’s
organisation, the ANC, applauds the initiative taken by the employees of
the Independent Electoral Commission in the Eastern Cape province of
visiting and handing over goods to the people in the East London region.
These employees handed out blankets, food and clothes to homeless people in
East London.

This initiative was started six years ago by the employees of this
commission in different areas such as East London, Molteno, Mthatha and
Qumrha, as well as the paediatric ward of Cecilia Makiwane Hospital in East
London. This is done annually by these employees and is funded by money
from their own pockets. This year they have decided to visit and assist
homeless people.

The ANC applauds this initiative because the rolling out of services by the
government to the people will be accelerated if people participate. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

                    DISTRIBUTION OF ALLOCATED LOTTO MONEY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr H C VAN SCHALKWYK (DA): Agb Adjunkspeaker, die onvermoë van die
Nasionale Loteryraad om geld beskikbaar te stel vir goedgekeurde projekte
lei tot groot ellende en lyding in veral die platteland.

Dit staan in direkte teenstelling met die beeld wat die regering by arm
mense wil skep, naamlik dat die armstes van die armes voorkeur geniet as
dit by opheffing en versorging kom. Die ekonomiese resessie lei tot groot
werkloosheid en veroorsaak ook dat private instansies minder tot
liefdadigheid bydra.
In Calvinia in die Noord-Kaap voorsien die Afrikaanse Christelike
Vrouevereniging, ACVV, wat ’n nieregeringsorganisasie is, aan 380 leerders
hul enigste bord kos per dag. Die versuim om goedgekeurde Lotto-geld aan
die ACVV uit te betaal beteken dat hierdie kinders, die armstes van die
armes, honger ly. Dit gee noodwendig aanleiding tot groot maatskaplike
probleme soos diefstal. Hierdie kinders word dan groot in ’n milieu waar
misdaad aanvaarbaar is, want dit help om hulle elke dag te laat oorleef.

Die standaard antwoord wat die Nasionale Loteryraad by navraag gee, is dat
iemand nog die tjek moet teken en dat die ACVV “net geduldig moet wees”.
Kinders wat honger ly, weet nie wat dit beteken om geduldig te wees nie,
veral nie as dit bekend is nie dat daar R8,5 miljard beskikbaar is vir
uitbetaling en slegs R2,3 miljard in die drie jaar van 2007 tot 2009
uitbetaal is. Die ses raadslede se salarisse wat in hierdie tydperk
gesamentlik R7,5 miljoen beloop het, word egter gereeld maandeliks betaal.

Dit is tyd dat die Minister van Handel en Nywerheid ’n ondersoek gelas na
die onvermoë van die raadslede om die voordeel wat die Lotto-geld vir arm
kinders behoort in te hou te laat realiseer. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation
of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr H C VAN SCHALKWYK (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, the inability of the
National Lotteries Board to make money available to approved projects leads
to great misery and suffering, especially in the rural areas.

This is in direct contrast to the image the government wants to create
among poor people, namely that the poorest of the poor enjoy priority with
regard to upliftment and care. The economic recession is causing huge
unemployment and is also the reason that private institutions are
contributing less to charity.

In Calvinia in the Northern Cape the Afrikaanse Christlike Vrouevereniging,
ACVV, which is a nongovernmental organisation, provides 380 learners with
their only meal of the day. The failure to pay out approved Lotto money to
the ACVV means that these children, the poorest of the poor, are starving.
Inevitably this contributes to big social problems, such as theft. These
children then grow up in an environment where crime is acceptable, as it
helps them to survive each day.

Upon enquiry the National Lotteries Board gives the standard response that
someone must still sign the cheque and that the ACVV must “just be
patient”. Children who are starving do not understand what it means to be
patient, especially not if it is known that R8,5 billion is available for
payouts, and yet only R2,3 billion has been paid out over the three years
from 2007 to 2009. However, the salaries of the six board members that
collectively amounted to R7,5 million during this period, was regularly
paid each month.

The time has come for the Minister of Trade and Industry to investigate the
inability of the board members to realise the intended benefits of the
Lotto money for poor children. [Time expired.]]

                        COPE’S GAINS IN BY-ELECTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T BOTHA (Cope): Following a fierce democratic contest last week, Cope
wrested power from the ANC yesterday in the municipal by-election at
Ekurhuleni. The 2006 ANC majority of 87,2% was slashed to 45% in
Ekurhuleni.

The people are beginning to realise where the future lies by showing the
growing support that is demonstrated by a victory of over 50% in this ward.
[Applause.]

The party also contested three by-elections, which showed growing strength
with substantive gains. It achieved 21,1% in Lephalale, 21,3% in Upington
and 20% in Westonaria, Gauteng. All these results show a remarkable growth
when compared to less than 8% attained during the national elections.

They confirm the inherent strength and the potential of Cope as a viable
alternative. [Applause.] We wish to thank our people for strengthening and
resolving to strengthen democracy in this country. [Applause.]

        DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ADVOCATES ADDITIONAL MEASLES VACCINATION
                            (Member’s Statement)
Mrs T E KENYE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC believes that mental, physical
and social health should improve for its own sake and as a major
contribution to increasing prosperity and the quality of life for all our
people.

In the past few weeks, there have been 131 cases of a highly infectious and
notifiable viral disease that have been confirmed through laboratory tests.
Most of these cases were people between the ages of four months and 38
years, with the median age being 13 years.

The Department of Health has urged parents to immunise their children after
a number of measles cases were reported in the country. They are urged to
bring their children for immunisation even if they have received all their
measles vaccines. School children will be immunised at schools, and parents
are asked to complete and return consent forms obtained from the schools.

The ANC will accelerate campaigns on health promotion and disease
prevention by changing social values and norms through common community
action. Furthermore, communities are encouraged to adopt healthy diets,
exercise and take part in campaigns against drugs, substance abuse and
obesity. I thank you. [Applause.]

                   SOCIAL SECURITY FOR HIV/AIDS SUFFERERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H N MAKHUBA (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, few crises in sub-Saharan
Africa have affected human health and threatened national, social and
economic progress in quite the way that HIV/Aids has.

The Bill of Rights says that everyone has the right to have access to
social security. If people are unable to support themselves and their
dependants, they have the right to get social assistance from government.

In South Africa, once people are diagnosed with HIV and their CD4 count is
below 200, they are able to obtain special grants to assist them with
accessing food and other basic necessities. Each year, however, HIV-
positive South Africans undergo a re-examination of their HIV status and
general health. If it is found that their CD4 count has stabilised, they
lose their special grants. This has a devastating effect on all South
Africans who are currently living with HIV. Meeting immediate food,
nutrition and other basic needs is essential if HIV/Aids-affected
households are to live with dignity and security.

The IFP believes that providing nutritional care and support for people
living with HIV is an important part of the treatment of this disease. The
IFP would, therefore, like to call on government to look at a dedicated
social support grant to assist people living with HIV and Aids, especially
those whose grants have been stopped due to their CD4 counts stabilising.
They too still need to have access to food and other basic needs. I thank
you. [Applause.]

      SUPPORT FOR ENDEAVOURS TO OBLIGE JSC TO PROBE CHARGES OF POSSIBLE
                      MISCONDUCT AGAINST JUSTICE HLOPHE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you
very much, Deputy Speaker. I would like to respond to the statement made by
the hon Shilowa regarding the complaint laid with the Judicial Service
Commission, JSC, by the judges of the Constitutional Court against Judge
Hlophe.

I would just like to remind the hon Shilowa that the JSC is an independent
body created by the Constitution. It has deliberated extensively on this
matter and decided on a process and a mechanism to deal with the matter,
and we appeal to everyone, including members of this House, to respect the
independence of the JSC and to allow it to fulfil the mandate that it has
been given by the Constitution and by the law. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    DISTRIBUTION OF ALLOCATED LOTTO MONEY
     IBSA CO-ORDINATION WITH REGARD TO INTERNATIONAL AND REGIONAL ISSUES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, first of all I
would like to respond to the question about the Afrikaanse Christelike
Vrouevereniging, ACVV, and the lottery. To begin with, I would just like to
say that, judging by the volume of questions I’ve received on the lottery,
you’d think I was the minister of lottery affairs!

I have to say, however, that I am not happy with the performance of the
lottery distribution, and have taken a number of steps since my appointment
to try and address the situation.

We’ve had a couple of round table discussions with all the relevant players
and we are in the process of working on three fronts, the first of which
will be basic administrative reforms.

Secondly, we will be changing the regulations and bringing these proposed
changes for public consultation. This will include a change so that there
will be no particular time of the year when applications have to be made
and they will be able to be made as and when the applicants want them.

Thirdly, we are going to drop the two-year audited financial statements
requirement for first-time applicants, and we are also considering the
possibility of changes to the legislation and the Act as such.

Simultaneously, the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry will be
conducting hearings in the very near future for a new chair of the
lotteries board, as its term has come to an end.

So, we are trying to address these issues; whether or not any particular
charity will benefit from that is not something that I can say at this
point, but we are definitely trying to work to improve the performance with
regard to the distribution of lottery funds, which, as I said, I do not
believe is satisfactory.

With regard to hon “Magama”’s question on the India-Brazil-South Africa,
Ibsa, forum, I would just like to indicate that I’m very pleased with the
interest that he’s taken.

In addition to the fact that the Ibsa countries are a group of countries
that face similar challenges in the G20, in the World Trade Organisation,
WTO, in UN forums and in the climate change negotiations, they also have a
real potential for expanding trade and co-operation between themselves.

It will be a major objective of the Department of Trade and Industry to
deepen trade and co-operation relations between that group of countries, as
well as other leading developing countries. The Ibsa summit will be taking
place in India later this month, and you can rest assured that pushing that
relationship forward will be a very high priority for government. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

   CALL FOR EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR MANUAL TAX RETURNS BECAUSE OF STRIKE
                        COPE’S GAINS IN BY-ELECTIONS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Deputy
Speaker, with regard to the question raised by Dr George in respect of
Sars, I’ve raised the matter and they are quite confident that the number
of staff members on strike today was substantially lower than yesterday,
and they will be able to catch up. So at this stage, I’m not considering
extending the deadline for submissions.

I stand to be advised; the hon member from the UDM raised a question and
then walked out. I don’t think that we should actually respect him by
responding to something when he showed such a lack of discipline, and I
trust that you will support that.

In respect of the hon Botha on Cope’s remarkable growth, I just don’t know
if that is hyperbole, exaggeration or just a plain “Dexterism”, but it’s
far from the truth. Thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

                   SOCIAL SECURITY FOR HIV/AIDS SUFFERERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

  The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, the hon member from
  the IFP referred to a need for a special grant dedicated to people living
  with HIV and Aids.


  I just want to start by reminding this august House that the Social
  Security Act of South Africa provides for social assistance support to
  four categories of people: older persons; children; people with
  disabilities, and the former military veterans.


  We do, however, note the fact that it is, indeed, necessary to assist
  those of our people who are suffering from either HIV/Aids or any other
  chronic illness. We have, in South Africa, currently, 14 chronic
  illnesses that require some level of support for all the people who
  suffer from these chronic illnesses and who require food and support of
  some sort.


  What I’m trying to say is that we are not only looking at people living
  with HIV and Aids, but also at people living with these other chronic
  illnesses. It’s a national debate that we have not yet concluded, but in
  the meantime Cabinet has adopted a working definition, which we are
  working on now, to provide for people living with HIV and Aids.
  The grant that we are providing at the moment is dependent on the
  individual’s CD4 count, and as I said earlier on, this matter is still a
  national debate, because we can’t necessarily classify those who are
  suffering from HIV and Aids as being disabled, as the Act provides,
  neither can we find a definition for them anywhere in the Act.


  We are also discussing this with the people with disabilities, because
  they also have views around that, so it’s a national debate that we are
  engaging in. We will come up with a plausible and workable outcome at the
  end of this discussion, we believe, because indeed we also do care about
  those people who suffer from HIV and Aids and other chronic illnesses.
  Thank you very much.

                    POOR MANAGEMENT OF N2 GATEWAY PROJECT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Deputy Speaker, I just want to
respond to the member of the DA as a messenger from N2 Gateway. I want to
remind this august House that the visit to the N2 Gateway by the Department
of Human Settlements, the Minister and I, was due to the need to resolve
the challenges of the N2 Gateway project.

As soon as we are ready with the report we will come to the House and give
that report. I want to assure all of you, particularly the DA, that we are
continually in touch with the N2 Gateway people; even last week we engaged
with them in the process of resolving the challenges that had been raised.

What I want to remind you about, and what you must go back and report to
them, is that it’s important for the tenants of the N2 Gateway to pay their
rent. If they do not pay rent, it will be difficult to maintain the flats,
because they must co-operate, as the government is providing for those
people. At the same time, we need that side of the House to ensure that
they also do their part in paying the rent.

With regard to the structural defects, we are in touch with the Housing
Development Agency, which is managing the flats from Thubelisha, to ensure
that those structural defects are being addressed.

As I said, as soon as the report is ready we will come back and give it to
you, but the tenants must please pay their rent, because at the end of the
day it’s about partnerships. The government delivers, so please respond as
the people who have been given that, so that at the end of the day we are
also able to say that we have delivered and our people are co-operating
with us. I thank you. [Applause.]

     SAPS IMAGE TARNISHED BY HIGH NUMBER OF MEMBERS INVOLVED IN CRIMINAL
                                  ACTIVITY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Speaker, thank you for recognising me at
last. The hon member from the IFP has raised the really important matter of
members of the SAPS who are involved in criminal activities. What he forgot
to tell this House is that this shows the government’s intolerance of any
criminal act by anybody or any South African, whether police officer or
not, who finds himself or herself on the wrong side of the law. They will
be arrested.

These members of the police have been arrested precisely because of that.
We should take this opportunity to thank members of the SAPS who have
dedicated themselves to the fight against crime, including arresting their
colleagues. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there were six responses, which is the maximum
number of responses. I’m terribly sorry. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: On a point of order, Deputy Speaker, I’m just dreadfully
concerned that Minister Pandor never had anything to say today. It’s most
unusual and I hope she’s OK. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you’re really out of order. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Is she well? I would like to wish her well.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ellis, you are not chairing this meeting!
[Laughter.]

    CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF CONVENTION ON
    REGISTRATION OF OBJECTS LAUNCHED INTO OUTER SPACE IN TERMS OF SECTION
                           231(2) OF CONSTITUTION


    CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF CONVENTION ON
   INTERNATIONAL LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE CAUSED BY SPACE OBJECTS IN TERMS OF
                       SECTION 231(2) OF CONSTITUTION

Ms J L FUBBS: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon members of
the House, comrades and colleagues.

Indeed, the ratification of the two conventions, namely the registration
convention and the liability for damage by space objects convention,
enables the launch of South Africa’s first national satellite known as
Sumbandila, a Tshivenda name meaning “Lead the way”. It is, indeed, a
pathfinder that will pioneer a new trajectory into space which is the
result of the collective participation of 40 local companies, including
Sunspace.
We may ask, outside this Parliament, what the motivation for the
ratification of the space-related conventions and the developments in space
science and technology is. How do they benefit us, the unemployed? However
South Africa recognises the need to have independent access to space. This
would have incurred a large investment and infrastructural support, if we
had to do the launches in our country. So we have saved billions of rand by
requesting Russia to launch our first national satellite, which is from a
CosmoRom called Bica Nore in Russia that will take place next week Tuesday,
15 September 2009.

It also recognises – I think it is something that we are all proud of
because it’s been a joint effort – that policy, people, space and poverty
are purposely linked. Our access to space enables us to get into
partnership with the private sector in technology. This will assist us in
addressing the challenges of poverty; disasters; urban planning; human
settlements; transport; the environment; safety and security; agriculture;
effective utilisation of land; the development of human potential, both in
its origination and the development of space technology; and also the
development of human potential through the eradication of poverty.

Of course, we already know that space satellites are used for the weather
and some of us have motorcars with GPS. However, as we know in our country,
rights come with responsibilities and in this case that obligation is to
register all space objects and information about them; and also to take the
responsibility for damage that may occur from accidents caused by our space
objects.

A key element of space policy goes beyond the purely technical and enters
the arena of international co-operation and strengthening relations in this
regard, particularly with India. India – perhaps some of us know this – has
already developed a number of socioeconomic programmes consequent upon
information gained from outer space.

We also are developing co-operation agreements with other countries in
Africa. Indeed, our space policy works within the African agenda and the
South-South co-operation for internationally strengthening our relations
with other countries. It was in this light – and having applied their minds
during two or three dedicated meetings in over two months of studying the
material – that the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry took a
unanimous decision to support these conventions. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space approved.

Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects
approved.
  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
      AFFAIRS ON WATER TARIFF INCREASES OF BULK WATER RESOURCES 2009-10

Mr P M MATHEBE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon
Ministers and hon members.

Madam Deputy Speaker, section 42 of the Municipal Finance Management Act of
2000 requires water boards to submit proposed tariff increases for each
financial year. The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs must table
the prices structure in Parliament or the relevant legislature on or before
15 March, yearly, for the tariffs to be effective on 1 July, yearly. Whilst
the portfolio committee can only make certain recommendations and cannot
amend or change the proposed tariffs, it is critical for the committee to
be briefed on the proposed tariffs as they have an impact on the end user
through the value chain process.

To this end, the committee received briefings from the Department of Water
and Environmental Affairs, the South African Local Government Association,
SALGA, National Treasury and 13 water boards on 30 June 2009 and 01 July
2009. The water tariff increases of bulk water resources for 2009-10 were
tabled to Parliament on 13 March 2009. Due to the global economic
recession, the previous Minister of Water Affairs issued the directive to
water boards to decrease their tariffs by 5%.
This directive was implemented by all water boards.


The tariff reduction impacted on a number of water boards. It noted the
following implications of the reduced tariffs, namely that it would have a
negative impact on board cash flows and would therefore, require a
reduction in the operating expenditure. The viability of water boards and a
delay in capital expenditure programmes were further issues raised.


The committee, as part of the future project, recommended that a new
funding model for water be explored, and that boards be penalised for not
spending their capital expenditure, capex. Good co-operative governance and
the building of partnerships in long-term planning was a necessity between
the water boards. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon Deputy
President, I move:

  That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:04.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         THURSDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a money Bill:

          a) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2009] (National Assembly
             – sec 77).

    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance Limited
        for 2009-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
        [RP 128-2009].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment
        Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-2009 [RP 205-2009].

 2. The Minister of Higher Education and Training

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Qualifications
        Authority for 2008-2009,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 66-2009].


 3. The Minister of Public Enterprises
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings  Limited  for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


4.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Sentech  Limited  for  2008-
        2009, including the Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


5.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  the  Tshumisano  Trust  for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the  Public  Service  Commission  (PSC)  on  Financial
        Misconduct for 2007-2008 Financial Year [RP 21-2009].


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T090903e-insert1 – PAGES 691-693

                          FRIDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency (Mr T A Manuel)

    (a)     Green Paper on National Strategic Planning – September 2009.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal for 2008-
       2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements and Performance information for 2008-2009 [RP 196-2009].

    b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Metrology Institute
       of South Africa for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
       Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
       Information for 2008-2009 [RP 144-2009].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
       Development Agency for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
       Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
       Information for 2008-2009.

    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
       Board for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
       Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
       2008-2009.

    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
       Administration Commission of South Africa for 2008-2009, including
       the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
       Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 213-2009].

    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
       finance Apex Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
       2008-2009 [RP 113-2009].

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

1.    Report of the Standing Committee  on  Finance  on  the  Taxation  Laws
   Second Amendment Bill [B11-2009] (National Assembly- section  75),  dated
   03 September 2009.

   The Standing Committee on Finance, having  considered  and  examined  the
   Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 11–  2009]  (National  Assembly  –
   section 75), referred to it, and classified by the JTM as  a  section  75
   Bill, reports the Bill without amendments.

   Report to be considered

2.    Report of the Standing Committee  on  Finance  on  the  Taxation  Laws
   Amendment Bill [B10-2009]  (National  Assembly-  section  77),  dated  03
   September 2009.

   The Standing Committee on Finance, having  considered  and  examined  the
   Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 10– 2009] (National  Assembly  –  section
   77), referred to it, and classified by the JTM as a Money  Bill,  reports
   that it has agreed to the Bill.

   Report to be considered

                          MONDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Higher Education and Training

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Department  of  Education  -
        Vote 13 for 2008-2009, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote  13
        for 2008-2009 [RP 191-2009]


        Please note: The above report was also tabled by  The  Minister  of
        Basic Education on 2 September 2009.

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
        Service  for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        2009 [RP 107-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the iSimangaliso Wetland
        Park for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


                          TUESDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. Membership of Committees
    Ms H C Magabedeli was elected as chairperson of the Joint Standing
    Committee on Defence on 2 September 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation

      (a)   Paper on Improving Government Performance [RP 223-2009].

   2. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Prosecuting
          Authority (NPA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
          for 2008-2009 [RP 116-2009].

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Debt
          Collectors for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2008-2009.


      (c)   Register of Debt Collectors in terms of section 12(1) of the
          Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).


3.    The Minister of Public Enterprises
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Proprietary) Limited
          for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
          the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
          2009.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T090908e-insert1 – PAGES 733-760

