---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 August 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-08-25
---

TUESDAY, 25 AUGUST 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS = see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move, on the
next sitting day of the House:

  That the House-


     1) debates the Donen Commission’s report and its findings with regard
        to the role played by South Africa’s stakeholders in alleged
        corruption in the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme; and


     2) resolves to call on President Jacob Zuma to appoint an independent
        commission of inquiry, headed by a retired judge, that has the
        power to issue subpoenas to investigate whether any abuse of power
        and/or corruption and/or any other irregularities were committed by
        South African stakeholders during the United Nations’ Oil-for-Food
        Programme.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move, on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the contribution of tourism to our economy, and
  obstacles to further growth in this regard, as well as steps by the
  government to promote this labour-intensive sector.

Dr D T GEORGE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day of the House:

 That the House debates the implementation of the development state.

Mr M WATERS: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the next
sitting day of the House, on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the human resources crisis facing health care in
   our country, and possible solutions.


Mr G R MORGAN: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day of the House, on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the state of South Africa’s marine resources, and
   mechanisms to increase opportunities in the fishing sector.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

  That the House –

     1) debates the inadequate security measures in the majority of South
        African schools;


     2) notes that the country has already lost too many educators and
        learners within the premises of their schools;


     3) calls for an end to the senseless murders at our schools.

                            HOLY MONTH OF RAMADAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, I
move without notice:
   That the House –
      1) notes that Saturday, 22 August 2009, marked the start of the holy
         month of Ramadan;


      2) further notes that during the month, Muslims from all walks of life
         across the globe fast from sunrise to sunset and that such
         abstinence as that of Ramadan promotes spiritual growth, self-
         discipline, nurtures feelings for those who are starving and
         provides an opportunity for spiritual renewal;


      3) believes that Muslims in this country have made significant
         contributions to the birth and sustenance of our democracy and that
         the holy month of Ramadan affords Muslims a unique opportunity to
         strengthen bonds of friendship and family ties amongst themselves
         and with their fellow South Africans; and


      4) conveys its best wishes to all Muslims during this holy month of
         Ramadan.

Agreed to.

       ACTING PRINCIPAL OF SECONDARY SCHOOL IN NEW CROSSROADS MURDERED

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms Z B BALINDLELA: Mr Speaker, I move without notice, on behalf of Cope:
 That the House –

    1) expresses its condolences to the husband, family, friends and
       education fraternity of the slain acting principal of the Sithembele
       Matiso Secondary School in New Crossroads;


    2) expresses gratitude to the police for their immediate efforts to
       trace the suspects;


    3) condemns the senseless murder of a dedicated educator, wife and
       mother during Women’s Month in the strongest possible terms; and


    4) requests the Minister of Police to ensure that the murderers of this
       innocent crime victim as well as all other slain victims are brought
       to book without delay.

Agreed to.

           CONGRATULATIONS TO SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL CRICKET TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, I
move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that the South African National Cricket Team, the Proteas,
        has moved up to the No 1 position in both test and limited overs
        cricket;

     2) further notes that it is the first time in the history of the game
        that another country, apart from Australia, has managed to occupy
        the top position in both disciplines of the game;

     3) congratulates the Proteas in achieving this historic milestone; and



     4) wishes the team well for the season ahead, especially in the home
        series against England.

Agreed to.

       SUPERB PERFORMANCE OF TEAM SOUTH AFRICA AT 2009 IAAF TOURNAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, I
move without notice:


   That the House –
      1) notes the superb performance of Team South Africa at the 2009 IAAF
         tournament in Berlin, Germany;


      2) further notes the outstanding individual performances of Caster
         Semenya in winning gold in the women’s 800m, Mbulaeni Mulaudzi, who
         won gold in the men’s 800m and Khotso Mokoena, who won silver in
         the men’s long jump;

      3) recalls that it is the first time since our country’s readmission
         into the International Athletics Federation that our athletes are
         world title holders in both the women’s and men’s 800m event;

      4) congratulates Athletics South Africa, the athletes who participated
         in Berlin and the administrators for bringing glory to our nation;
         and

      5) wishes all sportsmen and women success on the international stage
         as we continue in building a united, prosperous and winning nation.

Agreed to.

           CONDOLENCES FAMILIES OF PEOPLE KILLED IN TAXI ACCIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) expresses its regret and sends a message of condolence to the
         families of the ten victims killed in the taxi accident on 23
         August 2009 in which a taxi, transporting 19 people to Cape Town,
         collided with a bus 35 km outside Beaufort West; and


      2) wishes the hospitalised passengers a speedy recovery.

Agreed to.

                       Return of team SA from Germany

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M KOMPHELA (ANC): Hon Speaker, Deputy President, hon members, earlier
today the team representing Athletics SA returned to the country after an
outstanding performance at the 14th IAAF World Championships in Berlin,
Germany. The spontaneous outpouring of support for the team by all South
Africans illustrated how the events surrounding Caster Semenya have
galvanised the country to support and unite behind the young girl.

While the team finished ninth overall, the championships will be remembered
for the humiliating treatment dished out to Caster Semenya. The 18-year-old
Caster had to defy all the odds to conquer the world in the women’s 800-
metre event. She is, undoubtedly, superb and talented and her performance
on track captured the imagination of athletes and spectators at the
championship. Her brilliant performance has been thwarted by gender
stereotypes, discrimination, public humiliation and invasion of her privacy
by IAAF officials and the media.

The way the IAAF handled the matter has been clumsy and unprofessional and
with complete disregard for the interests of Caster. Yesterday, the
Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation unanimously adopted a
resolution calling for the matter to be investigated by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The ANC calls for nothing less than an unreserved apology from the IAAF to
Caster and to the entire South African nation to put this unacceptable
incident to rest. This would allow Semenya to get on with her life and
pursue her dream to dominate the 800-metre event for the rest of her life.
I thank you. [Applause.]

             VULNERABLE INVESTORS IN current economic conditions

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr D T GEORGE (DA): Speaker, in the current economic conditions investors
are often desperate to protect their assets and to increase their return on
investment. Although every investment brings with it a particular level of
risk, some risk is acceptable and some is not.

An acceptable risk exists where the investor understands the nature of the
investment and also understands the nature of the return and whether it is
guaranteed or not. Legislation was enacted to ensure that financial
advisers provide the necessary information to investors, and they can be
held to account if they fail to properly advise their clients. The
Financial Services Board is also mandated to take action against financial
service providers who do not comply with their obligations.

Financial predators are, however, operating in South Africa. They are not
properly accredited; they mislead potential investors and leave destitution
and broken lives in their wake. When investors fall victim to these
predators, the matter is often extremely complex and complicated and
requires extensive investigation. The victims often do not have any
financial resources to pursue the matter, precisely because their money has
been stolen.

The DA believes that vulnerable investors must be protected and that the
Financial Services Board can do this by establishing a rapid response unit
that responds quickly and decisively when matters such as these arise. The
South African public needs to know that financial predators who lead them
into financial ruin will be acted against swiftly and strongly
and prevented from perpetuating their crimes over and over again. Thank
you.

                 SUCCESSFUL BY-ELECTION PERFORMANCE BY COPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Mr Speaker, effective participation of viable
political parties in the electoral processes of our country is an essential
prerequisite for a vibrant people-centred democracy. Towards that end, the
recent by-election performance by Cope in the Khai-Ma Local Municipality in
the Northern Cape should be noted as a sure signal of future political
dynamics in South Africa.

During the 2006 general municipal elections, the ANC conquered 88,23% of
the votes, with the opposition parties reaching 11,77%. The DA was at
6,93%, and the ID was at 4,84%. On 12 August 2009, in a head-to-head
context between the ANC and Cope, Cope made substantive inroads into the
ANC majority of 66,88% by slashing it to a very modest 59,01%. With 40,99%
of the voters aligning with Cope, and in the absence of contestation by
other opposition parties, the opposition vote increased by 350%.

Currently, the Khai-Ma Local Municipality is better known as Pofadder – the
generic name of a feared species in the animal kingdom. Whilst some of us
have been called snakes and worse in recent months, this by-election, in
which a previously ANC-dominated ward became a marginal seat, is set to go
down in history as the small but definite beginning of true multiparty
democracy in South Africa.

Modest as it may be, the Pofadder by-election is set to be the first of
many in the dismantling of de facto one-party domination. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                             VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M T KUBAYI (ANC): Mr Speaker, the ANC strongly condemns the escalating
number of acts of unjustifiable violence in our schools. We therefore
denounce these acts of violence, rape, racism and racial discrimination in
the strongest possible terms. Our schools should be places of safety and
learning, not places of violence. The fact that these brutal crimes take
place on school premises despite the security measures put in place by the
Safe Schools Project, is entirely unacceptable and deeply concerning.

The ANC mourns the untimely and tragic death of Nomzoxolo Dziba, who was
shot dead on the premises of the Sithembele Matiso Secondary school in New
Crossroads. We therefore strongly condemn the motives and actions of those
persons who have committed this brutal crime, as they demonstrate a
dangerous practice of creating fertile ground for violence in schools.

The ANC is also deeply saddened by the increase in the incidence of rape,
such as the one that took place at the Ndamase High School at Ngqeleni in
the Eastern Cape. We want to emphasise that the ANC-led government will not
be deterred in establishing a normal school environment for teaching and
learning. Parliament will have to vigorously discuss the issue of school
violence, and place it on the agenda as an issue of national importance.
The ANC extends its condolences to the family, friends and relatives of
principal Nomzoxolo Dziba. Thank you.

                     KILLING OF WOMAN ON SCHOOL PREMISES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu V B NDLOVU (IFP): Somlomo, ukubulawa komuntu wesifazane ikakhulukazi
ewuthishomkhulu wesikole ngaphakathi emagcekeni esikole kuyihlazo elingeke
lavunyelwa ukuba khona eNingizimu Afrika.

Ngakho –ke ukusebenza kwamaphoyisa nabantu abakhe eceleni kwesikole
kufuneka benze isiqiniseko sokuthi ziyaboshwa izigebengu,
imigulukudu,izigelekeqe ukuze zikwazi ukudonsa ejele ngokuthi zibulale
umuntu wesifazane esemsebenzini.

Okwesibili ukuthi kwenzeke lokhu kabi, kuyinyanga yabantu besifazane lapho
abantu besifazane kufuneka baziqhayise khona. Okubuhlungu ke wukuthi
mhlawumbe kwenziwe abantu besilisa okuyingozi enkulu ngoba kukhombisa
ukuthi labo bantu abakwazi ukukhusela imphefumulo yabanye abantu. Abantu
abafanele ukuvalelwa banganikwa nephalishi ekuseni, emini nantambama.
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Speaker, the murder of a woman, especially a school
principal, on school premises is a disgrace that cannot be allowed in South
Africa.

The police and the people in the area of that school must make sure that
these murderers, thugs and criminals are arrested, so that they can start
serving their sentence for murdering a woman at work.

Secondly, the timing was bad, as it happened during Women’s Month, when
women are supposed to be proud of their achievements. The most painful
thing is the possibility that this murder was committed by men. This is
very dangerous, because it shows that these people are not able to protect
other people’s lives. These people deserve to be locked up and not to be
given porridge in the morning, during the course of the day or at night.
Thank you.]

                    COMMUNICATION STRATEGY AND H1N1 VIRUS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M H HOOSEN (ID): Hon Speaker, while the number of deaths related to the
H1N1 virus continues to increase, millions of South Africans are still in
the dark about effective preventative measures in the absence of a national
communication strategy. Recently, the Minister of Health conceded that his
department had not done enough in communicating a coherent message to South
Africans on the prevention and spread of the virus.

Notwithstanding the promises of the director-general at the Health
portfolio meeting recently, effective preventative messages to South
Africans have still not been communicated. Whilst we welcome the individual
letters addressed to MPs in this House on the matter, we, as the ID, again
call on the Minister to urgently implement a national communication
strategy in respect of the spread of the H1N1 virus. I thank you.

             PARTNERSHIP WITH KENYA TO PROMOTE TOURISM IN AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr D M GUMEDE (ANC): Hon Speaker, on 18 August 2009 the Kenyan and South
African governments entered into a partnership to promote the tourism
sector on the African continent.

These two countries will collaborate in strategic areas, like sharing data,
to improve efficiency and add value and variety to the tourism sector in
both countries and in Africa; provide more opportunities to augment
sustainable tourism; co-operate in the development of strategies; address
challenges in climate change, the economic downturn and development; and
mutually promote, advocate, educate and support stakeholders in both
countries.

This reflects the spirit of Nepad, thus contributing to sustainable
livelihoods, decent jobs and rural development in line with the manifesto
of the ANC. I thank you.

                        MANAGEMENT OF REFUGEE CENTRES

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr M MNQASELA (DA): Somlomo, mandibulele kuSekela-mongameli, ndibulise
nakumalungu ale Ndlu inkulu. [Chairperson, let me thank the Deputy
President and also greet the members of this august House.]

The DA is deeply concerned about the manner in which refugee reception
centres are managed in this country. The response time to individual
applications, by either political asylum seekers or economic migrants, is
appalling. The Nyanga refugee centre is one of the examples that we have
chosen after having made numerous visits to this centre.

Kuqengqeleka iinyanga abantu belinde ukuba bafumane iincwadi zabo,
begxalathelana ukuya kweli ziko, besuka kumazwe ngamazwe becinga ukuba baza
kukwazi ukuncedakala. Ingxaki enje ngale uthi xa ufika phaya ubone ukuba
... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[People have been waiting for their documents for months now, flocking to
this centre from different countries hoping that they will be assisted. You
only get to see this kind of problem when you arrive there ...]

... there are private security personnel running the centre whilst the
officials sit there doing nothing.

One of the characteristics of this particular centre that we have observed
is its high absentee rate. This is very serious. Other characteristics
include poor filing of documents and loss of files owing to the manner in
which they are packed at this facility. Fraud and corruption were observed
at that centre and have been reported in the newspapers.

Lastly, the Department of Home Affairs, in seeking to address these
challenges, must try to centralise the application process so that the
turnaround time is shorter.

Abantu basuka eRhawutini, abanye basuka kwamanye amaphondo afana neLimpopo,
KwaZulu-Natala njalo njalo, afike umntu athi: Bendenze isicelo kwezi ndawo,
kodwa ngoku ndilapha eNtshona Koloni. Kuthiwa mandihambe ndiye kulaa ndawo
bendisuka kuyo. Loo nto ayamkelekanga kwaphela.

Ke, sifuna ukuyandisa sithi kuMphathiswa makathathe amanyathelo
ngokukhawuleza ngoba uye wathembisa ukuba uya kuyenza loo nto. Siyabulela.
[Laphela ixesha.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[People come from Gauteng, others are from other provinces like Limpopo,
KwaZulu-Natal and so on, and when this person arrives he will say: I have
made an application in one of these provinces, but now I am here in the
Western Cape. I am told to go back to the province I come from. That is
totally unacceptable.

Therefore, we want to extend this and appeal to the Minister to take
corrective measures immediately as she has promised to do so. Thank you.
[Time expired.]]

                          HONOURING CASTER SEMENYA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Hon Speaker, the ACDP is delighted at the support
that our hero and 800 metre world champion, Mokgadi Caster Semenya, has
received from her countrymen and women. The report that more than 35 000
people have joined a Facebook group in support of Caster Semenya and
African women bears testimony to the overwhelming support that Caster has
received.

We honour her for her courage and determination and for rising above the
abuse and unfair treatment she has received from the International
Association of Athletics Federations and some media reports, emanating
mainly from the Australian and English media, implying that she was
cheating.

The ACDP believes that if anybody, including athletes, has a birth defect,
then they should be protected and supported by all, rather than being
subjected to humiliating gender tests which may leave a person emotionally
scarred for life.

There is an argument that there is no single process of determining gender
because every case is different. It has been reported that at the 1996
Atlanta Olympic Games, eight female athletes were determined to have male
chromosomes and were barred from the games.

Further tests, however, showed that they were physiologically female, even
though their genes indicated that they were male, and they were reinstated.
One shudders to think about the trauma these athletes experienced.

The ACDP therefore calls on our government, Athletics SA and other sporting
bodies to do their best to pre-empt and prevent a repetition of this
humiliating and degrading testing of our athletes. Thank you.

    ELECTION OF PRESIDENT OF FIRST STUDENT REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF THE
                        UNIVERSITY OF THE FREE STATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D K MATABOGE (ANC): Speaker, on 19 August 2006, the University of the
Free State elected Mr Moses Masitha as their first President of the Student
Representative Council. The ANC acknowledges the calls for change expressed
by students during these elections, particularly as the university has been
engulfed by the negative issues of racism and racial discrimination in the
recent past.

The ANC further salutes this achievement, especially since the province is
the spiritual home of the ANC. Recognising the horrible events of racial
discrimination that took prominence at the university, we further applaud
the shining example by the student community for bestowing their confidence
in the SA Students Congress-led SRC to establish a progressive
transformation agenda at the University of the Free State. We also applaud
them for undertaking this huge responsibility of continuing the struggle
for a better life and increasing access to quality education.

The ANC would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Moses Masitha
on his election. The ANC reminds him that the confidence and the mandate
given to him by the student community places him and the Sasco-led SRC at
the pole position in undertaking the task of racially transforming the
university as a centre of academic excellence and meaningful improvement of
student life. Thank you. [Applause.]

                       ASSURANCE OF NO MORE BLACKOUTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Speaker, die voormalige Minister van Openbare
Ondernemings, Minister Alex Erwin, het in 2006 hierdie Parlement die
versekering gegee dat Suid-Afrika nie beurtkrag sal ervaar nie. Sy woorde
was skaars koud toe ervaar Suid-Afrika donkerte wat die ekonomie R2 miljard
per dag gekos het.

Die tariefverhoging van 27,5% verlede jaar deur die Nasionale
Energiereguleerder van Suid-Afrika, Nersa, en
Elektrisiteitsvoorsieningskommissie, Eskom, en 31,3% vir vanjaar, gaan
egter geen duik maak aan die R283 miljard wat Eskom vir sy
kapitaaluitbreidingsprogram nodig het nie. Nou blyk dit dat Eskom ’n 40%
tariefverhoging vir volgende jaar in gedagte het met inflasionistiese
tendense wat gaan lei tot rentekoersverhogings en die ekonomie verder gaan
knou. As ons kyk na die Moody’s-agentskap vir kredietgradering se swak
gradering van Eskom, gaan Eskom ook nie internasionale finansiering bekom
nie.

Eskom se tweede groot kopseer is dat ’n vakbondopname nou toon dat 62% van
sy werkers ontevrede is en ook nie vir hulle ’n toekoms by Eskom sien nie
vanweë onvoldoende diensvoorwaardes. Eskom staar dus nou ook ’n geweldige
vaardigheidstekort in die gesig.

’n Groot kopseer egter vir die verbruikers van Suid-Afrika is dat die
Kabinet goedgekeur het dat 30% krag deur privaatondernemings opgewek kan
word, maar om die een of ander bisarre rede het Eskom sedert Januarie 2008
geweier om kontrakte aan privaatondernemings wat krag opwek, toe te staan.

Die DA is egter vol vertroue dat die Minister en die Kabinet hul volle
aandag aan hierdie saak sal skenk om te voorkom dat ons binnekort weer in
donkerte sal verval. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Speaker, the former Minister for Public Enterprises,
Minister Alex Erwin, gave this House the assurance in 2006 that South
Africa would not experience load shedding. His words had scarcely been
uttered when South Africa experienced darkness, which cost the economy R2
billion per day.

Last year’s tariff hike of 27,5% by the National Energy Regulator of South
Africa, Nersa, and Electricity Supply Commission, Eskom, and the 31,3% hike
for this year, will however make no difference to the R283 billion that
Eskom requires for its programme for capital expansion. It now appears that
Eskom has a 40% tariff hike in mind for next year, which will have
inflationary implications, and will lead to increases in interest rates and
further harm the economy. When we look at Eskom’s poor rating by Moody’s
credit rating agency, Eskom will also not obtain international financing.

Eskom’s second biggest headache is that a union survey now indicates that
62% of its workers are dissatisfied and do not see a future for themselves
at Eskom owing to inadequate conditions of service. Therefore, Eskom is now
also facing an immense skills shortage.

A big headache, however, for the consumers of South Africa is that Cabinet
approved that 30% of power may now be generated by private companies, but
for some bizarre reason or another Eskom has refused to grant contracts to
private power generation companies since January 2008.
The DA fully believes, however, that the Minister and the Cabinet will give
their full attention to this matter in order to prevent us from returning
to darkness very soon. I thank you.]

               CONSTRUCTION OF PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT BUILDING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H N NDUDE (Cope): Speaker, the development and building of the Pan-
African Parliament is an important building block for the establishment of
this institution. South Africa, as a host country, has the responsibility
to oversee this development in the proper manner and within the law.

According to newspaper reports, building activities on this proposed site
of the Pan-African Parliament were stopped after a complaint was received
that an environmentally sensitive vlei [marsh] was being destroyed by the
contractors.

The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs has now claimed that
misleading information was given in the environmental impact assessment
report. The question remains whether the department visited the site, and
why this was not picked up.

A shortlist of six sites was produced by the department for approval by the
Cabinet. Cabinet approval was given on the wrong information supplied.
Apparently, the Gauteng department of agriculture and rural development
warned the national Department of Water and Environmental Affairs, but
received no reaction. Cabinet is urged to rectify the situation in such a
manner that our image and that of the Pan-African Parliament are not
tainted. We must be sensitive to the environment and take the necessary
steps against those responsible. Thank you.

                      ATTACK ON POLICE IN WESTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Enkosi Somlomo. Umbutho wesizwe i-ANC ilugxeka
ngamdla uhlaselo lwamagosa ogcino-cwangco noxolo kwiindawo esihlala kuzo,
ingakumbi apha eNtshona Koloni. Kwisithuba seveki ezintathu kwiilokishi
zeli leNtshona Koloni, amagosa ezogcino-cwangco ahlaselwe izihlandlo
ezintathu. Kwezibini kuzo amapolisa amabini athe aphulukana nobomi bawo,
elinye ipolisa liyachacha esibhedlele. Kuzo zozithathu ezi ziganeko,
amapolisa aphulukene nemipu yawo yomsebenzi, nto leyo ebonakalisa
ngokumhlophe ukuba eyona nto ifunwa ngamandla zezi ntswela mbeko yimipu
eyakuthi isetyenziswe kugebengo lwabantu abangenatyala.

URhulumente okhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, uzakubuncothula kunye
neengcambu ubukrelemnqa, kodwa ke kuthi malungu ombutho wesizwe icace gca
okwe kat’emhloph’ehlungwini ukuba urhulumente eyedwa angekhe aphumelele
ukwenza oko. Angaphumelela xa kukho inkxaso evela ebantwini basekuhlaleni.
Siyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson. The people’s organisation,
the ANC, strongly criticises the attack on safety and security officials in
our communities, especially in the Western Cape. In three weeks’ time the
safety and security officials in the townships of the Western Cape have
been attacked three times. In two of these attacks two police officers lost
their lives and one of them is recovering in hospital. In these three
incidents the police officers lost their service firearms. This clearly
shows that what these thugs are looking for are firearms, which will be
used in violent attacks and in the murdering of innocent people.

The ANC-led government will uproot crime, but to us members of the people’s
party it is vividly clear that the government alone will not succeed in
doing that. The government can only succeed with support from the
community. Thank you. [Applause.]]

  CALL FOR GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN WATER CRISIS IN UMKHANYAKUDE DISTRICT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Hon Speaker, the lack of adequate water in Jozini
in the Umkhanyakude district is a mounting crisis that has been made worse
by a crippling drought in the area. At times, the water crisis is so severe
that even the local hospitals have to make do without water.

The Umkhanyakude Municipality has written numerous letters to the national
government seeking assistance, but has received no reply to date. The
municipality is also currently R16 million in the red due to the fact that
it has had to hire water tanks from suppliers at a very high cost. Yet, the
nearby Jozini Dam, which has the capacity to deliver water to the
community, remains unutilised for reasons unknown to us.

The IFP, therefore, calls on government to immediately intervene in the
crisis, and we call upon the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs to
visit the area as a matter of urgency to meet with the mayor and his
executive committee members.

Furthermore, we call upon the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs
to assist the Umkhanyakude Municipality in repaying the millions in debt,
and to urgently give the municipality the necessary assistance they need to
create a viable and sustainable water supply for the community. I thank
you.

            CONDEMNATION OF SHOOTING OF NEW CROSSROADS PRINCIPAL
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N M KGANYAGO (UDM): Speaker, the UDM condemns the shooting yesterday of
an acting school principal in New Crossroads, Cape Town. We extend our
condolences to the family and friends of the acting principal of the
Sithembele Matiso Secondary School, Nomzoxolo Dziba.

What happened yesterday was a cold-blooded assassination. An appointment
was made with the victim and the killers strode confidently onto the school
premises, where they murdered her. It was an act of brazen callousness. The
killers are mocking our society. They are disregarding our belief in the
sanctity of life and our commitment to safe schools and communities. The
disdain that they have shown towards the victim and the community is a
terrible reminder of the sad times that we live in.

Unfortunately, violent crime has become so commonplace in South Africa that
criminals can contemplate such casual brutality without a moment’s
hesitation. Their barbaric actions strike at the very heart of our
civilisation, and that is why no effort must be spared to bring these
criminals to book. They must face justice. Our society will not stand for
the lawlessness and anarchy ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                          HONOURING CASTER SEMENYA
                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Mr Speaker, I rise in response
to the issue around the IAAF World Championships with deeply mixed
emotions: that of joy, undoubtedly, at the wonderful performance of our
team, but also that of sadness at the way a human being has been treated by
an international federation without any regard for her dignity.

In this recent distasteful incident it is clear that the IAAF, as also
indicated by the hon Komphela, has badly mishandled the matter and that it
has also badly underestimated the strong principles of South Africa and its
citizens. The IAAF officials have made public announcements and
pronouncements on the gender-testing process and, as a result, has not only
embarrassed a talented youngster, but caused a strong and appropriate
response from us, the rainbow nation.

Minister Stofile, the Minister of Sport and Recreation, has written a
strongly worded letter to the president of the IAAF demanding a retraction
of these statements and also demanding an apology. We are awaiting a
response from the president of the IAAF to South Africa. We have also gone
on record to say that it was intentionally devious for questions to be cast
about a particular athlete just before a final event. We all applaud her
ability to remain focused and cross the winning line first, despite this.
The team arrived back in our country this morning and we have put in place
a support system for Miss Semenya and, if they so wish, for members of her
family, to help them through this very difficult time. It is important to
protect our young athletes and to help them to become stronger in the long
run. For indeed, it will be a long run as Miss Semenya lines up for the
2012 and 2016 Olympic Games. The type of support we will be giving will be
discussed to ensure that we meet the needs of Miss Semenya and her family
appropriately.

We have also written to our colleague, the Minister of Women, Youth,
Children and People with Disabilities, as well as to the chairpersons of
the SA Human Rights Commission and the Commission on Gender Equality. We
did so because this is a cross-cutting issue, it’s an issue of national
importance and it is an issue of human rights and of principle.

I want to compare this to the appalling way that our disabled athlete,
Oscar Pistorius, was treated when he took on the might of this very same
international federation to assert his right to compete against athletes
without disabilities. All of this indicates that much work still needs to
be done within athletics and other international federations to instil a
fundamental respect for human rights and dignity.

We, in the Ministry of Sport and Recreation, support the call for these
issues to be taken to the United Nations Human Rights Commission. To assist
in this process, I requested from a full report the president of Athletics
SA this morning a full report so that we can address the issue from a basis
of full and complete information. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, may I address you on a point of procedure here?
Members make statements and Ministers reply, but Ministers reply,
presumably, off the cuff because they do not know what members are going to
say. Why is it that the hon Deputy Minister of Sport and Recreation is able
to stand up and read a statement? Something in the process has quite
clearly gone wrong, and I do ask you to consider this. [Interjections.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, the hon members make
statements and the hon Minister has given information based on those
statements.

Mr M J ELLIS: But, Madam Chair, is that the correct procedure?
[Interjections.] I mean, we could play all kinds of games in the House with
ANC members standing up and making statements and Ministers responding in
the same way.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Mike Ellis, I think when
members make their statements, they want to get information on what is
happening. That is exactly what the Deputy Minister was doing.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, with regard to your ruling, may I simply ask:
Are the Ministers now asking that the DA hand in their statements
beforehand so that they can prepare their answers as well? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Mike Ellis, you cannot decide
on how the Ministers and Deputy Ministers respond to your statements. So
just allow the Deputy Ministers and Ministers to respond to information
they believe is of importance.

             VELNERABLE INVESTORS IN CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
                    COMMUNICATION STRATEGY AND H1N1 VIRUS
                       ASSURANCE OF NO MORE BLACKOUTS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
we should advise the hon Ellis that jealousy about our powers of
anticipation will get him nowhere. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, the hon Trevor Manuel has just written me a
letter asking me about my powers.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Ellis, please take your seat.
You may continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
I would like to give a few brief responses. The first is to Dr George. This
Parliament has done its utmost to protect investors, and key amongst this
would be the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act. The role of
the Financial Services Board is, in fact, to ensure that intermediaries are
registered and compliant with the rules. You cannot protect people against
greed, and, in most instances, where people choose an intermediary or
somebody who holds him or herself out as an intermediary but who is not
registered and not recognised, then there is very little that the FSB or
the state can or should do.

There was a matter recently. In fact, there is an organisation that now
calls itself the Society for the Protection of our Constitution, that says
it has gone to court to prevent Ms Gill Marcus from becoming Governor of
the Reserve Bank. It says that it is acting on behalf of people who have
refused to pay tax and who paid their money from under their mattresses to
some individual - and now the state is expected to support these people who
publicly boasted about the way in which they have violated the law. We
shouldn’t support that. I think that we must ask the FSB to shore up the
system that the FAIS provides. More than that, I think it is exceedingly
difficult and dangerous for the fiscus to undertake such a matter.

The hon member from the ID raised issues about the prevention campaign and
H1N1 and, if I had anticipated this as well as Deputy Minister Oosthuizen
had, I would have brought him the print ads or the transcripts of both the
commercial and community radio advertisements. They are out there; they are
not just letters to Members of Parliament. There is a wider campaign. In
fact, the campaign features quite coyly the Minister of Health himself in
various poses as part of the prevention campaign. So, I encourage you, hon
member, to read and listen to the radio and observe the television and
thereby be educated.

The hon Van Dyk, as per usual, is attempting to mislead all of us. Eskom
cannot be held responsible for the independent power producers, IPPs, and
the hon member should know that the big issue that keeps the IPPs out is
the fact that pricing of electricity per unit is still the lowest in the
world - and Eskom’s prices are low. Either you are saying that consumers of
electricity must now, through Eskom, subsidise IPPs or this contradiction
will present itself. But to come to this House and suggest that the IPPs
are being kept out by Eskom is, I submit, an endeavour to mislead this
House, and the hon Van Dyk should desist therefrom. Thank you very much.

             PARTNERSHIP WITH KENYA TO PROMOTE TOURISM IN AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, I am responding to the hon member
Gumede on the memorandum of understanding signed with the Kenyan Minister
for tourism last week. Every year Africa receives only 5% of inbound
tourism, and what we would like to do as the South African government is to
change our relationships with the rest of the African continent to ensure
that we get our due share. We believe we can increase considerably that 5%.


We would also like to increase the tourism flow between South Africa and
Kenya. Ten years ago we received only 16 000 tourists from Kenya annually.
A year ago it was up to 28 000. We believe we can also improve in that
regard.

The purpose of this memorandum of understanding is to change the
relationship that we have had historically with Kenya. It was a
relationship on the African continent based on intense competition which, I
believe, was to the detriment of both of us. I believe we can change this
relationship to one in which, yes, we compete, but compete in terms of
improving standards in both countries and, even more than that, become
partners.

As the hon member mentioned, we will concentrate on the exchange of
information: tourism statistics and scholarships. In my view, there are
exciting opportunities awaiting our investors in Kenya. The tourism
industry is poised to take off over the next few years and, certainly, as
investors our businesspeople can also benefit.
Indaba South Africa is the premier marketing platform on our continent, and
we have now opened the indaba floor for the first time ever to another
African country, namely Kenya. They will be our guest at the indaba next
year. Thank you. [Applause.]

  CALL FOR GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN WATER CRISIS IN UMKHANYAKUDE DISTRICT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: House
Chairperson, regarding the matter raised by hon member Mpontshane with
regard to the water situation in the Umkhanyakude District Municipality,
this matter has been brought to our attention by the community member who
raised a challenge that is being experienced in that municipality.

We have agreed that we will go to that area to deal with the problem,
because the Jozini Dam is not supplying the local people and, at the same
time, the municipality is also not benefiting. We said that whilst we were
finding long-lasting solutions, we would be dealing with finding solutions
in the interim to ensure that the matter is dealt with. What we are saying,
in essence, is that the matter has been taken care of. It has been brought
to our attention recently and we’ll be attending to it. We hope that not
only will we be able to find a solution so that the people of the area are
able to benefit from the dam, but that we will also address the situation
in the interim. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

    ELECTION OF PRESIDENT OF FIRST STUDENT REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF THE
                        UNIVERSITY OF THE FREE STATE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Madam Chair, I just want to
respond to the matter raised by the hon Mataboge on the development at the
University of the Free State. My friend, hon Ellis, I am now convinced that
there is a problem about serving a fourth term in the opposition benches.
[Laughter.]

We welcome this development of the election of the first black president of
the Student Representative Council at that institution, and we also wish to
congratulate the SA Student Organisation, Sasco, and Moses Masitha. We see
this as a very positive development at such an institution, and hope that
it will lay a better foundation for really creating a nonracial
institution, especially in the wake of that ugly incident of racist and
sexist abuse of black working-class women at that institution.

I just want to remind members that in our Budget Vote debate earlier this
year, we indicated that we had written a letter to all chairs of councils
of all universities to discuss the report that was commissioned by my
predecessor, Minister Pandor, on racism, gender discrimination and other
forms of discrimination at higher education institutions.

As part of receiving reports from the institutions, we are convening a
higher education summit during the first quarter of next year, so that we
make sure that we continue and deepen the struggle against all forms of
discrimination at our higher education institutions. I also want to say to
the hon Mataboge that I am very pleased that I will be visiting the
University of the Free State on 3 September as an opportunity to further
assess the progress and the situation at that institution. Siyabonga,
Sihlalo. [Thank you, Chairperson.] [Applause.]

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT -
                    BUDGET VOTE NO 16: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT – BUDGET VOTE
                              NO 33: TRANSPORT

     CONSIDERATION OF JOINT REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE AND
 PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT - JOINT MEETING ON BUDGET VOTE
     NO 7: NATIONAL TREASURY, AND THE 2009/12 STRATEGIC PLAN (UPDATE) ON
    NATIONAL TREASURY AND THE 2009-10/2011-12 STRATEGIC PLAN OF THE SOUTH
                           AFRICAN REVENUE SERVICE

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE - BUDGET VOTE NO
   11: STATISTICS SOUTH AFRICA, AND THE WORK PROGRAMME FOR 2009/10 IN LINE
      WITH THE 2004-5/2009-10 STRATEGIC PLAN OF STATISTICS SOUTH AFRICA

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE - BUDGET
               VOTE NO 20: INDEPENDENT COMPLAINTS DIRECTORATE

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE - BUDGET VOTE NO
                           22: SAFETY AND SECURITY

 CONSIDERATION OF JOINT REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION AND
   PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING - JOINT MEETING ON
                        BUDGET VOTE NO 13: EDUCATION

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY -
                    BUDGET VOTE NO 32: TRADE AND INDUSTRY

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENTS -
      BUDGET VOTE NO 26: HOUSING, AND STRATEGIC PLAN 2009 – 2011 OF THE
              DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS AND ITS ENTITIES

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND
   ADMINISTRATION - BUDGET VOTE NO 8: PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION LEADERSHIP AND
                 MANAGEMENT ACADEMY, AND STRATEGIC PLAN FOR
                                  2009/2010
    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND
    ADMINISTRATION - BUDGET VOTE NO 9: PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND
        ADMINISTRATION - BUDGET VOTE NO 10: PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH - BUDGET VOTE NO
                 14: HEALTH, AND STRATEGIC PLAN FOR 2009/10

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS - BUDGET
    VOTE NO 24: COMMUNICATIONS, AND STRATEGIC PLANS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
                       COMMUNICATIONS AND ITS ENTITIES

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS - BUDGET
         VOTE NO 6: GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE
      AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - BUDGET VOTE NO 29: PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL
                                 GOVERNMENT

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES -
 BUDGET VOTE NO 30, AND STRATEGIC PLAN (2009/10 – 2011/12) OF DEPARTMENT OF
                     PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND ITS ENTITIES

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
            AND CO-OPERATION - BUDGET VOTE NO 3: FOREIGN AFFAIRS

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND
                LAND REFORM - BUDGET VOTE NO 27: LAND AFFAIRS

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY -
                  BUDGET VOTE NO 31: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

      CONSIDERATION OF JOINT REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND
        ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,
 FORESTRY AND FISHERIES - JOINT MEETING ON BUDGET VOTE NO 34: WATER AFFAIRS
                                AND FORESTRY

      CONSIDERATION OF JOINT REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND
 ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM - JOINT MEETING ON
            BUDGET VOTE NO 25: ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon House Chairperson, hon Deputy
President, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.


Motion agreed to.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Social Development on Budget Vote No 16:
Social Development accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Transport on Budget Vote No 33: Transport
accordingly adopted.

Joint Report of Standing Committee on Finance and Portfolio Committee on
Economic Development on joint meeting on Budget Vote No 7: National
Treasury, and the 2009/12 Strategic Plan (Update) on National Treasury and
the 2009/10 – 2011/12 Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Services
accordingly adopted.

Report of Standing Committee on Finance on Budget Vote No 11: Statistics
South Africa, and the Work programme for 2009/10 in line with the 2004/5-
2009/10 Strategic Plan of Statistics South Africa (Stats SA) accordingly
adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Police on Budget Vote No 20: Independent
Complaints Directorate accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Police on Budget Vote No 22: Safety and
Security accordingly adopted.

Joint Report of Portfolio Committee on Basic Education and Portfolio
Committee on Higher Education and Training on joint meeting on Budget Vote
No 13: Education accordingly adopted.
Report of Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on Budget Vote No 32:
Trade and Industry accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements on Budget Vote No 26:
Housing, and Strategic Plan 2009 – 2011 of the Department of Human
Settlements and its entities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration on
Budget Vote No 8: Public Administration Leadership and Management Academy,
and strategic plan for 2009/2010 accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration on
Budget Vote No 9: Public Service and Administration accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration on
Budget Vote No 10: Public Service Commission accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Health on Budget Vote No 14: Health, and
Strategic Plan for 2009/10 accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Communications on Budget Vote No 24:
Communications, and Strategic Plans of the Department of Communications and
its entities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Communications on Budget Vote No 6:
Government Communication and Information System accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs on Budget Vote No 29: Provincial and Local Government accordingly
adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on Budget Vote No 30,
and Strategic Plan (2009/10 – 2011/12) of Department of Public Enterprises
and its entities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Co-operation
on Budget Vote No 3: Foreign Affairs accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform on
Budget Vote No 27: Land Affairs accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on Budget Vote No
31: Science and Technology accordingly adopted.

Joint Report of Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs and
Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries on joint meeting
on Budget Vote No 34: Water Affairs and Forestry accordingly adopted.

Joint Report of Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs and
Portfolio Committee on Tourism on joint meeting on Budget Vote No 25:
Environmental Affairs and Tourism accordingly adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES -
                  BUDGET VOTE NO 18: CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, YOUTH, CHILDREN
    AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES - BUDGET VOTE NO 1: THE PRESIDENCY, AND
   STRATEGIC PLAN OF DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN, YOUTH, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH
                        DISABILITIES AND ITS ENTITIES

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS - BUDGET
  VOTE NO 4: HOME AFFAIRS, AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS
                              AND ITS ENTITIES

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
 CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - BUDGET VOTE NO 21: JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL
                                 DEVELOPMENT

     CONSIDERATION OF JOINT REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINING AND
     PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENERGY - JOINT MEETING ON BUDGET VOTE NO 28:
                             MINERALS AND ENERGY

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR - BUDGET VOTE NO
   15: LABOUR, AND THE STRATEGIC PLAN OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND ITS
                               PUBLIC ENTITIES

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS - BUDGET
 VOTE NO 5: PUBLIC WORKS, AND STRATEGIC PLAN 2009/10 – 2011/12 OF DEPARTMENT
                      OF PUBLIC WORKS AND ITS ENTITIES

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND
                 FISHERIES - BUDGET VOTE NO 23: AGRICULTURE

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon House Chairperson and hon Deputy
President, I move:


   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on Budget Vote No
18: Correctional Services accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and People with
Disabilities on Budget Vote No 1: The Presidency, and strategic plan of
Department Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities, and its
entities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on Budget Vote No 4: Home
Affairs, and strategic plan of Department of Home Affairs and its entities
accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development on
Budget Vote No 21: Justice and Constitutional Development accordingly
adopted.

Joint Report of Portfolio Committee on Mining and Portfolio Committee on
Energy on joint meeting on Budget Vote No 28: Minerals and Energy
accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Labour on Budget Vote No 15: Labour, and
the Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour and its public entities
accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Works on Budget Vote No 5: Public
Works, and Strategic Plan 2009/10 – 2011/12 of Department of Public Works
and its entities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries on
Budget Vote No 23: Agriculture accordingly adopted.

House adjourned at 14:51.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 21 AUGUST 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Appointments to Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public
    Office-Bearers

    The following persons have been appointed by the President as members
    of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office-
    Bearers in terms of section 3 of the Independent Commission for the
    Remuneration of Public Office-bearers Act (No 92 of 1997):

        • Judge Phineas Mojapelo, Deputy Judge President of the
          Witwatersrand Local Division;
        • Dr Mpilenhle Pearl Sithole;
        • Dr Mark Herbet Raymond Bussin;
        • Mrs Philisiwe Buthelezi.

2.    Membership of Committees
    The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees
    listed below:


    PC on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries


    DA


    Appointed:
    Pretorius, Mr P J C


    Discharged:


    Coetzee, Mr T W


    PC on Public Works


    UDM


    Appointed:


    Gaehler, Mr L B


    Discharged:


    Kganyago, Mr N M

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Agreement between the African Development Bank and the African
        Development Fund and the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        regarding the Establishment of the Regional Office of the African
        Development Bank and the African Development Fund on the Territory
        of the Republic of South Africa, tabled in terms of section 231 (3)
        of the Constitution, 1996

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the African
        Development Bank and the African Development Fund and the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa regarding the
        Establishment of the Regional Office of the African Development
        Bank and the African Development Fund on the Territory of the
        Republic of South Africa.

    (c)     Government Notice No R.832 published in Government Gazette No
        32484 dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1383), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).

     d) Government Notice No R.833 published in Government Gazette No 32484
        dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1384), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


     e) Government Notice No R.834 published in Government Gazette No 32484
        dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/319), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     f) Government Notice No R.835 published in Government Gazette No 32484
        dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1385), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     g) Government Notice No R.836 published in Government Gazette No 32484
        dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/648), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     h) Government Notice No R.837 published in Government Gazette No 32484
        dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/320), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

 2. The Minister of Tourism


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 25 for 2008-2009 [RP 149-2009].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
    (a)     Letters from the Minister of Finance dated 4 August 2009 and 13
        August 2009, requesting the relevant parliamentary committees, in
        terms of section 4(2) of the Land and Agricultural Development Bank
        Act (No 15 of 2002), to nominate by 28 August 2009, or as soon as
        possible thereafter, candidates for appointment to the board of the
        Land Bank.
        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and
        Fisheries for consideration.

    (b)     A letter dated 7 July 2009 has been received from the Minister
        of Police, Mr E N Mthethwa, informing Parliament of the appointment
        of Mr Anwa Dramat as Head of the Directorate for Priority Crime
        Investigation on 21 May 2009


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Police.

    (c)     Report of the Independent Panel Assessment of Parliament.


         Referred to the Joint Rules Committee and the Parliamentary
        Oversight Authority for consideration and report in terms of their
        respective mandates.

    (d)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on an Overview of
        the Implementation of the Financial Disclosure Framework: Financial
        Year 2007/2008 – April 2009 [RP 37-2009].

                           TUESDAY, 25 AUGUST 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Protection of Personal Information Bill [B 9 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 32495 of 14
             August 2009.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(2) classified the following
         Bill as a section 74 Bill:

          a) Constitution Seventeenth Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 74).

3.    Calling of a Joint Sitting of Parliament

         CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT
    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr M V Sisulu, and the
    Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in
    terms of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Thursday, 27 August 2009 at 14:00 for a Debate on
    National Women’s Day.


    M V SISULU, MP                      M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                      CHAIRPERSON OF THE NATIONAL
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector Education
          and Training Authority (Services-Seta) for 2008-2009, including
          the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 11-2009].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
          Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
          (CTFL-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2008-2009 [RP 87-2009].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education and
          Training Authority (TETA) for 2008-200, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2008-2009 [RP 104-2009].

       d) Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security Sector
          Education and Training Authority (SASSETA) for 2008-2009,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


       e) Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare Sector
          Education and Training Authority (HWSETA) for 2008-2009,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 94-
          2009].

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources
          Fund (MLRF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2008-2009 [RP 131-2009].

3.    The Minister of Human Settlements
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
          Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2008-2009.



