---
title: 'National Assembly - 29 January 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-01-29
---

THURSDAY, 29 JANUARY 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I have to announce that the vacancies that
occurred due to the resignations of Mr M E George, Ms N M Mahlawe and Ms M
A Njobe, and loss of membership of the National Assembly by Mr S L Dithebe
have been filled by the nomination with effect from 27 January 2009 of Mr D
R Rwexu, Mr J M Matshoba, Ms A D N Qikani and Mr D Erleigh respectively.

In terms of section 48 of the Constitution, members of the National
Assembly must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to
the Constitution before they begin to perform their functions in the
Assembly.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: The members are waiting outside to be
sworn in. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a point of order.

Ningixolele inkonyane ithuka isisila. [Please bear with me, I am still
new.]

Would two members please accompany the new members into the Chamber?
[Applause.]

                                    OATH

Mr D R Rwexu, Mr J M Matshoba, Ms A D N Qikani and Mr D Erleigh,
accompanied by Ms J L Fubbs and Ms N D Ngcengwane, made and subscribed the
oath and took their seats.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP I give notice
that I shall move:

   That the House –


      1) noting that the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Fatima Hajaig
         is alleged to have made anti-Semitic comments at a public meeting
         in December;


      2) noting that such comments have caused the SA Jewish Board of
         Deputies to lay a formal complaint with the SA Human Rights
         Commission;


      3) calls upon the Deputy Minister to withdraw the comments and
         apologise to the Jewish community if such remarks were made; and


      4) calls upon this House to debate the rising levels of anti-Semitism
         both locally and internationally.

Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I hereby give notice that I shall move:

   That the House-

      1) debates the current crisis surrounding the government’s provision
         of bus subsidies to bus operations; and


      2) considers possible solutions to this crisis.
Thank you.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Mr Jan Van Eck)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes with profound sadness the untimely death of Comrade Jan Van
         Eck, who passed away on Tuesday, 27 January 2009;

      2) further notes that Van Eck became a Member of Parliament in 1986
         representing the Claremont constituency and in 1992 joined the ANC
         together with four other Democratic Party MPs;

      3) recognises that for his principled stance against the National
         Party and its policy of apartheid, as such, he was ordered out of
         Parliament twice by the Speaker for refusing to withdraw
         ``unparliamentary’’ criticism of NP leaders on their complicity in
         police brutality towards activists;

      4) recalls that, over the past nine years, Van Eck’s role in Burundi
         was described as: ``What was in the beginning a relatively-speaking
         passive, `listening’ one, to that of a resource person on conflict
         resolution and negotiations, and more recently that of an active
         though informal, independent peace facilitator.’’;

      5) believes that his efforts were aimed at contributing towards
         reconciliation, ongoing negotiations, the search for home-grown
         compromise solutions and the progressive development of a
         democratic culture amongst the countries of the Great Lakes and
         Burundi in particular;

      6) remembers that Van Eck was a man of principle, peace, justice and a
         leader of integrity who has devoted his life for the betterment of
         others and that his honesty, objectivity and dedication helped him
         in getting closer to the real truth regarding the fears, concerns
         and objectives of the different and opposing parties than most
         other international players;

      7) further remembers that Van Eck was also recently named a Paul
         Harris Fellow by the Rotary Foundation of Rotary International `` …
         in appreciation of tangible and significant assistance given for
         the furtherance of better understanding and friendly relations
         among peoples of the world.’’; and

      8) conveys its condolences to the Van Eck family and the African
         National Congress, and wants to assure them that the loss they
         sustained is not theirs alone but equally felt by Parliament.

Agreed to.

                           SECOND-HAND GOODS BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

   That the House -

   (1)      notes that it agreed to the establishment of the Mediation
        Committee on the Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2D - 2008] (sec 76(1))
        on 27 January 2009 and that the composition of the committee was
        not complete;


   (2)      elects the following member, as nominated by his party, as a
        representative in the Assembly component of the committee: Mahote,
        S (ANC); and


     3) elects the following member as an alternate member: Mabena D C
        (ANC).


Agreed to.

   EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR REPORT OF AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER
    MATTERS IN TERMS OF SECTION 12 OF NATIONAL PROSECUTING AUTHORITY ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, on
behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move:

   That the House, subject to the concurrence of  the  National  Council  of
   Provinces and notwithstanding the decision of the Speaker of the National
   Assembly and  the  Chairperson  of  the  National  Council  of  Provinces
   ratified by the House on 27 January 2009, which inter alia specified that
   the Ad Hoc Joint Committee to consider Matters in terms of Section 12  of
   National Prosecuting Authority Act has to  report  by  9  February  2009,
   extends the deadline to 11 February 2009.

Agreed to.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE IN TERMS
              OF SECTION 45(1)(C) OF THE CONSTITUTION FOR 2007

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the House revives the following item, which was on the  Order  Paper
   and lapsed at the end of the 2008 annual session,  for  consideration  by
   the National Assembly:


     1) Consideration of Report of Joint Constitutional Review Committee in
        terms of section 45(1)(c) of Constitution for 2007 (Announcements,
        Tablings and Committee Reports, 26 June 2008, p 1437).

Agreed to.

                         ANC VICTORY IN BY-ELECTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J L FUBBS (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, members of the House, it is really
a celebratory day for the ANC, which won 23 out of 27 contested wards
yesterday. [Applause.] This again demonstrates unequivocally the confidence
and trust the people of South Africa have in their organisation, the ANC.

As a mass-based organisation rooted among the people of our country, it
reaches out to every sector of society and indeed every corner of our
country. Yes, we do have the capacity to bring all the members of our
society together to make changes happen faster. We can do this together.

Recently in the Northern Cape, the most hotly contested of all provinces,
the ANC vindicated itself and won 11 out of 15 words, with one result
unknown. [Applause.] Claims that the ANC has been losing support in the
province, have been a gross exaggeration of the facts on the ground. It is
time where you all consulted our people effectively.

As the ANC prepares for the next general election it will mobilise the
members and supporters ... [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

       CONTENDERS FOR POST OF NATIONAL DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L K JOUBERT (DA): Deputy Speaker, the DA notes reports in the press that
Advocate Musi Mkhize is a contender to succeed Vusi Pikoli as the National
Director of Public Prosecutions. We note this with serious concern. Mr
Mkhize is a former legal representative of Mr Jacob Zuma and should, under
no circumstances, be put in a position to decide whether his former client
is to be charged with 783 counts of fraud, bribery and corruption.

Further, we believe Mr Mkhize’s disciplinary record disqualifies him from
the National Director of Public Prosecutions post, since the National
Prosecuting Authority Act requires an individual appointed as national
director to be a fit and proper person of conscientiousness and integrity.
The DA does not believe that the President should have the sole prerogative
to appoint the NDPP, and as such we will submit draft legislation to
curtail the President’s powers in this regard at the earliest possible
opportunity. I thank you. [Applause.]

                       ECONOMIC STATUS IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP has noted the indexes
indicating that inflation in South Africa is indeed slowing down. The
annual rise in the Consumer Price Index inflation gauge targeted for
monetary policy is down to 10,3% from the previous 12,1% in November.

The headline consumer price index which will replace the CPIX as the
official inflation target has indeed slowed down to 9,5% as against the
11,8% in November. With inflation dropping down to more acceptable levels
and against the backdrop of international economic turmoil, it would be
prudent for the Governor of the Reserve Bank to seriously consider dropping
the repo rate by a full 100 points, which will practically mean a one per
cent drop at the next meeting of the monetary policy committee.

Indeed, I believe there is sufficient scope for the Governor to even
consider a larger cut in the repo rate in the months to come. Consideration
must be given to the fact that the South African economy has to remain
internationally competitive, whereas most of the larger world economies
have dropped their bank rates dramatically to even as low as a base rate of
one to two per cent.

It is simply imperative that South Africa must remain competitive,
particularly with regard to our export markets. [Time expired.]

                             FIGHT AGAINST CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M SOTYU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC views crime as a major
national challenge and the fight against crime and its causes remains a
priority of our government for the next five years. As a result of this
commitment the ANC government has established an integrated and seamless
National Criminal Justice System Information Technology database containing
all information relevant to the criminal justice system and reviews and
harmonises the template for gathering information relating to the criminal
justice system.

The ANC believes that the national struggle for freedom was the critical
overarching vehicle to bring about peace, security and stability to our
society. In dealing with issues of crime, the ANC proceeds from the premise
that a rising quality of life also means improvement in the safety and
security of citizens in their homes and environs where they live, work and
engage in extramural activities.

However, government cannot fight crime alone. A critical focus therefore
must be placed on mobilising society to make life difficult for criminals
in our midst; mobilising communities and the establishment of street
committees to assist law enforcement agencies.

The ANC-led government’s overall programme of national democracy and
transformation will eradicate the conditions that breed social crime, so
shall our contribution also create an environment of peace, stability,
economic growth and social development in South Africa and on the rest of
the continent. I thank you. [Applause.]

                         2010 WORLD CUP SAFETY PLAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP is alarmed that South
Africa’s current 2010 World Cup Safety Plan has not sufficiently provided
for the rights and safety of young people. Nor do we have an effective
regulatory system to monitor pornography sites and sex offenders, whose
activity is likely to rise along with other exploitive crime as we approach
the World Cup.

The ACDP is, however, pleased to hear that the United Nations Campaign led
by former Springbok Rugby Captain, Dawie de Villiers, to stamp out sexual
exploitation is making a major international impact; and establishing a
global code of ethics for tourism which reflects the responsibilities of
all stakeholders. But what is South Africa’s position? On the one hand we
hear statements by the former chief of police and some ANC Members of
Parliament supporting the legalising of prostitution for the 2010 World
Cup; while on the other, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development expresses the admirable intention to have new legislation on
human trafficking in place by the end of the year.

Clearly a contradictory position, as it is impossible to separate issues of
prostitution and human trafficking. Surely, in an Africa where the shame
and tragedy of the slave trade is still so keenly felt, we should be
passionately protecting the rights of all our people against slavery and
exploitation of every kind. The public is unmistakably against proposals to
legalise prostitution and there are concerns that, with less than 500 days
to the World Cup and with the high rate of Aids deaths, the government is
not taking this issue seriously enough. What is government’s position and
what are its intentions?

The ACDP also calls on all parties to be upfront with the electorate on
these issues. Thank you.

                CALL ON LARGE COMPANIES TO LOWER FOOD PRICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr I E JENNER (OD): Speaker, die Onafhanklike Demokrate is bekommerd oor
die steeds stygende voedselpryse wat talle Suid-Afrikaners in behoeftigheid
gedompel het.

Die OD veg aanhoudend vir die reg van ons mense om nie hul sakke leeg hoef
te maak net sodat hulle die basiese items kan koop nie. Dis egter `n
verligting en verblydend om te hoor dat daar groot maatskappye is wat
daartoe verbind is om ons mense se lewensstandaard en nood te verlig. Meer
gesprekke van hierdie aard moet plaasvind sodat ons mense se belange eerste
kan kom, en dan moet die daad by die woord gevoeg word om dit te laat
geskied.
Ons doen ook ’n beroep op groothandelaars om nie net aan winste te dink
nie, maar om op ons mense se swaarkry te fokus, en meer ondersteuning word
benodig om te verseker dat hulle kos kan bekostig.

Die grootste uitdaging in ons land is dat armoede, wat geen kleur of
partypolitieke assosiasie ken nie, steeds die grootste bedreiging is. Die
platteland word die ergste hierdeur geraak omdat daar min, of bykans geen,
ekonomiese aktiwiteite plaasvind nie. Die inwoners van ons land se hoop is
op ons gerig om hulle omstandighede indringend te verander. (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr I E JENNER (ID): Speaker, the Independent Democrats are concerned about
the ever-increasing food prices that have plunged many South Africans into
indigence.

The ID is continually fighting for the rights of our people to not have to
empty their pockets simply to buy the basics. It is, however, a relief and
gladdening to hear that there are big companies that are committed to
uplifting our people’s standard of living and alleviating their need. More
discussions of this nature should take place so that our people’s interests
can come first, and words must then be put into action for this to be
realised.

We also want to appeal to wholesalers to not only think of profits, but to
focus on our people’s suffering, and more support is needed to ensure that
they can afford food.

The greatest challenge in our country is that poverty, which knows no
colour or party-political association, remains the biggest threat. The
rural areas are the worst affected, as very little, or almost no economic
activity takes place there. The hopes of the inhabitants of our country are
directed at us to change their circumstances significantly.]

                         CHALLENGES OF FOOD SECURITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs N M TWALA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC is committed to creating
an environment that ensures that there is adequate food available to all;
that we grow our own food and protect the poor communities from the rising
prices of food and eradicate hunger.

In response to challenges arising from food security, the ANC government
will embark on the following, amongst other things:

Introduce “food for all” programmes to procure and distribute basic food at
affordable prices to poor households and communities; the government will
develop an appropriate institutional approach for the implementation of
this programme; introduce measures to improve the logistics of food
distribution such as transportation, warehousing, procurement and
outsourcing in order to reduce food prices in the long term; continued
enforcement of stronger competition measures will be used to act against
food cartels who collude to inflate food prices.

The ANC welcomes the commitment made by Pick `n Pay to summon their
suppliers to look at how come food prices go up while the international oil
prices go down. We call upon other retailers to emulate this example set by
Pick `n Pay.

                        BUS COMPANIES SUBSIDY CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Deputy Speaker, the plight of the working poor is
exacerbated by the ANC-led government that owes bus companies over R1,5
billion in subsidies. Much as the country, led by the ANC government, may
try to look good to the world by ensuring that the Fédération
Internationale de Football Association, Fifa, 2010 World Cup becomes a
success, that may also fail as workers may not make it to work and,
therefore, not have the stadiums completed on time.

The UCDP calls on government and the Department of Transport, in
particular, to do their utmost to find money and meet their contractual
obligation to the transport service providers. Pleading poverty is out of
the question as services have been rendered as agreed to by the department.
We support the bus companies that have gone to court in an effort to
extract what is due to them from the radical central government.

It is unthinkable that a Black-led government would ever mete out such
treatment to people who try to lead an honest living and at the same time
provide employment to citizens of the country. If the bus companies stop
operating at the end of this month, as they threatened to do, many people
will not make it to work and production will fall as most work in the
industries is on the shoulders of the black commuters.

The UCDP puts it to government to do all they can to seek a political
solution to the imminent crisis, lest we have chaos in this country on the
eve of the Confederations Cup. I thank you.

                  FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN INDIA AND SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Madam Deputy Speaker, on 2 January 2009, India
celebrated the auspicious occasion of Global Friendship Day in Delhi, North
India and the Chief Minister of Delhi, Smt Sheila Dikshit and Dr Bhishma
Narain Singh, former governor of Tamil Nadu and Assam, proudly presented a
lifetime achievement award certificate of excellence to our very own hon
MEC for Sports and Recreation, KwaZulu-Natal, leader of the MF, Mr Amichand
Rajbansi.

We take this opportunity to thank the hon Chief Minister of Delhi for
honouring our MEC and recognising his valuable friendship and contribution
from within and beyond South Africa. We further take this opportunity to
congratulate hon Rajbansi on his auspicious award and wish him the very
best in his continued striving, dedication and commitment with regard to
our people. We invite the House to consider making such honorary awards
that follow India’s example of appreciating the contributions from within
and abroad. Thank you.

                         INVESTIGATION OF ARMS DEAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, almost four years ago the DA
released what we believe to be enough evidence to justify a further
investigation into the arms deal. At the time, we also predicted that the
arms deal would not go away. Indeed, it has not. These are just a few of
the issues that have emerged since then. Jacob Zuma said in March 2008 that
if he is convicted on charges, he will expose others; recommendations
concerning the appointment of a commission of inquiry made by Judge
Nicholson on 12 September 2008, at which the ANC rejoiced; some of the
assets of Fana Hlongwane, an advisor to the then Minister of Defence, have
been frozen pursuant to a court order obtained in November 2008, following
his alleged involvement in corrupt dealings in connection with the arms
deal. The Sunday Times published a report in August 2008, to the effect
that former President Mbeki received a bribe of R30 million, of which he
passed R28 million to the ANC. No action against any person involved has
ever been instituted by anybody.

In this report we ask for an independent panel, that Parliament should
continue to exercise its oversight role with respect to the arms deal,
including a debate on the adoption of a resolution calling for the
appointment of a judicial commission.

On Tuesday this week, I gave notice of a motion that this matter be debated
by the National Assembly. In so doing, the DA has opened a window of
opportunity for this matter to be debated publicly. The ANC must stop
running away from this issue. [Time expired.]

                                JOB CREATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C MABENA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, decent work is the foundation of
the ANC-led war against poverty and inequality, and its promotion is the
cornerstone of all our efforts. Due to the ANC-led government, sound
management of the economy and better use of our national resources has seen
the economy grow every year since 1994.

In recent years the economy has, for the first time, been creating jobs
faster than the rate at which new people have entered the job market. On
average, half a million new jobs have been added to the economy every year
since 2004, reducing unemployment from 31% in 2003 to 23% in 2007.

There is still much to do to reach our goals and new challenges have
arisen. We have to ensure that we grow the economy to meet the needs of our
people squarely. Lasting victory over poverty and hunger requires the
creation of decent work opportunities and sustainable livelihoods.

The creation of decent work remains the primary focus of the economic
policies of the ANC-led government by ensuring that macroeconomic policy is
informed by the priorities that have been set out in this manifesto. The
Expanded Public Works Programme created a million work opportunities a year
ahead of its target.

Ngiyathokoza. [Thank you.]
                FIGHT AGAINST CHOLERA IN BUSHBUCKRIDGE REGION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the IFP, I stand
to commend the good work of the medical, nursing and administrative staff
of both Mapulaneng and Matikwana Hospitals in their daunting task of
handling and administering the influx of patients suffering from cholera in
the region of Bushbuckridge in Mpumalanga province. Regrettably, the area
has no clean water supply and the people depend on water from rivers and
wells, which become polluted during rainy days.

Hospitals have the responsibility for treating cholera. The Department of
Water Affairs and Forestry and local communities are responsible to see to
it that people’s basic rights to cholera-free water supply are not
infringed. I call upon all officials to rise above petty party politics on
issues of national interest. Thank you.

                            HEALTH CARE INSURANCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms R J MASHIGO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the statement will be on Health
care insurance. The Freedom Charter commits the ANC-led government to a
preventative health scheme run by the state, free medical care and
hospitalisation provided for all, with special care for mothers and
children.

The ANC believes that South Africa commands huge health care resources
compared with many. Yet the bulk of these resources are in the private
sector and serve a minority of the population, thereby undermining this
country’s ability to provide quality health care and improved health
outcomes.

The ANC, however, is determined to end the huge inequalities that exist in
the public and private sector by making sure that these sectors work
together. We will introduce a national health insurance system which will
be phased in over the next five years.

The health insurance system will be publicly funded and publicly
administered and will provide every South African with access to quality
health care, which will be free at the point of delivery. People will have
a choice of which service provider to use within their district.

A social solidarity principle will be applied and those who are eligible to
contribute will be required to do so. Access to health care will not be
according to payment. The ANC will improve quality standards for both
public and private sectors, which will include specific targets for the
provision of adequate numbers of workers at all levels of the health care
system, including recruitment, treatment and the filling of all vacant
posts. Thank you.

                               MATRIC RESULTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Western Cape Education
department is making absurd excuses to avoid conducting a simple enquiry
into the 2008 matric marking process to establish whether or not marking
standards were lowered. Its refusal to do this investigation suggests that
it knows full well that there were problems with the process. It is in the
interests of everyone in South Africa that the matric results be seen as
the credible and accurate reflection of matriculants’ skills.

Learners who have worked hard and done well do not deserve to have the
value of their hard work undermined by inflated pass marks given to others.
Employers, trainers and tertiary institutions must know they can use the
matric exam to evaluate the learners properly.

The DA received several reports earlier this year from exam markers, who
for obvious reasons wish to remain anonymous, that they had been instructed
by their supervisors to raise the marks of weak students. We have over the
past few days received several similar complaints from others.
It would be easy for the department to corroborate this by pulling a random
sample of weak students’ marks, having them independently evaluated and
releasing the results to the public. This would put the controversy to an
end once and for all. But it continues to refuse to do so and continues to
evade its responsibility to do its duty to guarantee the credibility of the
results by accusing the DA of fabrication. [Time expired.]

                      HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN SRI LANKA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv Z L MADASA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC wishes to express a
very serious concern at the unfolding humanitarian crisis that is emerging
in Sri Lanka. This war between the Tamil Tigers and the Sri Lankan
government has been going on well over 27 years and has resulted in
hundreds of deaths of civilians from both sides of the conflict and much
destruction in the country.

The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, LTTE, is regarded by the Tamil people
of Sri Lanka as their authentic liberation organisation who is fighting for
their inalienable right to self-determination. The continued conflict in
Sri Lanka has been cited by the human rights watch international monitoring
mechanism as a conflict now reaching unacceptable, wanton destruction of
lives and property.

The African National Congress urges all parties in the conflict, both the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and the Sri Lankan government, to
immediately institute a ceasefire and to allow humanitarian aid and
assistance to be brought to the civilians caught in the conflict and who
are in need, and to immediately return to the negotiating table and resume
a peaceful process of finding a lasting political solution. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                    FIRST ORDER OF THE DAY TO STAND OVER

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I have been informed that the first
Order will stand over. The Secretary will read the second to sixth Orders.

    OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NEW GENERATION CORRECTIONAL CENTRE BEING BUILT IN
                                  KIMBERLEY

       OVERSIGHT VISIT TO BRANDFORT AND GROOTVLEI CORRECTIONAL CENTRES

  BUDGET VOTE 18 AND THE 2008/9-2012/13 STRATEGIC PLAN OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
                            CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

              ANNUAL REPORT OF JUDICIAL INSPECTORATE OF PRISONS

 UNANNOUNCED VISIT TO FOLLOW UP ON CONDITIONS AT POLLSMOOR HOSPITAL SECTIONS
                         (Consideration of Reports)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order, we didn’t seem to
have Ministerial responses to the statements today. Was there a reason for
that?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, we are now dealing with the second to the
sixth orders. You had an opportunity earlier to raise that point.

Mr M J ELLIS: I don’t think there is anything in the Rules that says I
can’t stand up later on and raise a point of order on the same issue. But
this must be the first time ever that we have gone through a process
without one ministerial response, and there must be a reason for it.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, on that matter that has been raised by hon
Ellis, I have been advised that there is no Minister that is at this point
ready to respond to the statements. I would like, then, to proceed with the
Order of the Day.

Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Deputy Speaker,  allow  me  to  say  good  afternoon  to
everybody present. Thank you very  much  for  this  opportunity  to  present
these five committee reports on behalf of the portfolio  committee  to  this
House. The five reports are the visits to the New  Generation  Prison  being
built in Kimberley, and so on. I think that they have read these reports  to
the House.

The reports are there for all of us to read. I’m not going to deal with  the
reports in detail. We made recommendations on all of them.  [Interjections.]
Can you please give me a chance?

However, I decided to deal with maybe one or two issues  in  these  reports.
And the first one will be our visit to Grootvlei and Brandfort Prisons.  One
of the things that concerned the  portfolio  committee  very  much  was  the
awaiting-trial children and juveniles.

The committee raised the issue with the social workers and  with  the  staff
present there. Why do we have so many children in this prison? And  this  is
what the social workers and correctional officers were saying: that in  most
of the cases when these children appear in court, when it is a black  child,
this child will be sent to prison. When it is a white child, the courts  are
doing everything in their power to  see  to  it  that  this  child  must  be
diverted to community things. This is one issue that  really  concerned  the
committee very much.

On the unannounced visit to Pollsmoor, I’m going to deal with  that  report.
The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa guarantees every  sentenced
prisoner the provision, at state expense, of adequate medical treatment.
Health professionals in the department, as well,  are  equally  expected  by
the relevant legislation, rules,  regulations  and  their  councils  at  all
times to practise their professions within the legal frameworks.

In May 2007, the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services paid an
unannounced visit to Pollsmoor Correctional Centre. The purpose for the
visit was to assess the state and quality of health care service at Medium
A and the admission centre. The need for such a visit was necessitated by a
number of complaints the committee had received from both the inmates and
the medical staff. On that visit the committee found the following: That
the centre was crippled by the chronic and severe shortage of health
professionals; extremely unprofessional and unethical conduct and practice
by health professionals was uncovered by the committee; poor supply and no
control of medications, including schedule six and seven drugs, were easily
identified; basic principles of medicine storage and handling of expired
medicines were not observed by the staff; basic principles of record
keeping were also not observed by the staff; basic management principles of
a ward or a unit were not implemented; emergency equipment was incomplete
and not in good working order and not checked; this means that dealing with
any life-threatening emergency would have been very difficult for the
staff; wards and units were not providing a therapeutic or a healing
environment and patients’ files were incomplete.

Whilst appreciating and acknowledging the severe shortage of health
professionals, the committee was distressed by the high level of
unprofessional, unethical conduct and the complete neglect of basic health
care principles by the health professionals in these centres. The committee
expressed its findings to the management and recommends that the management
should attend to those gross shortcomings at least within a period of three
months.

As  such,  on  27  November  2007,  the  committee  undertook  yet   another
unannounced visit to the same centre with the intention of following  up  on
the recommendations made in May. During the  November  visit  the  committee
was pleased by a number of dramatic improvements that had happened within  a
space of five months. Drugs storage had been corrected. The hospital  had  a
fully equipped and functioning emergency trolley. Wards had been  renovated.
Twenty-four nurses had been recruited through  headhunting  and  advertising
of posts.

The committee is of the strong view  that  the  department  of  correctional
services should conduct inspections of all its health  facilities  in  order
to assess and evaluate the standard of professional  practice,  the  quality
of health care services and adherence to policies, amongst others.

It can’t be correct that things will be corrected only after  the  portfolio
committee’s visits. I am saying this because Modder B and Barberton  Prisons
might be facing the same, if not worse, challenges as Pollsmoor did in  May.


However, as a committee, we want  to  thank  the  Pollsmoor  management  for
their swift and positive response to our recommendations. We hope that  they
will continue with their good work. We will  continue  to  make  unannounced
follow-up visits. I want to thank everyone in the committee for  their  hard
work and I wish them well. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker I move:

  That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on Oversight Visit
to New Generation Correctional Centre being built in Kimberley accordingly
adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on Oversight Visit
to Brandfort and Grootvlei Correctional Centres accordingly adopted.

Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on 2008/9 Budget
Vote 18 and the 2008/9-2012/13 Strategic Plan of the Department of
Correctional Services accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on 2006/07 Annual
Report of Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on 20 November 2007
Unannounced Visit to follow-up on Conditions at Pollsmoor Hospital Sections
accordingly adopted.

  working towards a peaceful election by promoting political tolerance and
          ensuring freedom of expression and freedom of association

                                  (Debate)

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues; as political parties,
we are about to fight an all-important election, one that will determine
the future character of this country, either as a vibrant multiparty
democracy or a stagnant one-party state. Our debate today, therefore, is
one of critical importance as it goes to the heart of the environment that
will prevail in the next election and whether our election will indeed be
free and fair.

A recurring theme among political parties and the media in recent months
has been the critical issue of avoiding pre-election violence and acts of
intimidation. Most parties have paid lip service to a commitment to
nonviolence, but it is clear that not all parties have done enough to
ensure that supporters at the grassroots level adhere to this commitment.
It is clear that there has been a disjuncture between word and deed.

The IFP and other parties have already asked what specific measures the
Independent Electoral Commission will take to monitor and prevent political
intimidation and violence in the run-up to the 2009 election. Our concerns
have not yet been fully allayed.

We believe that the media also plays a very critical role in working
towards ensuring peaceful elections. Earlier this week the IFP had to
defend itself against two false claims relating to political intolerance
which were broadcast on TV and published in various newspapers. My
colleague, hon S C Vos, will later expand on the issue of advocacy
journalism.

It was also suggested that the murder of a traditional leader, Inkosi
Mbongeleni Zondi of KwaZulu-Natal, had to do with him parting ways with the
IFP to join the ANC. But in fact, the truth is that Inkosi Zondi had no
links with either the ANC or the IFP. So the false claims, based on
unjustified information, only served one purpose, and that is to fuel
political intolerance.

Furthermore, it had been claimed that the IFP attempted to disrupt
preparations of other political party events and that, as a party, we have
never had to endure disruption by ANC supporters in our electioneering
campaigns. These claims, too, were false. The truth is that the IFP’s
public meetings in KwaZulu-Natal and elsewhere are routinely disrupted by
rowdy ANC supporters.

In fact, many of our pre-election events in KwaZulu-Natal are never
complete without disturbances and intimidation by local ANC supporters.
Billboards have been set on fire and posters have also been defaced. Today,
I must therefore say that we must guard against half truths and
irresponsible political rhetoric because it can only work against our
shared common vision of a free and common election.

In his newsletter last month, our President, Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi,
referred to hostilities surrounding the launch of COPE, which, in our view,
demonstrated that we still have far to go in order to place nonracialism
and a genuine respect of diversity, including political choice, at the
heart of our public disclosure.

Also, a few weeks ago, one of our IFP youth brigade leaders, Mr Bonginkosi
Dube, was murdered. A member of the ANC has confessed that the murder was
politically motivated.

We can never let the dark days of politically motivated killings return
ever again. As political parties we have to ensure that we act against
rogue elements within our membership. Let us work together and affirm today
that as a country, we are committed to political tolerance and freedom of
expression which must be the core principle of our democracy.

Lastly, I believe as political leaders of various political parties, we
must send out a clear message today to those who do not adhere to the basic
principles of democracy, free assembly and free speech that they will be
strictly disciplined and they will face the full brunt of the law.

Furthermore, the IFP appeals to the hon Minister of Safety and Security,
provincial MECs and other stakeholders to ensure the impartiality of our
security forces in the run-up to the 2009 elections. This will also be a
very critical element that will determine whether or not we are able to
deliver a free and fair election, in which all members of the electorate
have the ability to make informed choices and exercise their right to vote
for their chosen parties without fear of intimidation. Prevention is always
better than cure. [Time expired.]

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, believe me, I won’t address you as Madam Deputy
Speaker. When we went to the polls on 27 April 1994, we did so as a nation
in awe of our first taste of democracy. Against all odds and despite all
prophecies of doom, our first democratic elections were conducted in an
exemplary manner, as an example to the world. Since then, we have continued
the tradition of tolerance, pride and dignity with each election that we
have had.

Who of us here can forget the image of a person being brought to the
polling station, old and weak, pushed in a wheelbarrow by a family member,
in order to be able to exercise his democratic right for the first time in
his life? How can we forget the image of an old grey-haired man on crutches
supported by a youth, exercising his right for which so many have laid down
their lives.

We remember the long queues up and down the perimeters of the polling
stations, multitudes waiting patiently, and sometimes in silence, for their
turn to cast their votes for the first time, without any fear. This year
will be no different from those times.

It would be wrong of us not to acknowledge the role of the Independent
Electoral Commission in all our elections, and what a success story they
have been and still are today. None of our democratic victories would have
been possible without the commitment, professionalism and dedication of the
group of women and men who, behind the scenes, put together what we
sometimes take for granted.

They have not only been responsible for every election since 1994, but have
also displayed the true spirit of ubuntu. They have become a beacon of hope
for many people on our continent by assisting and ensuring free, fair and
democratic elections. This year will be no different from those times.

It would be disingenuous of any of us to stand on this podium and not
acknowledge the role of our security forces, and more specifically members
of the SA Police Service, in ensuring that each one of us, no matter what
political party one belongs to or supports, can exercise his or her
democratic right in a free, safe and secure environment.

Our men and women in blue overcame all the challenges and threats that were
there prior to and during the 1994 elections with dignity and pride. Our
police have demonstrated and assured us that political parties are free to
communicate their messages in the most remote areas. Most political parties
have had their peaceful rallies in most provinces with overwhelming
attendance and with no violence reported, in preparation for the upcoming
2009 elections.

The ANC-led government, as in the past, will again support and ensure full
mobilisation of security forces and the SA Police Service in this election
to ensure that they act speedily and effectively against anybody who tries
to compromise the final results of these elections.
Fifteen years later, our debates have become more vigorous, our resolve
more intense and our democracy more mature. During these 15 years many
things have happened; new players have joined the field with their own
hopes and aspirations. Every party must be allowed to convey its messages
in every corner of our country with no fear or intimidation.

Sinoxanduva siyi-ANC, ngakumbi singabemi boMzantsi Afrika. Amehlo elizwe
lonke ajolise kuthi. Indlela esiza kuluphatha ngayo olu nyulo yiyo eza
kusetyenziswa ukukhangela ukuba uluntu luza kube lukhuselekile na xa siza
kube siququzelela umdlalo weHlabathi weBhola eKhatywayo wama-2010.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We have a responsibility as the ANC, especially since we are the citizens
of South Africa. The whole country is looking upon us. The way we are going
to conduct these elections will be used to determine the safety of the
people when we will be hosting the 2010 Soccer World Cup.]

Let each political party inside and outside Parliament play its role in
ensuring that we have peaceful elections. We owe it to our forebears and to
our heroes. We owe it to the images and memories of the 1994 elections and
the future of our country and nation.

The local government by-elections held today or yesterday are a testimony
to the fact that the ANC is the future of this country. The people of this
country have spoken and they will speak again in April 2009. The people of
this country will always support the ANC. I thank you.

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, as all of us in this House know, we are
approaching an election later this year - one which will probably be one of
the most significant since 1994. Considering our nation’s history of
conflict and injustice, it is remarkable that we have managed to hold
elections that are more or less peaceful, that are characterised by greater
or lesser degrees of tolerance and that are, by and large, efficiently
administered and widely regarded as legitimate.

This is something we should, however, never take for granted. The manner in
which we conduct our elections in South Africa stands in stark contrast to
many other countries. Since 2000 there have been disputed elections in
Cambodia, Georgia, Belarus, Ukraine, Peru, Venezuela, Kazakhstan,
Uzbekistan, Armenia and Kenya. Disputed elections are not the preserve of
developing or newly democratised countries. The accounts of electoral fraud
over many years and at all levels of government in the United States would
make any decent election observer’s hair stand on end. Election disputes in
these countries have ranged from electoral fraud - that is ballot stuffing,
inaccurate voters’ rolls, repeat voting and discrepancies in results -
through to claims of inequitable access to the media, to campaign finance
and to the voter registration process.

The most serious election disputes arise when the climate in which the
election takes place is characterised by violence, intimidation and
abduction. Some incidences of this sort of violence and intimidation have
occurred in South Africa in our past and we pray that they do not continue
in our future. Some of the worst examples of these have occurred and
continue to occur right on our doorstep in Zimbabwe, where the elections of
2000, 2005 and 2008 were widely condemned as rigged. Thousands of
Zimbabwean people have been abducted, tortured, humiliated, intimidated and
in some cases murdered, in an effort to prop up the corrupt and violent
regime of Robert Mugabe. The silence and inaction of the government of
South Africa while all this was happening has damaged our reputation as a
country that promotes freedom and democracy. We must never go down that
road in South Africa! Democracy is a fragile plant; it must be nurtured and
protected. It is very easily destroyed. The first test of any democracy is
the ability to hold successful elections.

Successful elections are characterised by a number of features: Firstly,
there needs to be a wide acceptance of what is known as the rules of the
game. This includes permissible and prohibited conduct as well as a
mechanism for policing and enforcing the rules in an even-handed and
transparent manner by the IEC and by the security forces.

Secondly, one requires an informed and involved public. This means that
there must be programmes of voter education. It means that the media in
general, and the public broadcaster in particular, must present the public
with the issues and the options in a way that enables voters to be able to
make informed choices. In this respect, the SABC needs to be commended on
the actions that they have recently taken. We are already enjoying, and
will continue to enjoy, more debates between political parties and we will
be having televised town hall meetings. New mechanisms have been put in
place and an independent media monitoring body will measure election
coverage for fairness. The DA has encouraged the SABC to build periodic, at
least monthly, reports into the tender so that these can be conveyed to the
public. A complaints officer has been appointed specifically for political
parties with a 72-hour turnaround target in dealing with complaints.

Thirdly, one needs an election infrastructure that delivers ballots to
stations, that ensures that the stations open and close on time, that are
protected so that voters feel safe and believe that their votes will be
secret and that deliver a result that is credible and legitimate.

Fourthly, we have to have a voters’ roll that reflects accurately the
population who are eligible to vote and which makes it impossible for
people who are not on the roll to vote.

Lastly, we require scrutiny of the registration and voting processes by
agents of the parties and NGOs that ensure that vote rigging and
manipulation of the processes are identified and can be interdicted at the
level of the voting station. This scrutiny must be supported by access to
party liaison mechanisms and, where these are insufficient, to the
electoral court.

All these are mechanistic devices. The IEC and the Electoral Act do, for
the most part, deliver these outcomes, but these measures alone will be
insufficient to deliver a successful election, unless they are accompanied
by tolerance of opposing points of view and differing ideas. In the open
opportunity society we stand for, debate and divergence produce better
solutions to the challenges that face us. Unfortunately, however, there is
an intolerance of debate and disagreement in many parts of our country and
frequently intolerance of different ideas is accompanied by a rhetoric that
can only serve to inflame emotions and provoke dissension.

When Mr Gwede Mantashe describes the DA as a party of “recycled National
Party members” and when the ANC Youth League Gauteng leader, Jacob Kawe
describes opposition parties as “cockroaches who should be destroyed”, as
he did at a Swapo rally last year, they undermine the tolerance required
for a successful democracy. When Angie Motshega calls the leaders of Cope
“dogs” and Buti Manamela calls them “baboons”, they undermine the tolerance
required to sustain a successful democracy. When Julius Malema, the ANCYL
President, tells his organisation that “we are ready to take up arms and
kill for Jacob Zuma”, he is undermining the tolerance required to sustain a
successful democracy. When the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs makes the
comment she allegedly did, about Jewish money controlling America and other
Western countries, she fatally undermines that tolerance.

The campaign which will culminate in the election later this year has
scarcely started, but the inflammatory rhetoric is in full flood. We should
be proud of the fact that in 1994, 1995, 1999, 2000, 2004 and 2006 we were
able to hold relatively peaceful and legitimate elections in South Africa.
Each time we do so, the IEC and the public broadcaster and the security
forces get better at their jobs. What will undermine a peaceful and
legitimate election are those in any party who inflame their followers and
who think that they have a monopoly on political virtue. Political leaders
in all parties have a duty to ensure that those who make such statements
are repudiated and disciplined and those who do not do so will face
electoral censure and the judgement of history. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M H HOOSEN: Chairperson, as part of the leadership of the ID, I would
like to express our party’s full commitment to creating and nurturing an
environment which is conducive to holding free and fair elections this
year.

The ID would like to call on all political parties and indeed the South
African public as a whole, to be tolerant towards those who, by expressing
different political beliefs from our own, are practising their
constitutional right to freedom of political association.

We would like to call on all leaders of all parties to teach and preach
political tolerance so that we can avoid any disruption of our democratic
process. It is up to our leaders to lead by example and to refrain from war
talk and other acts of disruption that prevent ordinary South Africans from
holding or attending political meetings and political conferences and
ultimately from voting for the party of their choice.

Political parties have the right to campaign in any community in the
country and we need a commitment from all parties and their leaders that
they will work hard to ensure that there are no no-go areas in the run-up
to the national elections.

The ID has repeatedly warned against any intimidation on political grounds
and we would like to reiterate that warning here again today. It is our
sincere hope that the 2009 elections will be an opportunity for a mature
exchange of ideas, where we will focus on the different policy options open
to our people, rather than on mud-slinging and sensationalism.

I would like to remind political parties and their leaders that we are all,
firstly, citizens of South Africa and thereafter members of our political
parties. The ID is a signatory to the Constitution and we therefore take
our mandate to contribute towards free and fair elections very seriously.

Debate will become heated but, as leaders, we need to take control, calm
things down and restore order and normalcy in such situations. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, South Africans appear to have a new-found
enthusiasm for politics and, with elections around the corner, they are
debating issues and preferences passionately.

However, failure to practise political tolerance and failure to respect
freedom of association remain obstacles that erode any democratic euphoria
which may exist. Being able to accept that people are entitled to their
opinions, ideas, customs, practices and religion, while maintaining the
right to respectfully disagree, seems to present a greater challenge to
some than would be expected.

Tolerance or respect, acceptance and appreciation of the rich diversity of
our country, must be promoted, defended and maintained if we are to have a
peaceful election. Political parties across the board should be expected to
respect the views of other parties and to refrain from provoking
individuals or groups intentionally. Without safeguards for the free
expression of divergent opinions, we risk a tyranny of the majority or
even, as we have seen in Zimbabwe, a minority, if they refuse to relinquish
power.

Freedom of association, which includes the right to voluntarily form, join
and participate in any association or to disassociate, must also be
protected and political parties have a responsibility to liberate their
members in this regard.

We can achieve a peaceful election, and choosing to value the concepts of
political tolerance and freedom of association is a key element of that
success. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, the atmosphere is thick and
tense in South Africa as political parties gear themselves up for the
national and provincial elections.

We, in the UCDP, pray much for all involved to have the strength to heed
the words of the Chairman of the Electoral Commission of Ghana, Dr Kwadwo
Afari-Gyan, when he said, “peaceful elections are the responsibility of
all.” It is not surprising that Ghana produced a tight, tense, yet flawless
election.

We maintain that, with the 1 700 voting stations set for the forthcoming
elections, there is no need to bus voters to the voting stations. Those who
want to vote should be able to do so freely and should not be coerced into
showing appreciation by voting for the provider of the transport.

We may have differences of opinion on Zimbabwe but, in Zimbabwe, people go
to the election stations on foot; they are never bussed in. Therefore, on
election day, their results are trustworthy.

The media should also play a responsible role in the elections – right from
the run-up – by giving credible access to all political parties. They
should also report activities responsibly and accurately so as to enable
the electorate to make intelligent choices.

Security agencies should create general peace by ensuring crowd safety at
all rallies and by exhibiting zero tolerance of all inappropriate
behaviour. It is unfortunate that, in some cases, politicians themselves
are our worst enemies because of the irresponsible and reckless statements
they make that fan the flames of intolerance. They tend to disregard the
golden rule that says, “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.
There is nothing wrong in people dissociating themselves from one party in
order to associate with another. Calling such individuals dogs, baboons,
witches or stooges polarises relations among the electorate while it
debases those who say those things.

I have always wondered how people can disregard their own legislation. The
regulations, especially the code of conduct contained in our Electoral Act,
No 73 of 1998, as amended, spell out clearly what has to be done in order
to have a peaceful election.

If all parties can follow the letter and the spirit of the Act, South
Africa will enjoy going to the polls. If we take this legislation and Dr
Afari-Gyan’s words of wisdom to heart, there is no reason why we should not
have a peaceful and credible election. I thank you.

Mrs M M MAUNYE: Chairperson, comrades, hon members, as we approach this
year’s general elections, I want to thank the ANC-led government for the
history of violence-free, fair and thriving elections that we have had
since 1994.

The promotion of political tolerance, freedom of expression and respect
among political parties is an important means of establishing a culture
conducive to acceptance of one’s freedom of association.

Instead of allowing diversity of race and culture to become a limiting
factor in human exchange and development, we must refocus our
understanding, discern in such diversity the potential of mutual
enrichment, and realise that it is the interchange between great traditions
of human spirituality that offers the best prospect for the persistence of
the human spirit itself.

The ANC’s first elective conference in 1991 committed itself to political
tolerance and further defined it as follows:

  Tolerance is respect, acceptance and appreciation of the rich diversity of
  our world’s cultures, our forms of expression and ways of being human. It
  is fostered by knowledge, openness, communication, and freedom of thought,
  conscience and belief.
  Tolerance is harmony in difference. It is not only a moral duty; it is
  also a political and legal requirement. Tolerance, the virtue that makes
  peace possible, contributes to the replacement of the culture of war by a
  culture of peace.

Since its foundation, the ANC has fought for and upheld the right of South
Africans to vote, and be voted into positions of authority. This found
expression in the famous statement of the Freedom Charter, that “the people
shall govern”.

In the years before and after the 1994 elections, many of our people died
tragically as a result of political violence, and since 1993 the ANC has
done everything to ensure that we have free and fair elections.

The question we should repeatedly be asking ourselves as our democracy
matures is, how can intolerance be countered? And, based on this, I will
focus on these four points:

The first point is that fighting intolerance requires law. The ANC-led
government is responsible for enforcing human rights laws, for banning and
punishing hate crimes and discrimination against minorities, whether these
are committed by political parties, individuals, NGOs or private
organisations. The ANC-led government has always ensured equal access to
courts, human rights commissioners or ombudsmen, so that people do not take
justice into their own hands and resort to violence to settle their
disputes.

The second point is that laws are necessary but not sufficient for
countering political intolerance in individuals and organisational
attitudes. Intolerance is very often rooted in ignorance and fear – fear of
the unknown, of the other - other cultures, nations, religions - and
political rivalry.

Intolerance is also closely linked to an exaggerated sense of self-worth
and pride, whether personal, national or religious. These notions are
taught and learned at an early age. Therefore, greater emphasis needs to be
placed on educating more and better. Greater efforts need to be made to
teach our children about tolerance and human rights, and about other ways
of life. Children should be encouraged at home and in school to be open-
minded and curious.

Education is a life-long experience and does not begin or end in schools.
Endeavours to build tolerance through education will not succeed unless
they reach all age groups, and take place everywhere: at home, in schools,
in the workplace, in law enforcement, multipurpose centres and legal
training.

Intolerance is most dangerous when it is exploited to fulfil the political
and territorial ambitions of an individual or groups of individuals.
Hatemongers often begin by identifying the public’s tolerance threshold.
They then develop fallacious arguments, lie with statistics and manipulate
public opinion with misinformation and prejudice. The most efficient way
that the ANC-led government has dealt with the matter was to limit the
influence of hatemongers by developing policies that generate and promote
press freedom and press pluralism, in order to allow the public to
differentiate between facts and opinions.

The last point is that intolerance in a society is the sum total of the
intolerance of its individual members. Prejudice, stereotyping,
stigmatising, insults and racial jokes are examples of individual
expressions of intolerance to which some people are subjected daily.
Intolerance breeds intolerance. It leaves its victims in pursuit of
revenge. In order to fight intolerance, individuals should become aware of
the link between their behaviour and the vicious cycle of mistrust and
violence in society. Each one of us should begin by asking: Am I a tolerant
person? Am I a stereotypical person? Do I reject those who are different
from me? Do I blame my problems on them?

An ANC-led government has passed the necessary legislation and subsequent
amended legislation to make it illegal for anybody to unlawfully take away
or diminish the very rights that are inherent in the practice of democracy.

The guarantees of these rights are anchored in the provisions of the
Electoral Act and the Electoral Code of Conduct, which promote conditions
conducive to free and fair elections, including tolerance of democratic
political activity, free political campaigning and open public debate.

The ANC, therefore, requests all political parties to honour their pledge,
made in Durban in November 2008 at the IEC pre-election conference, to
respect political differences and desist from using violent tactics in the
run-up to the 2009 general elections.

At that occasion, the ANC KwaZulu-Natal provincial chairperson, Comrade
Zweli Mkhize, reaffirmed the ANC’s belief in freedom of choice and freedom
of association and recommitted his party to a nonviolent and peaceful
campaign by stating that for a democracy to prosper, we need an unhindered
reflection of the people's will at the voting booth. We in the ANC will
take firm action against any of our members who do anything that undermines
the attainment of a truly free, fair and peaceful election.

The ANC-led government has also, in the past, and will now, in this
important general election which takes place soon, ensure the full
mobilisation of the security forces and the South African Police Service to
ensure that they are able to speedily and effectively act against anybody
who tries to compromise the final outcome of results. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I am so pleased that this topic has been
raised, especially when in the past political relations have been anything
but what the topic suggests.

The pulling off of posters and the blasphemous ill-truths that rally
political parties to be at each other’s throats are what I refer to. It is
obviously expected in a diverse society such as ours that there will be
great diversity in political views, values and plans to address sustainable
delivery. However, we have learned to respect our citizenry’s freedom of
choice without the ill-fated temptation to ridicule other parties so as to
attract people into yours.

In this same diverse society we respect that citizens have different needs
and, similarly, we as political parties have our strengths and weaknesses
in this regard. However, I invite all to embrace this election with dignity
and respect; dignity and respect for our citizens, ourselves and each
other. The wheels of success cannot do without any of us, and the wheels of
success will only turn when we all rest our hands on them.

Let’s do away with the opportunistic bullies who find no dishonour in
defaming and degrading those of us who work feverishly at delivering to our
people, and while we remain focused on our commitments to the people, they
remain driven to dominate power and get rid of anyone in the way of doing
so. It is crucial that we instil in our people a similar tolerance and
encourage a dignified and respectable election climate by exhibiting such
tolerance here on this podium first.

While the Minority Front certainly enjoys freedom of speech, we do not
encourage this as a right to impose on anyone’s dignity and self-respect.
We certainly hope that all parties shall join together in committing to
this tolerance and paving the way to a free, fair, peaceful and democratic
election for 2009. Chairperson, yes, together we can. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, to ensure a peaceful and politically tolerant
election, we need to operate in a culture of freedom. The Federation of
Democrats, a member of the Christian Democratic Alliance, further believes
that the Independent Electoral Commission conducts its business as
independently as possible to ensure a free and fair election.

However, when it comes to the SABC, the struggle for free and fair
political coverage still continues. The SABC is not a neutral information
service, but a broadcaster too politically embedded to appreciate freedom
of ideas and association. Recently I voted against the amendment to the
Telecommunications Act to defend the independence of the SABC board.

A case in point that I would like to mention here is the kind of coverage
we receive, or more correctly the absence thereof, in respect of
broadcasting political party footage on the SABC’s debate on election
issues. I wish to bring to the attention of this House that the footage
that was taken of our input on the debate on education on Sunday, 25
January 2009, was not broadcast.

Why should the SABC go through all the pretentious effort to interview me
in my parliamentary office and not broadcast the interview? Is it because I
took an opposing view to the education system? The SABC’s excuse is that
the selection of parties to take part in the elections debate is an
editorial one. That sounds more like political censorship.

The SABC can give editorial leeway to the Congress of the People, Cope,
whilst the Christian Democratic Alliance, CDA, of which the Federal
Democrats is a member, is overlooked by the SABC; given the fact that Cope,
like the CDA, must still contest the elections to gain representation in
Parliament. So, on what basis did the SABC make the editorial decision, one
might ask?

A free and tolerant society that respects the political views of others is
not only a requirement; it must also be ingrained in the business ethics of
state institutions and other public corporations. Thank you.

Nmz  J  B  SIBANYONI:  Ngilothjisa  uSihlalo  namalunga  woke   wePalamende.
Isihloko esikhuluma ngaso namhlanjesi siqakatheke khulu kwamabala; sithi:


    Ukusebenzela amakhetho anokuthula ngokukhuthaza ukuzwana kezepolotiki
    ngokuqinisekisa ilungelo lokukhuluma ngokutjhaphuluka nokuzibandakanya.

Inarha  yeSewula  Afrika  iyinarha  ehle   nekarisako.   Yinarha   esibonelo
eenarheni ezinye ze-Afrika nangaphetjheya. Isikhathi  esigadungileko  phambi
kwamakhetho wango-1994, khabe kusikhathi  esibudisi  khulu.  Soke  siyakwazi
okwakhulunywa ngaphambi  kwe-Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission,  i-TRC.
Sithi into efana naleyo ingabe isenzeka  godu.  (Translation  of  isiNdebele
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J B SIBANYONI: I greet the Chairperson and all Members of Parliament.
Today’s topic is of paramount importance, as it says:


    Working towards peaceful elections in encouraging political tolerance by
    ensuring freedom of expression and freedom of association.

South Africa is a beautiful and interesting country. It is an example to
other African countries and abroad. The period before the 1994 elections
was a very difficult time. We all know what was said before the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, the TRC. We say such situations should never
prevail again.]

The ANC-led government has passed the necessary legislation and subsequent
amended legislation to make it illegal for anybody to unlawfully take away
or diminish the very rights that are inherent to the practice of democracy.

The guarantees of these rights are anchored in the provisions of the
Electoral Act and the Electoral Code of Conduct, which promote conditions
conducive to free and fair elections, including tolerance of democratic
political activity, free political campaigning and open public debate.

Amongst other issues, the Code calls on everyone - every registered
political party and its candidates - to publicly state that everyone has
the full right to freely express their political beliefs and opinions; to
challenge and debate the political beliefs and opinions of others; to
publish and distribute election and campaign material, including notices
and advertisements; to lawfully erect banners, billboards, placards and
posters; to canvas support and recruit members for a party and hold public
meetings; to travel to and attend public meetings.

In the context of peaceful, free and fair elections, freedom of association
would mean the freedom of an individual to support a political party of his
or her own choice. This freedom also finds expression in the Electoral Code
of Conduct, which, amongst others, makes it illegal for anybody to compel
or unlawfully persuade any person to attend and participate in or not to
attend and participate in a political meeting, march, demonstration or any
other political event, by specifically prohibiting anyone from resorting to
violence and intimidation to influence the outcome of the elections; to
deny representatives or candidates of registered political parties
reasonable access to voters in public and in private places and to
unlawfully prevent the holding of a political meeting, match or
demonstration or any other political event.
The Electoral Act is very clear and specific about these matters. It makes
it a criminal offence to resort to such means and methods to influence the
outcome of elections. The law provides for the punishment of anyone found
guilty of violating any of these provisions. The punishment of offenders
derives from the central importance of the electoral process to the success
of our democratic system.

We would never be able to say that we have a true democracy if our people
do not have the possibility to freely choose people who represent them in
our national, provincial and local legislatures.

The ANC is the party that gave birth to other parties since many years ago.
Such parties do not have any impact whatsoever on the ANC in contesting
elections. In three years’ time, the ANC will be 100 years old. It will be
celebrating a centenary. One really cannot compare a 10-day-old party with
a 100-year-old party. Soon and very soon, the ANC will prove this to all
and sundry.

There is a freedom song that was sung in exile and inside South Africa. It
says words to this effect ...

   E-South Africa safa yinzondo.
   Amaphoyis’ azonda thina,
   I-CCB izonda thina,
   Nale-SADF izonda thina.

That was the situation in the past.

Today, we are in a situation where we have a hostile media that profiles
and gives a lot of coverage to some parties that the media wishes should
win the elections.

We have a judiciary that always complains that the ANC is attacking it and
that that amounts to a threat towards the independence of the judiciary.
But luckily, we have the multitudes; we have the masses that are with us as
the ANC. East London is a living example. One may ask, when the masses are
behind us, who can stand against us?

In conclusion, I would like to point out that the ANC remains firmly
committed to a free and fair election campaign where all parties will have
access to voters. Our opponents can rest assured that we will do everything
in our power to protect their rights to campaign. We have fought long and
hard for the right to vote and all of us who are serious about democracy
must protect each other’s rights in the electoral process.

However, during the last few weeks, the ANC has been criticised for the
actions of people who claim ANC membership. Our message to our members is
simple, namely that we would not tolerate any intimidation, threat or
violence against our opponents. ANC members who break the provisions of the
Electoral Code of Conduct will be disciplined by our structures as well as
face prosecution for crimes under the Electoral Act. We have nothing to
gain from violence and intimidation.

I think all of us, including those here in Parliament, should use the word
``contest’’ the elections, and not ``fight’’ the elections. We should not
be saying we are going to a battle out there or going to battle it out. No,
no! That sends a wrong message to the people on the ground who interpret it
to mean real fighting - hence the incidences before 1994; and hence what we
had during the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, TRC, process and what
we had with my colleague, hon Van der Merwe, during the applications for
political pardons. I will not disclose this but it is one and the same as
what was said in the TRC.

As the ANC, we know that “free, fair and peaceful” are the crucial words
for assessing the quality of elections. They denote the international
standards for measuring credibility at the ballot box.

Finally, I am glad to see that my former chairperson of the then Pretoria
subregion of the ANC, Comrade Paul Zondo, is back in Parliament. We have
been deployed with him to bring peace and political tolerance during the
days of the former Intando ye Sizwe Party, IYP, together with the ANC and
the alliance structures. I am happy that there is a lot that we are going
to do together here in Parliament. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson, the Inkatha Freedom Party thanks all who have so
positively participated in this debate. Many of us in this honourable House
– though so few at the moment – experienced the horror, firsthand, of
political intolerance and political violence throughout our land, prior to
our first post-apartheid elections in 1994.

We witnessed death and destruction and human suffering which individuals,
families and communities, to this day, remember as if it were yesterday.
Many continue to be the victims of this trauma which affected many millions
of lives.

Surely, what we are saying today is that this must never, ever, happen
again in our country, and it is up to us to ensure that it never does. This
is the commitment we must all make today. There are others outside this
honourable House who must also do so.

Let me put a human face on the reality of political intolerance. I remember
Dudu Dhlamini, a four-year-old girl, who was badly burned, when the home in
which she lived with her mother, was fire-bombed in the early 1990s.

She was carried screaming into the nearby Kwesini hostel in the then East
Rand. There I found her lying on a concrete floor, her eyelids melted
beyond repair, the skin on her face suppurating and raw, her tiny hands so
burned that they had contracted into misshapen stumps.
I remember so vividly that there was a peach tree in flower outside the
hostel, and, as we bundled her into my car, my thoughts fleetingly went to
the flowers Dudu would never see. Today Dudu is in a home for the blind.
Her mother died a few years ago of HIV/Aids.

To this day, I work as a trustee of the National Peace Accord Trust,
attempting to assist ex-combatants – ANC, Inkatha, PAC, Azapo, Black
Consciousness – whoever needs to receive the psychosocial help so many
desperately still require 15 years since our liberation. Our work is far
from over.

This human tragedy had its multifaceted causes and effects, but at its root
was one word: Politics. There were many actors in this blot on our nation’s
history and many wore various guises. While politicians must shoulder much
of the blame, there were others who fanned the flames which condemned Dudu
to a life of darkness and pain.

The media took sides. Advocacy journalists took sides. They too became
political actors. Blatant lies became truths in which enemies were somehow
made to be inhuman, and so then grew the fiction which became a reality
that it was somehow right to kill the enemy.

Personal opinions were paraded as factual news stories which we still see
to this day. Tensions were escalated, which we still see to this day. In
the end, then, everybody had blood on their hands and the role of the media
in this regard has yet to be truthfully exposed.

As we face what is probably the most important election in our history
since 1994, let us indeed work towards a peaceful election by promoting
political tolerance. We must recognise that, since 1994, there has been
continuing, sporadic political violence and intolerance which must be
stopped.

Let us indeed work constructively with all the other actors in this
political drama – especially the media – because we are in a period of
political drama.

Our forthcoming elections do appear to have all the signs of developing
into a very serious political drama for various reasons, including the fact
that both IFP and ANC leaders have been killed recently, and including the
fact that political posters are already being defaced. People are being
called the most dreadful names, as hon Selfe has just enumerated to us all.

Let us think before we speak and act. Let others, too, think of the
consequences of their own actions when they, too, play their own roles in
what should be an exemplary exercise in transparent political participatory
democracy. Thank you.

Debate concluded.
The House adjourned at 15:44.


