---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-11-10
---

TUESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:23.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr P VAN DALEN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move:

   That the House debates the current Eskom crisis and the economic effects
   of government interference in the internal affairs of public enterprises.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member. That is notice of a motion.

Mrs A T LOVEMORE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the findings presented in the recently released
   State of the Air report and the mechanisms and actions now required to
   ensure that all South Africans breathe air that is not harmful to their
   health or their wellbeing.

Ms S P RWEXANA: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House urgently and thoroughly debates the issue of the mounting
   deaths of civilians at the hands of the police in the aftermath of the
   “shoot to kill” sentiments expressed by the Minister, the President and
   the Deputy Minister.

Mr D A KGANARE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates whether the extent of security being provided to
   the President of the ANC Youth League is being matched in respect of
   similar youth leaders of other political parties.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move, on behalf of the DA:
   That the House debates the recently held presidential, provincial and
   national assembly elections in Mozambique and the lessons learned from
   these elections for South Africa.

Mrs M WENGER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the fiasco around the so-called “Referendum
   Matatiele”, in particular the issue of why the IEC was not involved in
   the process to ensure that the referendum was free and fair.

                  20TH ANNIVERASARY OF FALL OF BERLIN WALL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

      That the House –

      1) notes that 9 November 2009, commemorates the 20th anniversary of
         the fall of the Berlin Wall, effectively signalling the end of the
         Cold War;

      2) further notes that the fall of the Berlin Wall paved the way for
         German reunification, which was formally concluded on 3 October
         1990;

      3) recognises that the lessons learned from this period in history
         have strong resonance in our own, also marked by strong and
         unnecessary divide;

      4) calls on all members and the entire South African nation to
         identify those walls that still exist in our minds, and break them
         down; and

      5) recommits itself to those values that unite the nation and urges
         South Africans to build on them together.


Agreed to.


    APPOINTMENT OF WOMAN PROVINCIAL POLICE COMMISSIONER IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House-

    1) notes that the second woman ever to be promoted to provincial
       commissioner in the South African Police Service, Monnye Ngobeni,
       who served in the police for 22 years and is academically qualified
       for the job, was appointed on 5 November 2009, as provincial
       commissioner of KwaZulu-Natal; and


    2) congratulates Commissioner Ngobeni on her promotion.


Agreed to.

               INTERNATIONAL DAY OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that 3 December marks the annual observance of the
        International Day of Persons Living With Disabilities and the aim
        of this day is to promote an understanding of disability issues;


     2) further notes that this day also seeks to increase awareness about
        gains that are derived from the integration of persons living with
        disabilities in every aspect of political, social, economic and
        cultural life;

     3) acknowledges that persons living with disabilities continue to face
        barriers to their participation in society and are often forced to
        live on the margins of society;

     4) believes that dignity and justice for all persons are universal
        principles, and the rights of all members of the human family form
        the foundations of freedom, equality and justice for all, and peace
        in the world; and

     5) commits itself on this day, to the creation of an ever-expanding
        frontier of the dignity of people living with disabilities, since
        the achievement of that dignity, for this section of our society,
        should be predicated on the freedom of the individual to determine
        his or her destiny.

Agreed to.


 SA RESERVE BANK GOVERNOR, TITO MBOWENI, HANDS OVER TO NEW GOVERNOR, mS GILL
                        MARCUS, after 10-year tenure

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that on Friday, 6 November 2009, Mr Tito Mboweni, the eight
        Governor of the South African Reserve Bank officially handed over
        his position of Governor to Ms Gill Marcus, after an impressive ten-
        year tenure at the bank;

     2) further notes that his career includes many exceptional highlights,
        including several honorary doctorates from amongst others, Unisa,
        the University of Natal, the University of North West and
        Stellenbosch University;

     3) recognises that under his leadership the South African economy
        experienced prudential monetary policies which contributed towards
        unprecedented economic growth over a period of several years, and
        managed to see us through one of the worst global financial crises
        ever in commendable fashion;

     4) thanks Mr Mboweni for his dedicated service to our nation over the
        past ten years; and

     5) wishes him the best of success in all his future endeavours.

Agreed to.


           CONDOLENCES ON PASSING AWAY OF COMRADE ELEANOR KASRILS

                             (Draft resolution)

Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes with profound sadness the passing away of comrade Eleanor
        Kasrils on Sunday 8 November 2009;


     2) further notes that she was a committed fighter in the struggle to
        end apartheid and to work for a non-racial, democratic South
        Africa;


     3) acknowledges that her devotion to the freedom of all the people of
        South Africa led to her arrest in 1963 and that, subsequent to her
        escape from custody, she went into exile where she continued to
        work tirelessly for the freedom of the South African people;


     4) remembers her tireless dedication to the liberation movement in
        England and in Tanzania during her approximately 30 years in exile;
     5) believes that her selfless contribution towards the struggle and to
        the birth of the new constitutional democracy can never be fully
        appreciated; and


     6) conveys its sincere condolences to her friends, comrades in the
        struggle and the Kasrils family, in particular to her husband
        Ronnie, her daughter Brigid and her two sons Andrew and
        Christopher.


Agreed to.


             Declaration of 21 November as world television day

                             (Draft Resolution)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that in March 1998 the United Nations General Assembly
        proclaimed 21 November as World Television Day commemorating the
        date on which the first World Television Forum was held in 1996;

     2) further notes that this day is designed to encourage global
        exchanges of television programmes focusing on peace, security,
        economic and social development and the enhancement of cultural
        exchange;

     3) believes television is one of the most influential forms of media
        in our present time because of the considerable convenience it
        offers to its audience of all ages, nationalities and social status
        worldwide;

     4) further believes that television plays an effective role in
        disseminating information and knowledge and serves as a powerful
        tool for reflecting and shaping human conditions and aspirations;
        and

     5) commits itself to the broadcaster that aligns its programmes with
        the principles of the Constitution, social cohesion, nation-
        building, spiritual, moral and cultural values of the country’s
        people united in their diversity.

Agreed to.

     PARLIAMENTARY RUGBY TEAM TO PLAY IN THE UNITED KINGDOM AND IRELAND

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that from 19 to 29 November 2009, thirty parliamentary rugby
        team members will be visiting the United Kingdom and Ireland;


     2) further notes that the team comprises Members of Parliament across
        party lines, parliamentary staff members and VIP Protection
        Services;


     3) acknowledges that during the tour the team will play two matches:
        the first match against the House of Commons and the House of Lords
        in London on Sunday, 22 November 2009, the second against the Irish
        parliament on Saturday, 28 November 2009;


     4) further acknowledges that in addition to rugby, a programme is
        being put together that will enable MPs and members of the team to
        interact with South Africans living in the UK and Ireland as well
        as visit both Houses of Parliament in the UK and Ireland; and


     5) wishes the team a successful tour and a happy stay in the UK and
        Ireland.


Agreed to.

    PROCESS OF DEVELOPING WHITE PAPER ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE IN SOUTH
                                   AFRICA

     (Statement by Minister for Co-operative Governance and Tranditional
                                  Affairs)

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Thank you
very much, Deputy Speaker. Well, I hope that I’m not going to fall into the
category of ubab’ uKomphela [Mr Komphela] in terms of the ability to
remember who is chairing, who is presiding.

Deputy Speaker, comrades in Cabinet, Deputy Ministers, hon members and
ladies and gentlemen, it is with a great sense of pride and honour that we
present in this august House a process that will be undertaken in
developing a Green Paper that will subsequently lead to the White Paper on
Co-operative Governance in South Africa.

An attempt has been made in the past to ensure that legislatively the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act of 2005 was developed with the
aim of trying to translate Chapter 3 of the Constitution on co-operative
governance. The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa recognises and
appreciates the fact that there are three spheres of government in this
country: they are interdependent, they are interrelated, and they are
autonomous, meaning that we recognise the fact that South Africa is one
country, has one President and that we must move to a situation in which
there is one system.

On 11 May 2009, the President of the Republic, with his visionary insight,
established the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs. This happened after the weaknesses had been identified. These
weaknesses were related to the issue of policy development, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation, budgeting, and the utilisation of human
resources. As much as the outcome recognises the fact that there is a lot
of duplication, there is a silo mentality and, at the same time, there is a
challenge in respect of co-operation and co-ordination within the spheres
of government.

The resources that are quite important in respect of human resources and
financing, as well as time which is a precious commodity, illustrated that
they are not utilised optimally. Therefore, the issue here is that, at
times, we don’t get value for money. Our motto that has been borrowed from
the people’s movement, the ANC says: “Together, we can do more”, and we can
do more with fewer resources and with less input for greater output and
greater outcomes. We are saying it cannot be business as usual. We must do
things differently, particularly under this global economic meltdown. This
situation compels us to mend our ways.

It is against this background that we are embarking on a process of
developing a Green Paper on Co-operative Governance. It is an area in which
we haven’t claimed to be specialists or in which we haven’t claimed
authority. Therefore, we are calling upon all South Africans from all walks
of life, from across the length and breadth of our country, to come forward
and assist in developing a system of co- operative governance in this
country that is simple, uncomplicated, easily understandable and
accessible, a system that incentivises value for money and maximises the
impact as a result of co-ordination and co-operation between government
with all its spheres and the people of South Africa.

Let us look at where we are structurally within the three spheres of
government. In South Africa, at a national level, we have a Cabinet, which
is the highest decision-making body in government, with its committees. We
also have the Fosad, the Forum of South African Directors-General, which is
a structure of officials - where the DGs are sitting. We have the
provincial executive councils and their committees, and on an
administrative level they are led by Fosad. In local government, we have
mayoral or executive committees with their committees. Administratively
these structures are led by municipal managers.

The co-ordination of these structures in all these spheres is as follows.
The supreme body is the Presidential Co-ordinating Council where the
President, with the Premiers and, of course, the mayors and also some – not
all – Ministers sit. We also have 16 Minmec, which are sectoral structures
dealing with concurrent functions. We have nine premiers’ intergovernmental
fora, and 46 district intergovernmental fora that are led by the mayors of
the districts working with local mayors. These are the structures that are
prevailing. The SA Local Government Association, Salga, participates in
these structures.

We are going to be assessing the efficiency and efficacy of the structures,
looking at their output and at the value added in the system of governance.
There is a litany of structures between government and civil-society
formations which, as we speak, we do not know how many of them there are.
We will be doing an assessment of the structures; we will be looking at
them. We will also be looking at the issue of trying to avoid public
participation fatigue. In addition, we will be looking at resources of
these structures as to whether we are funding democracy in the proper way.

On concurrent functions, this process will also inform us whether
nationally agreed-to priorities are implemented by provinces as they are
supposed to be. We have agreed that the Green Paper will be ready in April
2010. That Green Paper will be presented, having been developed allowing a
process of consultation and engagement. This process will be led by an
interdepartmental team, composed of Cogta, the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs; the Presidency, the National Treasury,
the Department of a Public Service and Administration, the Department of
Health, the Department of Education, the Department of Social Development,
the Department of Human Settlements, the Department of Rural Development
and Land Reform, the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs, the
Department of Energy, the Department of Police, the Department of Economic
Development, and the SA Local Government Association, Salga.

Whilst the policy is being developed, there are interim arrangements that
have been agreed upon by Cabinet. These arrangements say that in terms of
concurrent functions, when a Minister goes to a community, the Minister
must be able to engage with the premier of the province, must be able to
engage with his or her counterparts at the local level on concurrent
functions, and must be able to communicate with the district and local
municipalities about the visit so that we are able to promote co-ordination
and co-operation on the way in which things are being done as we go
forward.

We have agreed that these guidelines must be followed. I want to say at
this sitting that some premiers – about five of them – have written letters
raising the same issues before even being told: that when leaders go into
their own areas they would like to be extended the courtesy of being told
beforehand. This is because at times there are commitments that are made by
national leaders, and you find that national leaders, when they are no
longer there, the issues still remain with the local leadership. Therefore
the best thing to do is to ensure that we work together cohesively and
coherently in the way we do things.

The other area that has been agreed upon, that is going to be taken up, is
that when powers and functions are assigned, it must be done within a
policy framework and a set of guidelines that is called “Assignment of
Powers and Functions,” which was developed in 2007. We are saying the
letter and spirit of this policy have to be followed, because this will
prevent a situation in which unfunded mandates are given to municipalities
in a way that undermines their ability to do the work.

The review of the concurrent functions will be done by the sectors, co-
ordinated, of course, by Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs,
which will, in turn, report to Cabinet on a quarterly basis, also looking
at the value added of these structures.

I must say, in the execution of this duty, we’ll be meeting with the leader
of the DA, the Premier of the Western Cape, at which we will be discussing
some of the areas of disagreement with regard to the visit of the Minister
to Mitchells Plain and Khayelitsha, where the water was cut off. You may
find that we’re not singing from the same page in our engagement of these
issues.
Therefore, what we are saying is that we’ll be meeting to look at effecting
the prescripts of the intergovernmental relations framework, wherein, if
there are disputes or disagreements between the spheres of government, they
must be able to sit down and engage. We’ll be engaging on this, but I must
hasten to say that people must know that there is no part of South Africa
where the national government is not going to go, irrespective of any party
that is governing that area. [Applause.]

We must allow a situation in which, if citizens in a particular area are
calling upon a Minister or an MEC or the President, these people have the
right to go and listen to the people on the ground, and we are going to do
the same. The Western Cape as a province, Cape Town as a municipality, are
not going to be excluded from that or treated specially when we deal with
those issues. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

We are calling upon everyone who has a contribution to make to come to the
party when we conclude. Leonard Bernstein said:

   If the conductor uses a baton, the baton itself must be a living thing,
   charged with a kind of electricity, which makes it an instrument of
   meaning in its tiniest movement.

Many voices, but one message, melody and song! Thank you very much.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]
Mr W P DOMAN: Deputy Speaker, again today the Minister showed respect for
this institution of Parliament by coming to us and also by showing respect
for us as public representatives to outline what he’s going to do and
giving us in the House the opportunity to reflect on it.

I’ve got a government document here. On page 7 his predecessor promised us
that by the end of 2008 that there would be a new White Paper on provinces
and a review report on local government, but the Minister is picking up
that baton and we will support him as far as possible.

I want to tell the hon Minister that he’s very welcome to visit
municipalities and the province that is governed by the DA. We’ve got some
good practices there that he can learn from and also take to the ANC
provinces. [Interjections.] [Applause.]
I’m also very glad that he is in a conciliatory mood with the Premier of
the Western Cape about the visit to Mitchells Plain and Khayelitsha; I’m
sure that that will be resolved. He actually only made only one mistake and
that was to go with the hon Fransman to that area! [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]

The DA agrees that our country needs a major public debate about our system
of co-operative governance. We need a governance system that is more
effective and efficient, and which better addresses the needs of our
people. This review should be driven by what we need in practice. We need
that powers and functions of the different spheres should be more clearly
defined and that unfunded mandates of, especially, municipalities are
resolved.

It is clear from the protests that ordinary citizens do not know which
sphere of government is responsible for what. Houses, for example, are
demanded from municipalities while it is not their function. We need
greater national co-ordination and the alignment of planning. The
integrated development plans of municipalities are everything but
integrated with the municipal budgets, let alone provincial planning, and
therefore remain wish lists of communities.

We need better assistance financially and otherwise, and better oversight,
especially over municipalities, not in a manner to infringe on their
autonomy, but to assist them to fully fulfil their role. Therefore we need
intergovernmental relations to be properly structured and practised to
their full potential.

In addressing these challenges it will be important to remember that the
Constitution is our founding document for the new South Africa. It contains
the basic agreements we reached and it must bind us all together in our
quest for solutions to improve our governance system. Therefore changes to
the Constitution should not be made lightly, and if any are necessary, they
should be made in the same spirit of consensus-seeking that underpinned the
crucial agreements that were reached with the interim and final
Constitution.
The creation of provinces is one such agreement that we should respect. The
whole system of co-operative governance of the three spheres lies, as
you’ve said, at the heart of our Constitution and should also be respected
as such. Therefore, because this is so important, we would like to remind
you that proper consultation with the public is an absolute necessity,
Minister. In this regard the Minister should allow proper time for inputs
and comments, and allow for everyone to be heard.

In many ways we are in a crisis, especially at local government level, and
therefore we have to address the significant amount of fraud and corruption
that is taking place. We have a breakdown in communication, and I think we
can do better. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr T BOTHA: Hon Deputy Speaker, Cope welcomes the process outlined by the
Minister towards a streamlined institutional arrangement, which seeks to
improve service delivery at both provincial and local spheres of
government.

However, Cope believes that the success of this process will depend on the
respect given to the constitutional autonomy of each sphere of government.
In pursuing the consultative process, the government will have to adhere to
the principles of separation of powers between government and political
party and between the ruling party and organs of civil society.
Cope is already worried about the trend that is beginning to emerge in the
country where officials of the party go around the country replacing
municipal officials, mayors and councillors. We are not sure what the role
of the Minister is and what the role of the party is.

Co-operative governance, as has already been said, is the cornerstone of
our Constitution and the success of our delivery processes. It is therefore
necessary to respect and encourage the fact that each sphere plays a role
that it is mandated to carry out by the Constitution, without interference
from party structures. But it also needs to be empowered to carry out these
roles, and it would be a pity if in each sphere of government when there is
a different party in power, that the national government would seek to
interfere with the running of the affairs of that particular sphere of
government. [Applause.]

We hope that the proposed amendments to the Constitution are not seeking to
undermine the democracy that is enshrined in our Constitution. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Deputy Speaker, I would like to start by thanking the
Minister for bringing this to us in the House. We think it’s a very good
thing that he presents it here. And I would like to say to him that we will
gladly engage in the process. We are pleased too that he is doing a Green
Paper too before a White Paper. There are departments that leap from
nowhere to a White Paper, leaving no space for public participation. So,
thank you for that.

But I would like to make two comments that are pertinent, I hope, to this
discussion. The first is that you are going to have to strike a balance
between voluntarism and commandism in the way you balance the extent of
regulation. The tendency at the moment I suspect in government is to leap
on the side of a more regulatory framework, which may or may not be
appropriate, because if we are talking about co-operative governance, we
need people to co-operate and forcing people to co-operate is a bit of an
oxymoron. You may as well do away with the word co-operative if you are
telling them what to do. So that is the first caution.

The second one – and this is nine seconds - and I speak ... I don’t know
which one it is. Sorry, Chair, on my little thing there, the computer, it
said I had two minutes. Here it says I have 10 seconds.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, you don’t even have those two minutes.

Mr P F SMITH: On those computer things there on my desk, it says two
minutes. [Interjections.] So it should be one minute more now.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. Just continue.

Mr P F SMITH: So, Chair, that is my first caution: strike a balance between
the two.

The second caution, Minister, is that please do not see regulating IGR as
the Holy Grail of government failures. It is important, of course, to get
your IGR working properly, but there are other very important issues that
are just as important, if not more important, if you want government to
work. Frankly, to ascribe failings of government basically to the IGR
system that is not doing its job is a weak excuse.

Let me give some values and other things that are just as important. How
about efficiency, dedication, hard work, integrity, clean governance, a
good service ethic, common sense and value for money? All these issues, I
would argue, are just as important in sorting out government failures as
good as IGR. So, when you get involved with the White Paper, please let’s
not think that that White Paper process and even implementing it will solve
everything. It is just part of a far bigger picture of problems that you
need to address yourself to as government. Thank you.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, my advice to my colleague is that he
must play 30 Seconds more often, then 60 seconds will feel very long.

Ek wil vir die agb Minister sê dat hy baie dinge in die openbaar sê en dit
is ook duidelik dat hy hier, met die witskrif wat ter sprake gaan kom, ’n
poging aanwend om wel die probleme van plaaslike regering aan te spreek. Ek
wil ook vir u, agb Minister, sê dat u in hierdie hele proses moet luister
na wat die voorstelle van die opposisie is. U moet luister as ons met
voorstelle na u toe kom, want ons is ook hierso in belang van Suid-Afrika.

Ek het in 1998 hier van dieselfde podium vir die Minister, ek dink dit was
toe Sydney Mufamadi, gesê plaaslike regering is die bom wat ons land in
duie gaan laat stort en dit is presies wat gebeur het. U moet nie wag tot
ons op so ’n stadium kom dat alles in duie gestort het voor u begin luister
na die opposisie nie. Dan sal ons ’n beter Suid-Afrika kry met ’n beter
bedeling op plaaslike regeringsvlak, en ek stem saam met die agb lid van
die DA dat ons nie net kan torring aan die Grondwet wanneer dit ons pas
nie. Aan die ander kant, het die DA drie grondwetwysigings voorgestel om
oorlopery toe te pas, so hulle is die laaste om te praat. Dankie. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I want to inform the hon Minister that he is saying a lot of things in
public and it is also evident here, with the White Paper coming up for
discussion, that he is making an effort to address the problems of local
government. I also want to tell you, hon Minister, that you should listen
to the opposition’s proposals in this whole process. You should listen when
we come to you with proposals, because we are also acting in South Africa’s
interest.

In 1998, from this very podium, I told the Minister, I think it was Sydney
Mufamadi at the time, that local government is the bomb that will bring our
country to ruin and that is exactly what happened. You should not wait
until we have reached the stage where everything has fallen into disrepair
before you start listening to the opposition. Then we will give rise to a
better South Africa with a better dispensation at local government level,
and I agree with the hon member of the DA that we cannot just meddle with
the Constitution when it suits us. On the other hand, the DA proposed three
amendments to the Constitution to implement floor crossing, so they should
be the last to point a finger. I thank you. [Time expired.]]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP appreciates the willingness of the
hon Minister to face the harsh reality that many of South Africa’s 283
municipalities have been in a state of paralysis and dysfunction.

The commitment of the Minister and the department to providing hands-on
support to provincial and local government will hopefully better position
them to fulfil their functions and produce results. Service delivery is in
a crisis and people’s patience has worn thin.

The ACDP is aware that extraordinary interventions will be necessary as
public perception of local government is that it is incompetent,
disorganised and riddled with corruption and maladministration.

Hon Minister, have all municipalities developed a service delivery and
comprehensive infrastructure plan to address backlogs? Do they have a debt
recovery plan? Has the proposed review of Salga taken place yet, in terms
of its role and relevance? And what progress has been made in ensuring
better communication with communities?

The ACDP supports the process outlined regarding the Green and White Papers
on co-operative governance. Thank you.

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Madam Deputy Speaker, we in the UCDP believe that the
White Paper on Co-operative Governance relates more to our rural areas and
that the people it relates to should be more informed of its contents.

We also feel that it would be important for them to give their input on the
White Paper and that the Paper must be translated into more languages.
Other than those suggestions, the UCDP supports the White Paper on Co-
operative Governance. I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the leader of the MF played a very
important role at Codessa. The provisions in the Constitution – the interim
Constitution - about traditional affairs was hurriedly done.

The 1996 legislation was a haphazard affair. The 1996 legislation had many
faults and the amendments in 2000 had a lot of deficiencies and
discrepancies. So, everything was hurried.

But the 2003 White Paper has consolidated everything, and that is why we
have new legislation which embraces everything and puts all differences in
their true perspective.

The relationship between the House of Traditional Leaders and the national
provincial level is indeed pertinent, and the relationship between national
government and the traditional leaders is a must.

However, in KwaZulu-Natal, Zulus are divided, and the MF’s stance is that
where Zulus are divided, the MF will not take any side and we will remain
neutral. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Madam Deputy Speaker, good afternoon. The hon Bhoola lives
on another planet. Such confusion emerging from him is quite surprising. I
thought he understood things slightly better than what he is displaying
these days. He needs some treatment, but I don’t know where.
Comrade Minister, many years ago the ANC indicated its intention of
building a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and united country and society.
So the first reference, in as far as we are concerned in the ANC, is that
that unity will emerge and come from the state system operating in a
coherent, united manner.

We hope that the contributions that are going to be made will be with a
view to developing a coherent state system that answers the needs of the
majority of the people in this country who are poor. That is why we will
agree with you that perhaps we need a framework that will guide our
actions, inside the state, and across the board, but especially giving
flesh to the name of the department.

That is why we learned from others. Before Samora Machel died he complained
bitterly - as part of the reconstruction and development of Mozambique -
that the departments were not going together to communities to deal with
people’s problems. As a result, communities were frustrated. And even as he
was saying that – this was many years ago - it was not only in Mozambique
where he felt they were experiencing such inabilities, unwillingness or
problematic relationships amongst departments in working together to
generate a coherent response to people’s needs.

I would like us to provide answers to those questions. Part of the problems
we were confronting is precisely the incoherent way in which we interact
with communities with regard to the stress of especially local government.
So the White Paper, ultimately, on this matter of co-operation will speak,
we hope, to those concerns in terms of giving meaning to collaboration and
co-operation.

Before we start doing anything, let us ask each other who else is affected
by what we are going to do. What are the consequences of going ahead
without reference to them and what they are doing? How can they add value
to what we are going to do? In that sense, I suspect we will be beginning
to work towards achieving the goals we want to achieve of better
collaboration and co-operation across the three spheres.

Hon Doman, you spoiled your good appreciation of the Minister’s intentions
here by calling it a mistake when he goes with a Member of Parliament to a
constituency he serves - after you said you appreciated his appreciation of
these institutions of public representatives. We are public
representatives, even outside of this Chamber. It is appropriate that even
when Ministers go out in the constituencies, they interact with Members of
Parliament who service those constituencies. It makes sense to me, and I
would have thought it would be a logical extension in respect of your
appreciation, though not for political expediency because you disagree with
some of the things that Mr Fransman said – that he should not be included
in the consultation process.

We appreciate, Mr Minister, your indication of your intention to initiate
this process. One of the reasons why it is important to indicate your
intention of developing this is that we are then in a position to go back
to our constituencies, to the departments that we interact with, to raise
issues that, in our opinion, will contribute to a meaningful debate,
discussion and dialogue on what we think collaboration and co-operation
are. This is the value of indicating your intention here, so that we can be
better prepared to engage with the process.

The question that the hon Dudley asked is what you said earlier in the
announcement on the work of the department that is in the process of being
done. So these things are going to happen simultaneously, as I understand,
in that the support that the municipalities are receiving towards the
formulation of comprehensive infrastructure plans is work in progress.
Therefore, it cannot be expected that municipalities must first sort this
out and then later on think and reflect about the White Paper on
collaboration.

In our opinion, it is correct that even as we take action, learn from that
action, develop a process of giving that meaning in a framework that guides
the work going forward, we think that basic stuff such as respect shown by
bureaucrats, efficiency and so on go without saying. This is what Ministers
and their leadership in the department do on a regular basis. Where there
are failures, they must be attended to. But those cannot be used as a basis
for denying the significance of a process to unleash a consultative process
to invite Members of Parliament and organisations outside Parliament to
contribute to the question of how best we can respond to collaboration on
the ground.

What are the experiences that we have as MPs, as organisations of civil
society, as departments on the problems of collaboration and co-operation,
because they lie at the heart of ineffective delivery of resources that are
limited? We will benefit, sir, I believe, from such co-operation that will
emerge.

It is also appropriate in my opinion that this is the Fourth Parliament run
by the ANC. Also, after 15 years it is appropriate that we review how we
have done things in the past. We must learn from that past so that we do
not repeat the mistakes of the past. We have repeated them often enough.
Ons is nou moeg [We are now tired] of repeating those mistakes. It is
appropriate that now we must provide some answers on paper that can
continue to guide us going forward, whatever its colour is. Thank you very
much, Minister. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

    SKILLS DEVELOPMENT WITHIN A SINGLE POST-SCHOOL EDUCATION AND TRAINING
                                   SYSTEM

          (Statement by Minister of Higher Education and Training)
The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am
avoiding making a mistake and getting punished. Hon members, as you are all
aware, the education and training landscape in government was reconfigured
following the momentous April elections. Our dedicated Ministries of Basic
Education and Higher Education and Training are now working to ensure that
these two critical segments of our education system receive greater
attention and dedicated focus from government.

The bringing together of higher education institutions, further education
and training colleges, adult education and training and the skills
development sector into a single Department of Higher Education and
Training, provides a powerful basis for addressing education and training
in an integrated way. Our department has the responsibility to develop the
country’s education and training institutional capacity and resources into
a coherent but diverse and differentiated post-school learning system,
serving adults and youth within the framework of the Human Resource
Development Strategy for South Africa, HRDS–SA.

While the Ministry of Higher Education and Training was created in April,
we have only gained full responsibility for all assigned legislation from 1
November. So, in effect, our complete programme of action was grounded by
legislative authority only from last week. We are now responsible for a
range of institutions and public entities which were previously distributed
across the former Department of Education and the Department of Labour. We
are wasting no time, hence our making this statement in galvanising our
skills development programme.

In a meeting with the National Skills Authority, NSA, on 30 October, we
agreed that the NSA, which advises the Minister on skills development,
needs to be strengthened in order to perform its expert advisory role. The
NSA must have administrative, policy and research capacity to support its
work. Alignment of the work of the NSA with the Human Resource Development
Strategy for South Africa is a priority. The relationship between the NSA
and other statutory bodies needs to be strengthened.


Following consultation with the National Skills Authority, I informed the
public last week that I would be gazetting the extension of the National
Skills Development Strategy II and the current Seta licence by one year
from March 2010 to March 2011. I also announced that I have appointed the
Director-General for Higher Education and Training, Ms Mary Metcalfe, as
the interim chairperson of the National Skills Agency, NSA, during this
important period of transition in order to strengthen the relationships
between my department and the NSA. As I have already indicated, this is an
interim arrangement until a new chairperson is appointed, hopefully soon.


Prior to the public announcement, I met all the chairpersons of the board
of the Setas, as well as their CEOs and informed them of the way forward.
It is my considered view, supported by the National Skills Authority, that
this extension is important to ensure alignment of the National Skills
Development Strategy with the Human Resources Development Strategy and to
allow some deliberation on the way forward.

Current mechanisms contained in the National Skills Development Strategy
II, which is the current one guiding the work of the Setas, will be
emphasised in the service-level agreements between our department and the
Setas for the 2010 financial year in order to focus on immediate priorities
such as the Seta-FET college partnerships and capacity-building. Setas will
continue with their current mandate and implement their 2010-11 service
agreements as well as contribute to the new strategies to finalise the new
National Skills Development Strategy.


These extensions will ensure both continuity and change. Service delivery
will continue and be consolidated whilst the new Department of Higher
Education and Training will take forward inclusive processes, with all
social partners, to renew and refresh strategies, policy and institutions
in order to strengthen the skills and human resource base of our country.

In all our consultation meetings, we agreed that we need a co-ordinated
skills development strategy, informed by an overarching industrial
strategy, based on clear sectoral industrial strategies, placing particular
emphasis on scarce skills. This will require refocusing and possibly
restructuring the Setas to be guided by this overarching objective, rather
than the other way round.




We in the Department of Higher Education and Training are clear that we
need to respond to the mandate and the vision of the President when he
created this new department. There are important potential synergies which
have not achieved the necessary momentum over the last 15 years, even
though that was the original intention of the ANC pre-1994. As the ANC, we
had said, prior to 1994, that we needed an integrated education and
training system. This is what we are returning to now.

We therefore require a fundamental reform of government’s skills
development strategy, as well as the respective roles and relationships
between FET colleges, universities of technology, other universities, the
National Skills Fund and the Setas. This requires that we think out of our
boxes to develop an overarching, highly integrated and articulated system
of higher education and training, but without, at the same time,
mechanically collapsing into each other the distinctive roles, features,
and contribution of each of the components of such a system.



One of the first things we need to do – all of us - is to re-skill. The
skills sector needs to understand more about the formal institutions of
education and vice versa. We all have now to better understand the
different subsystems in order to forge co-operative links. Our human
development planning strategies, which will be developed and adopted in
meaningful and effective partnerships with social partners, will be
informed by strategic information management systems and research for a
post-school education and training system and the labour market.

Managing a single post-school education and training system that is
comprised of FET colleges, the Setas and higher education institutions,
adult education and training including the training of the unemployed, will
indeed be a major challenge. We need a comprehensive management information
system, which we intend developing and also to ensure that over time we are
able to measure the extent to which learners migrate between the subsystems
and progress successfully into and through the labour market.

This Management Information System also needs to be extended to the private
education and training providers of further education and training and
higher education. The recent Council for Higher Education report on the
state of higher education in South Africa points out that our information
on private further and higher education is inadequate and that we need to
update it in order to work towards an integrated system of higher education
and training.

To this end, the Department of Higher Education and Training commits itself
to the establishment of these information systems through the commissioning
of systematic monitoring and evaluation exercises and regular research
reviews in each of the subsystems in partnership with other research and
higher education institutions.

Allow me to turn to the further education and training college subsystem.
The FET college subsystem has grown and changed over the last 15 years, and
further changes are anticipated with the move of the colleges to a national
function, thanks to the leadership of the past Minister of Education,
Comrade Naledi Pandor. [Applause.] The goal is to increase the number of
young people and adults accessing continuing education at these technical
and vocational centres, in a way that supports an inclusive growth path.

We will consolidate the institutional base for FET colleges as we are
prioritising these in partnership with the Skills Development System and
improve responsiveness to the needs of the economy. This is very important
because before the differential location of former FET colleges in the
Department of Education and the location of the Skills Development
Resources and Funding in the Department of Labour did not make it possible
to build these synergies.

Programme offerings in the FET sector will be expanded, training
partnerships with industry will be funded through Setas, partnerships with
employers will be established, and a workplace programme for graduates of
FET colleges will be set up. All these initiatives will make FET colleges
more attractive and institutions of choice instead of being seen as a
consolation prize for those who did not get into university. Quality
interventions also include initiatives to improve management capacity,
materials development, and the introduction of formal qualifications for
lecturers.

We will also work closely with the National Board for Further Education and
Training and consult those involved in this subsystem in reviewing the
impact of some of the recent changes, particularly the changes in the
management and governance structures, the development and implementation of
new programmes, and the introduction of new norms and standards for
funding. I hear the hon Ellis is making a noise because he needs to re-
skill. He no longer understands these areas now. [Interjections.] The last
time he spoke only about formal education in the then portfolio committee
of 1994 to 1999.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr Blade Nzimande is obviously missing
me, because I haven’t said a word. [Laughter.] Not a word, Dr Blade
Nzimande, sir.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: No, I can hear your voice,
hon Ellis. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: I’ve never been more innocent in my life, Madam Deputy
Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, he is right. I was looking at him. He is
innocent. It was the hon member next to him.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you. I was just
drawing his attention because he also made a very un-nuanced resolution
about the fall of the Berlin Wall ... [Laughter.] ... and forgetting that
this is 125th anniversary of that Berlin Conference which divided Africa
and caused perpetual problems. So you can’t celebrate in a one-sided
manner.

The National Board for Further Education and Training, NBFET, and the
Ministry have agreed on an urgent national audit on individual
institutional arrangements for governance and administration. We are
working with stakeholders to secure sufficient support and stability to
sustain these changes and to take forward new developments.

Briefly, on the skills subsystem, we are saying that despite the gains made
to date in the area of skills development and training, there are a number
of challenges we need to attend to. We must have improved co-ordination
between the sector education and training authority system and the
education and training institutions. We must address the negative
perceptions about the Setas. We need to improve strategic utilisation of
funds, in particular to minimise the cost of delivery of learnerships and
the high amounts of unspent funds in terms of skills development funding.

In addition, we need to improve the alignment of industry needs and the
provision of training and skills development, particularly the need to
increase the supply of artisans and technicians. In this regard, we will
engage with the state-owned enterprises, SOEs, Eskom permitting, the public
sector, and other large employers with a view to get them more involved in
training through apprenticeships, learnerships and internships. We also
need to finalise the alignment with an overarching industrial policy in
order to improve the effectiveness of skills development efforts.

There are widespread concerns about the Setas, some of which have
previously been articulated in this House. While it is wrong to paint all
the Setas with one brush, there is clearly unevenness in their performance.
There is definitely a need for an intensive assessment of the Setas to
ensure greater accountability, improved employment of resources, better
management of funds, and streamlining and alignment of their operations in
order that they fulfil their role as a central cog of our skills training
and job-creation machinery.

With a reinvigorated and strengthened National Skills Authority, the NSA,
we can ensure that the Seta structures are based on a more precise
understanding of their role and the priorities they should follow; reflect
an appropriate segmentation of the economy that is aligned with emerging
industrial strategies; minimise capacity deficits at all levels, avoiding
duplication; ensure that these Setas are financially sustainable; and
build, at the same time, the public sector to play a leading role in skills
development.

Part of this broad process of engagement will be a strategic planning
session with the National Skills Authority which we are going to have in
December to which we will invite the Council of Higher Education and other
statutory bodies. My department has already begun to engage the National
Skills Fund, the NSF. The intention is to urgently improve the operating
systems and procedures so that it can better fulfil its mandate. This
includes reviewing the process and criteria around the training lay-off
scheme and reporting to Nedlac – the National Economic Development and
Labour Council - so that any blockages in this fund are used timeously for
their intended purpose. We are indeed disturbed because the information we
have is that much as we have set aside R2,4 billion for the training lay-
off scheme, only four companies thus far have taken this up, and it is
important that we identify what the blockages are.

We will also be holding a strategic planning day for Setas next week,
during which we want to forge a new way of working amongst them so that
they can learn from each other as they explore ways in which our priorities
can be taken forward urgently. The priorities that we have set for the
Setas during the extension year 2010-11 will be to align with government
strategic priorities and focus on immediate priorities, including the Seta-
FET college partnerships, especially the provision of opportunities for
work-based learning, particularly from students in FET colleges and
universities of technology.

We will also soon be establishing the Qualifications Council for Trade and
Occupations. I’m pleased to announce that I’m in the process of appointing
a chairperson for this body, known as the QCTO, and we expect the board to
immediately begin with its work of establishing a council. We will request
the QCTO to work in close collaboration with other qualifications and
quality assurance councils in the higher education and training system.

Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members and comrades, in closing I wish to commit
my Ministry and department to working with energy and commitment towards
realising these goals. We are also calling upon each member of this House,
in his or her own way, to also make a contribution to this task of trying
to drive a skills revolution in this country, so that, indeed, as two great
thinkers once said, that the free development of each does indeed become
the condition for the free development of all. Although the revolution has
no copyright, those words were from Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels.
Siyabonga kakhulu. [Thank you very much.] [Applause.]

Mr G G BOINAMO: Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Minister, for those good
promises. We just hope that they will be met. Let me start by acknowledging
the fact that the response before me was written by Dr James, presented by
me with his approval.

A focus on skills development is overdue, as it brings - to cite Elizabeth
Bibesco’s aphorism: “certainty to hope”. We cannot continue to see
communities inhabit a world – whether by design, default or neglect – that
fails to nurture the talents of people, particularly those who by virtue of
poverty are starved of opportunities through no fault of their own.

The DA therefore supports the proposition that a skilled and educated
nation is a prosperous one in material and spiritual terms. We are
critical, though, of the government’s approach. We are aware that, as the
United States of America discovered, the markets do not educate and skill a
nation, but neither, as China discovered, does central planning in the
style of the former Soviet Union.

Firstly, therefore, to skill South Africans requires a governance system
that artfully combines local knowledge of - and practical support for -
communities in need of education, and not one that comes from on high. Our
position is to improve on existing governance arrangements instead of
pursuing the inefficient and unnecessary folly of pulling everything to the
centre.

Secondly, we propose a higher education system with multiple entry points
at a diversity of institutions and, importantly, having multiple exit
points with students having obtained excellent qualifications, for
excellence, and not mediocrity, has a market.

We propose a system that starts with the further education and training
colleges for technical, vocational, and professional training, including
for teachers, nurses, agricultural extension workers and the police. Those
who wish to continue their education can trade up into the second or third
year of an undergraduate degree – some may go further to graduate level.

Finally, Setas are not a broken good design, but a wasteful design and
should be abolished. They should be replaced by a modern apprenticeship
system regulated with trade unions and employers, by industrial councils
that certify quality of training undertaken at the FET colleges. A famous
17th century Frenchman once said: “Steadfastness of the wise is but the art
of keeping the welcome human emotions of agitation locked in their hearts.”
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N Y VUKUZA-LINDA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, with the current
changes sweeping across the education sector, one can only adopt a wait and
see attitude in order to make an informed assessment of what the outcomes
will be, with the hope that we one day will realise our dreams. The need
for this swift intervention, Mr Minister, in the shortage of skills cannot
be denied because we are indeed faced with a crisis in our country.

Let me state the obvious, if only to underscore a point: that it is not all
skills that are in short supply; it is skills relevant to the economy that
are much needed. There are in South Africa many people without jobs and
many jobs without people and that is why the issue of relevant skills takes
centre stage.

I am glad that the Minister has done a skills audit, albeit that I think it
was too short a period, unless the Minister found the skills audit in
place. I am also glad that the Minister has considered the human resource
development plan amongst the tools that were used in coming up with the
recommendations.

It is our considered view as Cope that general education is the baseline to
everything that we want to achieve. The new provisions for skills
development must never and can never replace the need for education. In
fact, linking skills to education is the sustainable way.

It is clear in our minds that in responding to the skills shortage we need
a mixed bag of interventions, that is crisis intervention, providing skills
that are short now. We need short-term and long-term measures. We must be
able to plan and provide for the skills of the economy, which will be
required in the next 10 years and beyond.

We also need, Mr Minister, a mixed bag of offerings which has learnerships,
trade education, apprenticeships, artisanships and other recognised forms
of experiential exposure. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members, if I were not in this
House I would use the expression: “Awu ushayile mfanakithi.” [You have done
an excellent job, my brother.] [Applause.] But I can’t say that because it
may be ruled unparliamentary. I must say, “hon Minister”. You said all the
correct things but now the question is: What would then be separating me
from you, from what you have said?

I think I know what separates me from you, hon Minister. It is this: it is
implementation; it is implementation; it is implementation again. For
instance, you talk of strategy I. I would have liked, Minister, to hear
more on what fruits strategy I bore. I didn’t here that, and now you are
coming to strategy II. I will just wait to see what fruits strategy II will
bear. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, skills development has been identified as a
significant factor in reducing poverty and accelerating long-term economic
growth. It is critical for government to effectively address the issues
which have plagued this sector.

A single post-school education and training system promises an integrated,
efficient system that will benefit learners. The incorporation of skills
development into education is an important step and welcomed by the ACDP.
Clearly, this new Department of Higher Education and Training will need to
extend agreements as a temporary and transitional arrangement to ensure
maximum momentum as concerns about Setas will necessitate intensive
assessment. The ACDP is cautiously optimistic that the commitment of the
Minister of Higher Education and Training and the new department to skills
development is a serious one and that it will, in fact, deliver results.
Thank you.

Mr M L FRANSMAN: Hon Speaker and members, I wish to thank and commend the
Minister, on behalf of the ruling ANC, for informing this House of the
developments, the vision and intentions of the department on the way to
better education for all.

These are all aimed at aiding our people and at developing everyone’s
potential to the full, as was just stressed, and it is quite impressive,
hon Minister, to note that, in fact, all political parties supported the
direction taken. In fact, some of them quoted from the ANC manifesto, if
you look at it.

In talking about the skills intervention and the approaches to it, I would
suggest to the DA, though, that it would not be the most appropriate thing
to look at a complete scrapping of the Seta, because what we are seeing is
that a new department is emerging, with a Minister. The creation of an
integrated approach, in fact, indicates to us that the Minister now has 12
months to review, to make proper assessments, to look at the critical gaps
in the Seta formation and then to come forward with suggested approaches.
Therefore, I think, we must all become involved in that debate. I also
believe – as the committee we looked at it – that it was the best thing to
not, in fact, reclassify for five years, because that in a sense would have
tied up a new administration for five years with the existing skills setup.

Minister, we also want to suggest with regard to integration, especially at
local government level, provincial government level and then with the
national economic development initiatives – that the three spheres need to
be closely drawn in in the strategic approaches linked to skills
development. This is because what we picked up in our oversight of Giyani
was that there was a mismatch between what economic opportunities there are
in Giyani, the district in that environment, and the FET interventions that
are there.

That brings me then to the FET colleges in particular. It’s heartening to
hear the concern around the perceptions of FET colleges, because there are
real, negative perceptions. Last week we had a meeting with Basic
Education, and between the two committees we picked up that the FET
throughput was quite low. This means, from some of the studies and analysis
we have done, that teachers don’t necessarily understand the strength of
FET colleges at times – though most of them do – but we are seeing people
being sent to FET colleges that are not necessarily being sent
appropriately.

So, there are perception issues at the level of teachers or educators at
times, and we are asking the Minister of Higher Education and Training to
work closely with the Minister of Basic Education to reflect on this.

With regard to management information systems, neither the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme nor Higher Education SA currently knows where all the
students that have graduated are. Also, they don’t know where the
unemployed students or those that did not go through the system completely
are. So we have asked that question.

I think what this management information system will do is to track where
unemployed graduates are or where graduates actually are beyond their
studies. This is so that we do not invest significant amounts of money in
education, only to support, possibly, the health sector in Canada or the
engineering sector in the UK.

Therefore, the link between the patriotic responsibilities of those
institutions and the type of curriculum at FET colleges, as well as the
curriculum at universities, should instil patriotism, pride, dignity and
all of those elements. We believe that will support the retention strategy
within South Africa.

The second last point I want to make is really around the issues of
performance, governance and management. We totally agree about these
issues. There are obviously sections to that. The Portfolio Committee on
Labour recently dealt with the annual reports. What we have seen is that
most of the Setas have unqualified audits, but we do know there is public
judgment when it comes, for example, to some of those deliverables.

This is precisely because the audit will look at financial auditing and not
necessarily at the performance assessments and the monitoring and the
impact on communities. That is an area, I believe, we will be able to
reflect on over the next 12 months.

In conclusion, as the ANC we are fully behind the Minister in his
commitment to ensuring that the skills revolution is taking place in our
country, that we need to get all spheres of society involved in this
process, and we call on all political parties – and, more importantly, all
community organisations and civic organisations – to participate in this
debate. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

     ANC CAUCUS OF JOHANNESBURG COUNCIL TAKING GOVERNMENT TO THE PEOPLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the
Johannesburg Council has responded favourably to the call of hon President
Jacob Zuma to transform this people’s tribune into an activist parliament.
In this regard we wish to congratulate in particular the chief whip of the
council, Councillor Nonceba Molwele.

On 2 November 2009 the ANC in Johannesburg took its caucus to Soweto to
interact with the people. The caucus included national and provincial
public representatives. This oversight visit afforded the caucus an
opportunity to engage with the local communities on issues of service
delivery, as well as to report back on government development projects for
the area such as city parks, city power, Pikitup, children’s libraries and
recreational facilities.

The ANC views the undertaking by the Johannesburg ANC caucus as setting an
example of an activist parliament which ensures, through its oversight and
legislative role, that there is a speedy roll-out of basic services to the
people. We also believe that the introduction of the doctrine of the
separation of powers that Johannesburg is piloting will enhance oversight
and we commend it to this House.

The Johannesburg caucus responded positively to the call by hon Kgalema
Motlanthe, ANC Deputy President and the Leader of Government Business, for
enhanced co-ordination, co-operation and mutual support within the
legislative arm of the state. In particular, and most importantly, the
Johannesburg caucus understands that our parliamentary system consists of
the national, provincial and local spheres and that mutual support of the
three spheres, and co-ordination and co-operation across the three spheres,
enhance our capacity for oversight and delivery of quality services to all
our people.

In conclusion, the interaction of the Johannesburg caucus with the people
of Soweto demonstrated that many of the so-called service delivery protests
could and should be arrested by getting national, provincial and local
public representatives to work together through one-stop parliamentary
constituency offices to address the needs of the people as collectives. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I ask whether you will be prepared
to be as lenient with us in the time allocation as you were with the Chief
Whip of the ANC?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me say, to some extent I have been lenient right
through. But this term, particularly, was confused completely by the Table.
That is why I was asking, and I apologise for that.

                      RESIGNATION OF CHAIRMAN OF ESKOM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Adjunkspeaker, die Eskom-saga is net weereens ’n bewys
van die ANC se magshonger om in die ekonomie in te meng en die ekonomie te
beheer. Die ANC gebruik nou ’n rassekwessie om sy eie belange bo die
belange van Suid-Afrika en sy mense te bevorder, deur met ’n skaakspel mnr
Maroga in sy posisie terug te plaas. Daardeur, met die vertrek van mnr
Bobby Godsell, verwelkom die ANC mnr Maroga se terugkeer, en dit gaan Suid-
Afrika baie meer kos as die R50 miljard wat mnr Maroga Suid-Afrika gekos
het.

Adjunkspeaker, die ANC wil nou vir ons kom sê dat President Zuma nie in die
proses ingemeng het nie. Maar die staat, as die alleenaandeelhouer in
Eskom, het nie vir mnr Zuma ’n mandaat gegee om in te meng nie. En dit is
die tweede grootste fout wat die ANC ten opsigte van Eskom gemaak het
sedert mnr Mbeki Suid-Afrika om verskoning moes vra omdat die regering in
2001 nie die Witskrif van 1998 van die Departement van Mineraal- en
Energiesake, wat hierdie krisis voorspel het, in berekening gebring het
nie. Net so min het mnr Maroga hom in 2007 gesteur aan die waarskuwings oor
die steenkoolkrisis wat Eskom tans ervaar.

Adjunkspeaker, die Minister moet aan hierdie Parlement kom verduidelik of
mnr Zuma ingemeng het in die Eskom-saga en of die Minister die besluit van
die raad beïnvloed het; of mnr Maroga net aangedui het dat hy gaan bedank,
en of hy werklik bedank het en toe sy bedanking teruggetrek het.

Verder moet die Minister ook vir ons verduidelik of sy en President Zuma
gebuig het voor druk van die Swart Bestuursforum, asook die ANC-jeugliga,
en ons wil ook weet wat die inhoud is van die sterk bewoorde brief wat die
Minister aan Eskom geskryf het, oor mnr Maroga, en laastens, hoe ’n raad
van direkteure, wat mnr Maroga se bedanking aanvaar het, nou weer in die
toekoms saam met mnr Maroga kan werk, want dit rym nie. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Deputy Speaker, the Eskom saga is once again proof of
the ANC’s hunger for power by interfering in the economy, and to control
it. The ANC is now using a racial issue to promote its own interests above
that of South Africa and its people by making a chess move to reinstate Mr
Maroga in his position. Hereby, with the departure of Mr Bobby Godsell, the
ANC welcomes Mr Maroga’s return, and it is going to cost South Africa much
more than the R50 billion that Mr Maroga cost South Africa.

Deputy Speaker, the ANC now wants to tell us that President Zuma did not
interfere in this process. But government, as the sole shareholder in
Eskom, did not give Mr Zuma a mandate to interfere. And this is the second
biggest mistake the ANC has made with regard to Eskom since Mr Mbeki had to
apologise to South Africa in 2001 for government’s failure to consider the
1998 White Paper of the Department of Minerals and Energy Affairs that
predicted this crisis. In the same way Mr Maroga did not heed the warnings,
in 2007, regarding the coal crisis that Eskom is currently facing.

Deputy Speaker, the Minister must explain to this Parliament whether Mr
Zuma interfered in the Eskom saga and whether the Minister influenced the
board’s decision, whether Mr Maroga just indicated his intention to resign
or whether he actually resigned and then withdrew his resignation.

Furthermore, the Minister must also explain to us whether she and President
Zuma succumbed to the pressure of the Black Management Forum, as well as
the ANC Youth League, and we also want to know what the content is of the
strongly worded letter that the Minister wrote to Eskom about Mr Maroga
and, finally, how a board of directors, who accepted Mr Maroga’s
resignation, will now be able to work with Mr Maroga in the future, because
this is irreconcilable. I thank you. [Applause.]]

              RESIGNATION OF BOBBY GODSELL AS CHAIRMAN OF ESKOM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Deputy Speaker, overseas media have widely
publicised the resignation of Bobby Godsell as chairman of Eskom. Analyst
Adam Habib commented that the latest developments at Eskom were a complete
disaster and that it was particularly worrying, as they served to put Eskom
under the microscope. On top of that, the insistence by the ANC Youth
League that Eskom CEO, Mr Maroga, had not resigned and that Godsell was a
racist who wanted to get rid of the CEO, left an indelible impression of
unacceptable interference by the governing party in the affairs of the
parastatals. Investors have long memories about such matters. We have seen
similar incidents at the SABC, Transnet, Athletics SA and the list goes on.

In the view of most observers it seems as if the board of Eskom was
certainly overruled by a higher authority, possibly even by the President
of the Republic. Economist Chris Hart asserted that the authority of the
board has been undermined and that co-operate governance at Eskom was very
badly affected as a result of the crisis. Not unsurprising, the racist
slurs against Godsell are being rejected by the National Union of Mine
Workers, which defended his nonracial credentials. The union also raised
its concern about the apparent breeches of the principles of good
governance at a state-owned enterprise.

Political intervention by government, which puts a board under duress to
act differently from the way it seems appropriate, will hopelessly
politicise these enterprises and precipitate their destruction. Eskom is on
a slippery road and this government must assume a very large share of the
blame. Cope regrets what happened at Eskom over the past few weeks and we
particularly regret the loss of Godsell at Eskom.

                        CLEANING AND GREENING PROJECT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr Z LUYENGE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the African National Congress supports
initiatives geared at empowering and educating communities on environmental
matters so as to enable it to act on environmental issues and be able to
promote an environmental ethic. As such, the Minister of Water and
Environmental Affairs, Buyelwa Sonjica, on Thursday 29 October 2009,
launched a cleaning and greening pilot project in Mthata, King Sabata
Dalindyebo.

The project forms part of the Eco Town pilot project, Buyisela, and will,
among other things, focus on cleaning, greening, waste management and river
rehabilitation, while, on the other hand, create employment opportunities
and also supporting municipalities’ local economic development programmes.

It is envisioned that a pilot project will take place in each province and
this will serve as the framework blueprint for other townships and villages
to follow. The African National Congress, therefore, believes that
environmental management must be transformed to promote the active
participation of civil society as a whole. Ke a leboga. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

                CONCERN OVER RISE IN PRICE OF AIRLINE TICKETS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P F SMITH (IFP): Deputy Speaker, the IFP is concerned that the prices of
airline tickets are going to rise dramatically next year. It appears that
this is going to occur immediately before, during and after the World Cup,
when hundreds of thousands of visitors are expected to visit us to enjoy
what they believe will be our honest hospitality.

The notions of airlines capitalising on this high demand to double, triple
or even quadruple prices is highly distasteful. If press reports indicating
this scenario are to be believed, then something needs to be done to stop
it.
The IFP calls on government to apply itself to preventing this price
collusion and blatant profiteering by airlines. We ask it also to commit
itself to looking after the interests of consumers, rather than big
businesses, including big businesses such as SAA, Mango and SA Express, in
which it is a shareholder. Thank you.

              RESIGNATION OF BOBBY GODSELL AS CHAIRMAN OF ESKOM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF Plus): Adjunkspeaker, die bedanking van mnr Bobby
Godsell, voorsitter van Eskom se raad, is ’n verkeerde besluit wat tot
nadeel strek van Eskom en Suid-Afrikaanse elektrisiteitsverbruikers.

Mnr Godsell se rekord wys dat hy oor die nodige vaardighede en vermoëns
beskik om te verseker dat Eskom uit die huidige krisis waarin die
maatskappy is, kan kom. Sy bedanking gaan veroorsaak dat Suid-Afrika oor
die langtermyn vir hierdie fout ’n baie hoë prys sal betaal. Dit gaan
beslis daartoe lei dat beleggersvertroue in Suid-Afrika ’n laagtepunt sal
bereik omdat die boodskap aan beleggers is dat Eskom op politieke beginsels
en nie op besigheidsbeginsels bestuur word nie. Dit gaan groter
werkverliese tot gevolg hê en dit is ’n duur prys vir Jacob Maroga, Julius
Malema en die Black Management Forum se politieke inmenging.

In kontras met mnr Godsell se reputasie het mnr Jacob Maroga, die
hoofuitvoerende beampte, deeglik bewys dat hy Eskom nie kan bestuur nie. Hy
was verantwoordelik vir ’n verlies van ongeveer R50 miljard in die
ekonomie. Indien ek korrek is dat mnr Godsell ... (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Deputy Speaker, the resignation of Mr Bobby
Godsell, chairperson of the board of directors of Eskom, is the wrong
decision that will be to the detriment of Eskom and electricity consumers
in South Africa.

Mr Godsell’s record shows that he has at his disposal the necessary skills
and capabilities to ensure that Eskom is able to get out of the crisis that
it finds itself in currently. In the long run his resignation is going to
cost South Africa dearly. It will definitely lead to a situation where
investors’ confidence in South Africa is going to reach a low point because
the message to investors is that Eskom is run on political principles and
not on business principles. It will lead to bigger job losses and it is a
high price to pay for the political interference of Jacob Maroga, Julius
Malema and the Black Management Forum.

In contrast to Mr Godsell’s reputation, Mr Jacob Maroga, the chief
executive officer, clearly has proven that he is not capable of managing
Eskom. He was responsible for a loss of nearly R50 billion to the economy.
If I am correct that Mr Godsell ...]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, there is a point of order.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: This is the third statement which deals with exactly the same set of
facts. [Interjections.] Well, I am addressing Madam Deputy Speaker.

You can’t possibly entertain three statements which are substantially the
same, drawn from the same sources as statements. [Interjections.] My
submission, therefore, is that it is out of order when a statement has been
made on a particular subject matter and another member comes with a
substantively similar statement.

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, may I address you on the same point of
order? In terms of the Rules there is no Rule that says you cannot do that
– that’s the first point. The second point is that if three different
statements deal with the same issue, it should be an indication to
government of how serious the issue is. [Interjections.] In that regard,
the question now remains: Will we get any reply from government that will
also be indicative of what is happening? Thank you. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we allow the member to continue?

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Adjunkspeaker, ek wil vir die agb Minister sê die
waarheid maak seer. [Gelag.]

Indien dit korrek is dat Godsell sy bedanking ingedien het na ’n
vergadering met President Zuma, kan die afleiding gemaak word dat daar
politieke druk op mnr Godsell was om te bedank. Met so ’n vergadering sou
die President wys dat hy geen vertroue in sy Kabinetsminister vir Openbare
Ondernemings het nie en beslis nie om die krisis te hanteer nie. Dit is dan
ook duidelik dat President Zuma voor die druk van die Black Management
Forum, die ANC-jeugliga en die metaalwerkersunie van Suid-Afrika geswig
het.

Die VF Plus doen ’n beroep op die regering en die agb Minister om dadelik
vir Jacob Maroga te ontslaan en ’n ander meer bevoegde hoofuitvoerende
beampte aan te stel. Die werknemers van Eskom en die verbruikers van Suid-
Afrika het geen vertroue in Maroga nie en ’n nuwe aanstelling kan poog om
daardie vertroue te herstel. Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, I want to say to the hon Minister that
the truth hurts. [Laughter.]

If it is true that Godsell tendered his resignation after a meeting with
President Zuma, it can be inferred that there was political pressure on Mr
Godsell to resign. Such a meeting would be proof that the President has no
confidence in his Cabinet Minister of Public Enterprises, and certainly not
in her ability to manage the crisis. It is also clear then that President
Zuma gave in to pressure from the Black Management Forum, the ANC Youth
League and the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa, Numsa.

The FF Plus calls on the government and the hon Minister to relieve Jacob
Maroga of his duties immediately and to appoint a more capable chief
executive officer. The employees of Eskom and the consumers of South Africa
have no confidence in Maroga, and a new appointment would be an attempt to
restore that confidence. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The next speaker is an ANC member. But before I
call her, I want to address the point of order that was raised by the hon
Deputy Minister. I know at times when people choose to be repetitive about
an issue, it is irritating. But there really is nothing preventing, law-
wise, people from choosing to repeat what another person said, as long as
it is not the same person saying the same thing. Can we move on.

              HOME AFFAIRS–LUSIKISIKI COMMUNITY FORUM LAUNCHED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T M A GASEBONWE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, as a mass-based organisation
that is rooted amongst the people, reaching into every sector of society
and every corner of the land, the ANC has the capacity to get all of
society working together to make change happen faster.

Continuing with our efforts of making a better life for all our citizens,
the Minister of Home Affairs, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, launched a joint Home
Affairs-Lusikisiki Community Forum in the Eastern Cape on Monday, 2
November 2009. She also inspected facilities in the Home Affairs offices.

The forum will monitor and ensure the implementation of quality service
delivery to the Lusikisiki community. This will be the second such
monitoring forum in the country, after the department launched one in
Umzimkhulu, KwaZulu-Natal, earlier this year.

The forum consists of several government officials and members of the
community, including local chiefs, religious leaders and councillors. The
launch of this forum took place within the context of an overall government
effort to involve communities in the process of governance, under the
theme, “Together, we can do more.”

The ANC will always remain in touch with our people and listen to their
needs. Thank you. [Applause.]

          HOME AFFAIRS PROCUREMENT SURVEY RESULTS STILL UNAVAILABLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H N MAKHUBA (IFP): Deputy Speaker, on 25 September 2008 the acting chief
director of procurement and finance administration in the Department of
Home Affairs issued a request to the department’s suppliers to complete a
supplier-satisfaction assessment survey. One of the questions asked was how
long it took to get through to the department, and included an answering
option marked: “Failed completely”. The survey’s questions are on the
department’s website. What is not on the website are the results of the
survey, more than a year down the line.

Trying to obtain these results, the IFP called, starting with the office of
the Deputy Director-General of Finance, to the chief financial officer’s
number. However, there was no answer on the numbers we were given. We then
decided to call the 0800 enquiries number, and we were given a switchboard
number, but, unfortunately, that also rang unanswered.

If we were to answer the survey questions, we would be obliged to tick the
box that says our attempts to get through to the department failed
completely. We wonder how many suppliers feel the same way. How many gave
up trying to even submit their survey, and where are the submitted results
lying now?
Unfortunately, despite the talk of a turnaround strategy at Home Affairs,
it seems as if the situation in the department remains as dire as before.
The only hope is in the diligent office of our new Minister, which we
believe will bring about a change of attitude from department officials on
issues of customer service. I thank you. [Applause.]

       DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY CALL CENTRE LAUNCHED IN SOWETO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms F E KHUMALO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Department of Trade and
Industry launched an Investment Promotion and Facilitation Call Centre in
Moroka, Soweto, on Friday, 16 October 2009. The Cheshire Home-based call
centre is part of the new strategy on investment promotion and facilitation
that seeks to improve the investment climate in the country and reduce the
cost of doing business.

The 10-seater call centre will be staffed by people with disabilities. It
will be a one-stop shop service for national and international investors to
reduce administrative and regulatory barriers, as well as to facilitate a
smooth entry into the South African market by foreign investors. The call
centre will provide an environment conducive to improving our investment
climate.

South Africa has recognised investment as a key element. We are trying to
reach targets in productive activity, growth in employment, decreasing
inequalities, tackling poverty and providing decent employment. The success
of this three-year pilot project may lead to further expansion of this
concept and adoption by government departments and the private sector
across the country. The call centre will be operational from 30 November
2009. I thank you. [Applause.]

           STATEMENT BY MINISTER OF LABOUR ON WESTERN CAPE PREMIER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms L D MAZIBUKO (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon Minister of Labour
yesterday launched a personal tirade in the media against the Premier of
the Western Cape, Helen Zille, in which he demonstrated a measure of envy
about the quality and the quantity of services available to the people of
this province.

The hon Minister even went so far as to say: “We cannot measure the
progress of integrating our city by the number of water and sewerage
connections made.”

It is understandable that the ANC might feel resentful about the fact that
the Western Cape has in place some of the most progressive service delivery
and antipoverty policies in the country. But, the ANC government’s election
prospects for 2011 would be much better served if it focused on improving
its own service delivery record, rather than attacking the good delivery
record of the opposition.

The people across this country who are protesting because the ANC
government has failed to deliver such basic services as water and sewerage
connections want action from the government, not more empty rhetoric. I
thank you. [Applause.]

                      FEASIBILITY STUDY: COEGA PROJECT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L S NGONYAMA (Cope): Deputy Speaker, when, on 18 November 2004, Alcan
announced a feasibility study for a new aluminium smelter in Coega, in
partnership with the government and the IDC - the Industrial Development
Corporation - the people of the Eastern Cape were excited about the
economic prospects. Two years later, when it signed a 25-year power-supply
contract with Eskom, people were even more excited as this was now a
committed project that would be worth billions.

On 23 May 2007, in good faith, Alcan went as far as selecting a CEO to
oversee the R20-billion project. But then there was a bombshell: Early in
October, the company terminated its agreement with Eskom, because it could
no longer guarantee power supply in the future.
What the people of the Eastern Cape would like to know is: What happened to
the task team that was set up to smooth out the problem of the power
supply? This withdrawal by Alcan - a blue-chip company - is indeed a
massive blow to the viability of Coega. It is also a bitter indictment of
the government’s handling of the whole energy issue in our country. The
Alcan project, which was meant to be the anchor for foreign direct
investment, will send a negative signal to other companies.

Billions have already been already committed for this project. Government
must, therefore, do an immediate cost-benefit analysis of the smelter
project and advise Parliament as to what the best course of action is on
this matter, going forward. We need a clear and candid response from the
government, seeing that the situation in Eskom is becoming murkier and
murkier. I thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Thank you, hon member. Do you have a point of
order, hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: No, I just wanted to know
from the hon member whether it is the people of the Eastern Cape who want a
smelter or could the elephant consortium ... [Interjections.] [Laughter.]
... be having some interest in the aluminium sector.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The ANC – I am sure, hon Ngonyama – will answer you
outside.

             GRANT TO BOOST RURAL-BASED EDUCATION IN NORTH WEST

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs F F MUSHWANA (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the ANC believes that education
is a means of promoting good citizenship as well as of preparing our people
for the needs of a modern economy and a democratic society. As a result of
this commitment, the ANC views the R9 million grant awarded recently by
Atlantic Philanthropies to the University of the Witwatersrand Centre for
Rural-Based Education in North West as a major boost for the people of the
province.

The North West department of health and social development indicated that
the three-year grant will help to develop a district training centre. The
grant will also enable the development of a pilot district education campus
within the Lehurutshe-Zeerust Hospital Complex in the Ngaka Modiri Molema
District.

The ANC appreciates the initiatives taken by Atlantic Philanthropies and
will continue to work with educators, learners, parents, school governing
bodies and other stakeholders to make education a priority for all. I thank
you. [Applause.]

    SHORT-LISTING PROCEDURE FOR NEW NATIONAL LOTTERY BOARD DONE FOLLOWED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J F MARAIS (DA): Chairperson, this House, on the request of Minister
Davies, mandated the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry to short
list and interview candidates for the National Lotteries Board and to make
recommendations to the Minister for their appointment and specifically for
the position of chairperson.

The process started off as proactive, fully inclusive and transparent, with
a multiparty team involved in all the preparations: the setting up of the
criteria to be followed during interviews, the short listing of candidates,
etc.

The agreed list of 16 criteria was based on the content of the
advertisement, the mandate from the National Lotteries Act, which is
specifically to benefit the categories of sport, arts and culture and
welfare, and to improve the very poor record of the current board in terms
of which, amongst other things, reserves of more than R7 billion has been
accumulated, while NGOs and other deserving organisations have had to close
their doors owing to the lack of funds from the Lotto.

Sadly, the portfolio committee failed its first real test when it failed to
propose a board on the merits of expertise, as per the requirements of the
Act, to improve the distribution outcomes of the board and to have a board
demographically representing our nation.

It became clear that the ANC members made their proposals not on the above
criteria, but on criteria not provided for in the Act: on ANC affiliation
and per the ANC caucus instructions. The committee process and objectives
clearly enjoyed little or no priority in this.

This not only made a mockery of the whole process, but it also discredits
the perceived competency of the new board to be appointed and the work of
the committee. It also questions the justification of spending lots of
money on flying the candidates to Cape Town and putting them in expensive
hotels when the ANC had quite evidently already decided on the deployment
of their cronies to the board.

This is wasteful expenditure at a time when we can least afford it. Does
this enjoy the support of the Minister? [Time expired.]

            ASGISA EASTERN CAPE PROJECT TO PROMOTE FOOD SECURITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S ABRAM (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC is committed to creating an
environment that ensures that there is adequate food available for all,
that we grow our own food and protect the poor communities from the rising
prices of food and eradicate hunger.

Continuing with our commitment, Asgisa Eastern Cape has recently allocated
R7 million for the construction of silos in the province as part of a
cropping programme aimed at alleviating poverty in the rural areas.

Asgisa Eastern Cape is a provincial government initiative and is fast-
tracking agriculture and agroprocessing, which also include livestock and
forestry. The jobs to be created and the small business development are
also significant benefits of the integrated cropping programme.

This year, Asgisa Eastern Cape expects to double its harvest as the number
of hectares under cultivation has almost doubled from 6 700 to 12 000. The
ANC will always promote food security as a means of lessening our
dependence on food imports. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

                CONCERN OVER RISE IN PRICE OF AIRLINE TICKETS
       DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY CALL CENTRE LAUNCHED IN SOWETO
                      FEASIBILITY STUDY: COEGA PROJECT
       SHORT-LISTING PROCEDURE FOR NEW NATIONAL LOTTERY BOARD NOT DONE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Deputy Speaker, I want to try to
respond to four statements. First of all, regarding the hon Smith’s
statement, I’ve heard these ideas that there’s going to be excessive
pricing by airlines ahead of 2010. As a rumour, I don’t know whether that
is correct or not, but I should just point out that there are two matters
that could fall under the competition authorities.

First of all, if there was any collusion around price-setting, that would
be matter. Secondly, abuse of dominant position to set unfair prices to the
detriment of consumers and the country at large could also be something
coming out of the purview of the competition authorities.

If – and I don’t know whether this is the case or not – it were to be that
the kind of price-setting that the hon Smith described were to come to
fruition, this would be something that we would expect the competition
authorities to look at very closely and to apply the letter of the
competition law.

Secondly, regarding the Soweto call centre, I’d just like to say that this
is indeed a very exciting project. In fact, it’s a call centre that’s
supposed to deal with major investment enquiries – large foreign investment
enquiries.

It’s very significant that it was actually established in a facility in the
Cheshire Home in Soweto. The decision that led to us doing this was that we
were not just providing charity to people that were disabled, but we were
actually recognising the ability of those people to carry out those tasks
and the importance of the support facilities available in at Cheshire Home.

I think this is actually a model project. We were very happy to have
representatives of the Department of Women, Children and People with
Disabilities present as well. I think it’s a model that many other
facilities of this sort could follow.

Thirdly, on the question of Alcan, I think the hon Ngonyama should be
looking at what Pepi Silinga had to say about this – he is the CEO of
Coega. He said that they were not fazed by this, and that long ago, they
had departed from the model of looking for an anchor tenant, particularly
an anchor tenant based on large energy use and which was not labour-
creating projects such as that of aluminium smelters.

In fact, it was by mutual agreement that this project was suspended,
basically because we don’t have the energy to support those kinds of
projects that actually generate very little downstream activity and depend
on large quantities of energy. Actually, Coega already has another big
project, the petrol refinery, and is working on a number of other
activities. So, I don’t think it’s a disaster, but it is also an indication
that we can’t expect to be having these kinds of energy-absorbing projects
of this nature in the future. I think the concept of industrial
decentralisation belongs in the past, and is certainly not a current one. I
certainly don’t think that it’s a disaster for the Eastern Cape or for
Coega.

Regarding Mr Marais’ point on the lottery board, well, this is still in the
hands of the committee and in the hands of Parliament. I have not received
any communication as yet regarding the processes. I need to receive a
report and the recommendations through the proper procedures of Parliament.

The hon member is welcome to make whatever representation he wants to at
that point. But I think that he has just given us a series of allegations
today that I know other members of the committee will not say is what
actually happened in the committee. The fact of the matter, as I understand
it, is that a number of candidates were interviewed, and I trust that the
outcome will enable us to strengthen the lotteries board so that it can
deliver on the mandate of making sure that there is actual delivery of
lottery funds to good causes. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

              RESIGNATION OF BOBBY GODSELL AS CHAIRMAN OF ESKOM

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Deputy Speaker, I don’t want to dwell on
the matters in general regarding Eskom. I’m sure that the Minister of
Public Enterprises will be able to and should talk about it in due course.
If members want to ask the President, they obviously have the ability to do
that.

However, there is one aspect that definitely must be corrected here and
now. The hon Kganare, who I don’t see in the House now, alleged that the
ANC was involved in this matter and that our involvement as the ANC was
caused by racialism.

This morning, speaking on behalf of the ANC, the secretary-general of the
ANC, Gwede Mantashe, coming out of a national executive committee meeting
of the ANC, condemned in very firm terms – in fact, he described it as the
lowest level of irrationality, if I heard him correctly – any attempt to
ascribe race to the problems involved in the board and in the executive of
Eskom. [Interjections.]

He also specifically said – and it was not just the National Union of
Mineworkers, but also the ANC through its Secretary-General who said - that
we have no grounds whatsoever for regarding Bobby Godsell as a racist. And
he rejected any attempt to do that.

Since I’m dealing with the hon Kganare, I’d also like to say that he
suggested that blue lights should be made available to other youth leaders.
Given the level of civil war in Cope’s youth section, I think that we could
look very favourably, as government, at providing it with blue lights.
[Applause.]

             GRANT TO BOOST RURAL-BASED EDUCATION IN NORTH WEST

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Deputy Speaker, we share the
sentiments expressed by the hon member in relation to the contribution by
Atlantic Philanthropies, and we do so for the following reasons: One, that
they are providing a facility for the training of educators in a rural
area; two, that they recognise the importance of continual training in
relation to teacher development for the benefit of our schools; and, three,
that they recognise that education is a societal matter and that public-
private partnerships are indeed necessary and most welcome in the context
of the challenges that we face as a department.

So, we certainly would like to laud the contribution, particularly the
location of the site at Lehurutshe, a rural and remote area, and by
locating this site in this area, access to education is being provided not
only to the learners, but to the educators themselves. Thank you very much.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, could I just address you on a
particular issue? The DA and other opposition parties have raised before
the importance of Ministers being here for statements. We’ve had here, this
afternoon already, a situation arising in which three parties made a
statement on the same subject, and this was raised by the hon Deputy
Minister.

It is incredible that an issue of such importance is not addressed by the
Minister herself here this afternoon. Again, I would make an appeal to you
and to the Speaker to try to ensure that when statements do occur in the
House, Ministers are present to answer them, particularly when there’s
something as important as the Eskom matter is at the present time. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, if I could
address you on behalf of my colleagues. The reason that so many of us are
present here, this afternoon, is in response to approaches that the Leader
of Government Business has addressed with Cabinet. I would think that the
hon Minister that was referred to, who is not in the House at this moment,
is addressing the very matter which so many parties have shown an interest
in. But Cabinet colleagues are present here, and we are a collective and
able to respond on the range of issues that have been addressed by hon
members. [Applause.]

 CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON REPORT OF
 AUDITOR-GENERAL ON PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF ENTITIES CONNECTED WITH GOVERNMENT
         AND DOING BUSINESS WITH NATIONAL AND PROVINCIAL DEPARTMENTS

Mr N T GODI: Deputy Speaker, the Auditor-General issued a report to
Parliament in August 2008, which indicated that senior managers failed to
declare their interests and that the majority of government employees did
not have approval to perform remunerative work outside their employment in
government.

The report of the Auditor-General highlighted, amongst other things, six
key findings. The first is a lack of approval to perform remunerative work.
Of the 2 319 government officials that had an interest in companies that
did business with government departments, only 75 had permission. The
business conducted with government by these employee-related entities for
the 2005-06 and 2006-07 financial years amounted to R615 million.

The second finding highlighted excessive business with employee-related
entities. In certain instances, employees of the departments had approval
to perform other remunerative work, but did excessive business with
government which could have had an impact on their ability to effectively
perform their respective duties. The Auditor-General further found that 19
employees did business with national and provincial departments to the tune
of R68 million.

With regard to the third finding, there was also the issue of collusive
tendering processes. The Auditor-General also identified a total of 11
employees involved in collusive tendering and their activities amounted to
R1,6 million.

Regarding the fourth finding, the report also dealt with conflicts of
interest. Employees were involved in procurement processes in the
departments and the entities in which they had an interest. These employees
were appointed to deliver goods and services for government and their
conflict-of-interest transactions amounted to R14,2 million.

In respect of the fifth finding, there was also a lack of declaration as
well as misrepresentation in the standard bidding documents. Fifty-nine
government employees with transactions amounting to R172 million were found
to have misrepresented the disclosure in the tender documents by not
declaring that they were related to companies and close corporations doing
business with government.

The sixth finding was regarding deviation from the supply-chain management
processes in the awarding of tenders and quotations.

When read in line with the findings of the Public Service Commission’s
Report on financial disclosures by members of the senior management service
for the 2007-08 financial year, the findings of the Auditor-General are an
indication of a profound challenge of a conflict of interest in the Public
Service.

The Public Service Commission, PSC, found that 210 senior management
members did not disclose their interests in some companies or close
corporations. Furthermore, the PSC reported that only 48% of the disclosure
forms were submitted by senior management members to the PSC before the
prescribed dates.

Whilst there are clear guidelines in terms of the Public Service
regulations, Treasury regulations, the Public Finance Management Act and
other applicable legislation regarding the prevention and the management of
conflicts of interest, the following challenges remain significant in
resolving this matter.

One, there is lack of compliance with legislation relating to financial
disclosures; two, there is no proper monitoring of the legislation relating
to financial disclosures, procurement, collusion among public servants and
other practices that have led to the findings outlined by the Auditor-
General; three, there are attitudinal reasons that mostly lead to a lack of
compliance by senior management.

In line with the aforementioned provisions, we recommend that: One,
national and provincial departments ensure that they develop effective
monitoring and evaluation policies that will respond to any breaches in
policy and deal with such cases immediately; two,   in an event that some
employees are found guilty, the respective national and provincial
accounting officers must ensure that they recover the money acquired
through these fraudulent means; three, the accounting officers of the
relevant departments must take disciplinary action against designated
employees who do not declare their interests in companies or CCs that did
business with national departments; and, four, national departments that
had employees performing remunerative work without approval investigate
these instances and that the relevant accounting officers take immediate
and appropriate disciplinary action against those that are found guilty of
performing remunerative work without approval. I thank you.

Mr M E MBILI: Madam Deputy Chairperson of the House, the government
programme of action till 2014, as derived from the ANC election manifesto,
rightly identifies the intensification of the fight against crime and
corruption as one of the key priorities. It is important to note,
therefore, that the first report of Scopa, the Standing Committee on Public
Accounts, to come before this House this session dealt with the
shortcomings within the SA Police Service in their fight against crime. The
second report of Scopa dealt with corruption within the Public Service
generally.

Equally important to note is that both reports are based on performance, as
opposed to compliance audits, which speak directly to the quality, the
depth and the nature of service delivery to the public.

Too often we tend to delink oversight over the public purse from the day-to-
day performance issues that impact on the interaction of ordinary South
Africans within the Public Service.

In the 1992 “Ready to Govern” policy document of the ANC, the ANC commented
on the Public Service thus: “The civil service should be impartial in its
functioning and be accountable both to Parliament and to the broad
community it serves.”

This report has its roots in the report issued by the Auditor-General to
Parliament in January 2006, regarding, one, approval for government
employees to perform other remunerative work; and, two, disclosure of
financial interests by Ministers, Deputy Ministers and senior managers.

We all know that the report indicated that designated employees had failed
to declare their interests and that the majority of government employees
did not have approval to perform remunerative work outside their employment
in government, as required by the relevant legislation and regulations.
This then gave rise to a performance audit being concluded both nationally
and provincially.

I shall briefly sketch out the main findings of the Auditor-General, whilst
my colleague will delve deeper into some of the issues uncovered in the
audit, suffice to say that it is not a pretty picture. We would be failing
in our duty and responsibilities to the public if we were to shy away from
raising these issues.

During the audit process, specific emphasis was placed on the performance
of remunerative work; the declaration of registrable interests; the
declaration of interests and standard bidding documents; deviation from
supply-chain management; noncompliance with certain Treasury regulations
and non-performance in terms of value-added tax legislation.

Scopa then heard and considered evidence on two occasions, from the
directors-general of different departments, such as National Treasury; the
Department of Public Service and Administration; the Department of Arts and
Culture; the Department of Communications; the Department of Correctional
Services - I’m happy the Minister is here – the Department of Labour; the
Department of Police, the Department of Trade and Industry; and the list
goes on.

Let me then sketch and point out the current situation as it stands. The
regulatory framework used currently is applicable to all members of senior
management services. That is where the crux of the problem lies. We don’t
understand why it excludes all the members below the senior levels, that is
below directors. That is where we think the bulk of the problem is, because
directors-general will not tender for something while their subordinates
will do the same. We have uncovered particularly in the Department of
Correctional Services.

The chapter reads: Unless it is otherwise provided for in his or her
condition of employment, every officer and employee shall place the whole
office or her time at the disposal of the state. The question is: If a
person is allowed, as is the case in the current situation, to have work
because he is below the threshold of senior management, when is he going to
have the time to devote all his time and dedication to do the work for the
state? We are of the view that this is supposed to be corrected.

The results, therefore, of our deliberations is the resolution now before
this House, which my Scopa colleagues will deliberate on.
However, I wish to focus on a worrying development with far-reaching
implications for every parliamentary committee. It transpired as a result
of our public hearings.

The parliamentary system of government is premised on the idea that public
representatives, as representatives of the electorate, perform oversight of
the work of the executive and the Public Service. In this regard, the
Deputy President, while delivering his keynote address at our Apac -
Association of Public Accounts Committees - conference, captured the nature
of this engagement when he said:
   Our Constitution specifically requires the legislatures to provide for
   active mechanisms of oversight and to ensure that executive organs of
   state in the national and provincial spheres of government are
   accountable to legislatures.


That is what we are saying: Ministers, you are accountable to Parliament.
That is what the Constitution is saying. The Constitution is specific about
the type of society it wants to create and the values of accountability, of
responsiveness and of having an open society.

As an oversight mechanism, public accounts committees have a great
responsibility and must contribute to legislatures fulfilling their mandate
of overseeing executive actions, with special focus on financial management
and administration.

The Auditor-General has raised the bar. We are going to carry out
performance audits. We have to engage, one way or another. The legislative
framework will then force us to carry out oversight, where we will have to
call in the Ministers. This is what the current performance audit, done by
the Auditor-General, is saying currently, unless stated otherwise.

Our democratic system of government is critically dependent on transparency
and accountability. The main responsibility for this is in the hands of the
South African legislatures. When legislatures oversee and scrutinise the
actions of the executive, they have to enforce accountability on the part
of government. The Constitution prescribes that members of the executive,
as Madam Pandor has said, are collectively and individually accountable and
must regularly provide comprehensive reports regarding matters related to
the performance of functions under their control.

Therefore, the need for strong parliamentary oversight and scrutiny
guidelines are an essential part of promoting good governance and combating
corruption, and this is an internationally accepted fact.

What the Deputy President said in his statement with regard to public
accounts committees is applicable to all parliamentary bodies. It therefore
pains me that during one of our interactions with an official from Arts and
Culture that there was a high level of ill discipline, as the official came
to Parliament and literally lied. We cannot accept that.

We want to send out a strong message to the officials that lying to
Parliament is a crime. I’m happy to report to this House that the COO,
Chief Operating Officer, concerned, of Arts and Culture, has since been
suspended and we will follow up this matter with keen interest. [Applause.]

We are saying that this Public Service does not have a place for people who
do not take their work seriously. We will follow this matter to the letter.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N D DU TOIT: Madam House Chairperson, hon members, conflicts of interest
can extend beyond simply the term of one’s employment. The original arms
deal joint investigation report of 2001 – eight years ago – states that
Parliament should take urgent steps to ensure that high-ranking officials
and Ministers are not allowed to be involved in contracts that are
concluded with the state for a reasonable period after leaving office. Now
is the time to take this recommendation and the 2006 concerns of the
Auditor-General seriously and implement them.

Measures to combat conflicts of interest are urgently needed but cannot
stop at the level of senior officials. They must also include Ministers,
their spouses and families. In Scopa’s report before the House, it is
recommended that the Public Service Commission, Cipro - Companies and
Intellectual Property Registration Office - and the National Treasury
databases should be integrated for available information. As far as Cipro
is concerned, there is the looming Valor IT tender scandal. There are also
serious flaws in the system that allows criminals to commit tax fraud.
Furthermore, the National Intelligence Agency, Nia, has since 16 January of
this year failed to do a security clearance on a chief information officer,
as is required.
Die Departement van Handel en Nywerheid het slegs riglyne vir die
aanstelling van persone met ’n kriminele rekord, wat nou eers in die proses
is om in beleid vervat te word. Maar alles is blykbaar onder beheer, want
die Nasionale Intelligensie-agentskap gaan hierdie voornemende werknemers
se rekords verifieër. Indien ’n mens na die Cipro-geval kyk, gaan Handel en
Nywerheid vir ’n lang tyd vakante poste hê. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The Department of Trade and Industry only has guide-lines for the
appointment of persons with a criminal record, which is only now in the
process of being formulated into policy. But apparently everything is under
control, because the National Intelligence Agency is going to verify the
records of these prospective employees. When one looks at the Cipro case,
the Department of Trade and Industry is going to have vacant posts for a
long time.]

To keep criminals out of public office, Nia will play a crucial role. The
right person needs to be in charge of the agency. Since the latest
appointment, the DA has made its view very clear on this matter. With all
the shaking and shuffling on the highest level, I will not be surprised if
we soon sing the national anthem to the tune of “Shake, shake, shake your
booty”. Even the Treasury admits that they employed people with criminal
records, although they stressed the point that this was not related to the
type of work that was being performed. But, yet again, criminal records
have to be verified by Nia.
Hoe gaan die NIA al die personeel wat aangestel moet word of reeds werksaam
is se kriminele status verifieër? Soos ons almal weet, het die agb
President baie sterk standpunt ingeneem teen korrupsie, of hoe? Op ’n vraag
aan die Presidensie deur die agb Leier van die Opposisie aangaande die meer
as R9 miljoen se rekenaartoerusting, kantoortoerusting en ander masjinerie
waarvoor geen stawende dokumentasie beskikbaar was vir die Ouditeur-
generaal se oudit nie, antwoord die Presidensie soos volg: (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[How is the NIA going to verify the criminal status of all members of staff
who have to be appointed or who are already employed? As we all know, the
hon President has taken a very strong view against corruption, isn’t that
so? To a question directed at the Presidency by the hon Leader of the
Opposition regarding the more than R9 million worth of computer equipment,
office equipment and other machinery, for which no supporting documentation
were available for auditing by the Auditor-General, the Presidency
responded as follows:]

   Some of the records for assets procured prior to the year 2007-08 could
   not be obtained because there were no proper records kept. The officials
   that were responsible for the safekeeping of asset documents have left
   the Presidency. No action was taken against any officials as they are no
   longer working for the Presidency.

There you have it. The buck stops with the Presidency.

Met so ’n voorbeeld wat gestel word, is dit geen wonder dat ons ’n probleem
in die Staatsdiens het nie. Dankie. [Applous.] [With such an example that
has been set, it is no wonder that we have a problem in the Public Service.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: House Chair and hon members, elected and appointed
government officials who betray the people they serve through unethical,
illegal and greedy pursuance of personal interests, gain or private success
should be punished by double measures.

Those who steer public money into their own pockets commit a serious crime
against the jobless and poor people who instead could have participated in
the economy. We know that more than R615 million from 2005 to 2007 landed
in private pockets. Some 30 officials gave themselves undue tenders in
excess of R30 million. The fat cats became fatter.

High ethics are key to a corrupt-free society. But some people have no
regard for the law or standards. This is more than misconduct or neglect of
duty, but a violation. They get unfair advantages, compromise independence,
and misuse positions, state facilities, time, employees and inside
information for their gains. They stop at nothing and even engage in
political influence or collusion. They treat our hard-earned tax money as
their cash cow for the milking. They even regulate their own ventures.

As a rule, government employees should avoid conflicts of personal interest
and public duty, whether nonprofitable or profitable. They must evade every
appearance of conflicts of interest. To do paid private work while working
for government is simply wrong. The report before the House is a shame for
our country and an indictment of this government. It says that even
Ministers, since 2006, did not declare their interests or get permission.
Millions of rand went into the pockets of already paid officials.

Cope calls on all to root out corruption or undue enrichment and not
condone it by inaction. How can we fight corruption when little happens to
those who “Tata machance” and “Tata mamillion”? The Minister of Finance, in
fact, said, and I quote: “Take strong action against those who feed
selfishly off the state.” Cope says we must be alert and blow the whistle.

We must raise the levels of Public Service professionalism and the ethics
for conducting business on or off duty. We must embark on a fresh campaign
of integrity, clean governance, clean hands and clean conscience and report
all deviations. All officials must comply. All employees guilty of this
must be shown the door. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, the hon colleagues who spoke before me have
indicated that the first report was tabled by the Auditor-General in 2006
and that we had a new report that we considered in July 2008. We all know
what the report indicated. It indicated that senior managers failed to
declare their interests and so did certain Ministers.

Now the question to ask hon members is whether it is the duty of the
Auditor-General to find these things out. Well, the answer, my friends, is
not blowing in the wind. The answer lies with the fact that directors-
general or heads of departments have failed in executing their own
responsibilities to ensure that senior managers within their departments
complete declarations of interests and everything else that is necessary.
It also lies in the inability of the Department of Public Service and
Administration and the Public Service Commission to have the same
understanding of what remunerative work means. We hope that by the time we
discuss this later on, they will know exactly what remunerative work means.

The sterling work of the Office of the Auditor-General has helped to
identify many areas which need to be tightened up to ensure that there are
continued investigations as to whether or not some of the transactions in
which government employees who did business with government departments
were fraudulent.

Members of Parliament have to disclose their interests, and this is a
public document. Why should government officials’ interests not be declared
publicly as well? They sit on procurement committees; we don’t. In
municipalities, you find that the officials look at tenders, but don’t have
to declare their interests.

When it comes to moonlighting - and the SAPS and the Health Ministers are
not here – you find that many members of the SAPS and nurses are
moonlighting. They work for government, for pension and everything else,
but they go and work for private hospitals and security companies in the
evenings. When are we going to put a stop to moonlighting?

We also need to ensure that those who are employed in state-owned
enterprises declare their interests publicly. This is because state-owned
enterprises seem to be becoming a cash cow for many people who either
worked in government or have knowledge of what is happening in government.
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr T J BONHOMME: House Chair, Ministers, Deputy Ministers and colleagues,
it is generally accepted that our Constitution guarantees the right for all
citizens to make their livelihoods, so long as they do so legally. That
constitutional imperative is not what is under consideration in this case.
Essentially, what we are discussing today is the phenomenon of serving two
masters simultaneously.
Rightly or wrongly, the current framework allows our senior public servants
to perform remunerative work outside official duties, with the proviso that
they obtain approval and disclose their interests.
This is informed by the non-negotiable principle that senior public
officials should maintain the highest standards of professional ethics and
that disclosure measures are aimed at preventing incidents of conflict
before they occur. They also protect both senior officials and, more
importantly, strengthen citizens’ trust in public institutions.

Paragraph 4.5.5 of the Explanatory Manual on the Code of Conduct for the
Public Service, states that:

  Employees are expected to place their undivided attention, time and
  skills at the disposal of the Public Service as employer. The nature and
  demands of the job in the Public Service are such that the interests of
  both the Public Service and the community may be prejudiced by a public
  servant undertaking remunerative work
  outside official duties. It is therefore mandatory to obtain prior
  approval to perform remunerative work outside official hours.

There is no ambiguity in the statement. So, let us consider how it matches
up to reality as reflected in the Auditor-General’s performance audit.
According to the report, 2 319 government officials had an interest in
companies or CCs, close corporations, that did business with national and
provincial government departments. Of those, only 75, that is 3%, had
approval to perform paid work outside their official employment at the
departments, whilst some departments were still determining their approval
status when the report was finalised. The business contract with government
by these employee-related entities for the 2005 until the 2007 financial
years amounted to R615 million.

This is not only a case of an official in the Western Cape having interests
in a company doing business with the Limpopo government. A total of 30
employees are identified as directors or members of companies or CCs doing
business with the very same department where they are employed. It goes
without saying that none of them had any approval for the work, which
netted them R32 million for the period under review.

A department such as Correctional Services had four employees who
transacted with the department, a contravention of the Correctional
Services Act, to the tune of R1 037 000. This is not to single them out,
but it is equally factual that the department has had qualified audits
every year since 2001. Another person employed on a part-time basis at the
then Department of Housing had interests in companies that did business
with other national departments amounting to R17 million.

The Auditor-General identified a number of factors that militated against
employees seeking approval. These are: One, the majority of national
departments do have a system of control in place to manage the performance
of other remunerative work by employees; two, the national departments do
not have a database or register in place to monitor other paid work; three,
designated employees were under the impression that the financial
declaration forms submitted to national departments and the Public Service
Commission were sufficient; and, four, the national departments rely on the
integrity of employees to seek approval to perform outside paid work or
declare their interests in companies or CCs. So this is rather a grim
picture.

The committee recommends that national departments investigate instances of
employees performing remunerative work without approval and that the
relevant accounting officers take immediate and appropriate disciplinary
action and report the outcomes of the investigations to Scopa.

All provincial heads of department should take immediate remedial action to
henceforth ensure compliance with legislation by all staff, and that
matters related to the difficulties in the implementation of legislation be
addressed with the Department of Public Service and Administration.

The provincial public accounts committee should consider holding public
hearings with respective provincial departments to monitor the actions
taken against implicated employees by the respective provincial
departments. The national and provincial departments should implement and
actively monitor the systems of control to manage the performance of other
remunerative work by employees.

The legal interpretation regarding what constitutes remunerative work must
be speedily concluded by the relevant bodies, namely the Public Service
Commission and the Department of Public Service and Administration, and be
communicated widely in the Public Service.

Again, it is instructive to note that the report from the Auditor-General
has hardly spurned the PSC to re-examine the framework governing outside
paid work and financial disclosures. The committee was assured that
baseline documents incorporating some of the Auditor-General’s
recommendations would be published in the near future as they are currently
in the work plan of the DPSA.

In conclusion, we, in the ANC, have realised the gravity of the situation.
In this regard, I must refer to the statement after the first national
executive committee meeting on 18 and 19 September 2009, which referred to
declaration ... I thank you, Madam. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs M N MATLADI: Madam Chairperson of the House, the UCDP is seriously
concerned about the R615 million that has been misused in departments
dealing with their employees in business. This spells out the following:
firstly, that the tender allocation system of the departments encourages
fraudulent activities. It is a system that has to be revisited; not every
section in every department should allocate tenders, but there should at
least be a division that deals with this.

The second issue is that we realise that the deputy directors-general of
departments are not even aware of what is happening. The report that we are
debating today was issued in 2006, and they were called in in August 2009.
Some of them were hearing about these resolutions for the first time. That
is why I support my hon colleagues who say that Ministers have also to
appear before Scopa in order to account, to know what is happening in their
departments and to see how their deputy directors-general are failing the
departments.

Another point is that the financial management system in many departments
is still wanting. We wonder about the chief financial officer, if there is
an internal auditor, if there is an audit committee in every department
that is supposed to be working on these issues long before the Auditor-
General picks them up.

Resolutions by Scopa in this House, which have been adopted, are not taken
seriously by most of the departments. Thank you, hon Chair. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Hon Chairperson, let us not do shadow-boxing. The Auditor-
General is correct: Too many civil servants and their spouses are involved
in business, but what about politicians and what about councillors?
Contracts have been given to political friends and party loyalists.

I can point out that since 1994, in KwaZulu-Natal, certain individuals have
become stinking rich. They are getting electrical contracts, they have
become suppliers; whereas before 1994 they were not known. What will help
check civil servants and politicians is a special squad, within the Hawks,
that can check for unaccounted-for enrichment and lifestyles, such as that
from the evidence that has been led by KPMG in the Jackie Selebi case.

If you have an investigation for unaccounted-for enrichment and lifestyle
in India, you are detained immediately, irrespective of your rank. By the
way, for the benefit of the House, in KwaZulu-Natal, the Auditor-General
had great praise for only one department, the department of sport and
recreation, which was led by the MF leader, Mr A Rajbansi. Thank you. [Time
expired.]

Dr H C VAN SCHALKWYK: Chairperson, the Auditor-General’s report on
conflicts of interest in the Public Service has raised serious issues. One
of his specific concerns was the approval to perform remunerative work.

In a comprehensive audit conducted, it was found that 2 319 government
officials had an interest in companies or CCs that did business with
national and provincial government departments. Only 75 officials, that is
3%, had approval to perform remunerative work outside their official
employment at departments.

What is very annoying about this is that the Public Service Act of 1994
stipulates explicitly:

  No officer or employee shall perform or engage himself or herself to
  perform remunerative work outside his or her employment in the Public
  Service, without permission granted by the relevant executing authority
  or an officer authorised by the said authority.

Clearly, these officials violated the law. Business conducted with
government by these employee-related entities for the 2005 to 2007
financial years amounted to R615 million.

The situation gets even worse when the Public Service Commission states in
its report: Overview of the Implementation of the Financial Framework,
Financial year 2007-08, that the low level of compliance, that is 70% by
directors-general and deputy directors-general in both national and
provincial departments, is of great concern. Surely, better compliance
levels should be expected at this level as these officials take the lead in
decision-making within their departments.

It, therefore, makes sense that the Public Service Commission advises the
relevant executive authorities, namely Ministers and MECs, to institute
disciplinary action and to charge transgressing officials with misconduct.
The Auditor-General echoes these sentiments.

Accountability forms a crucial part of good management and good governance.
Therefore, there must be consequences for misconduct. Guilty public
servants, at all levels, must even be fired. Revision of the ministerial
handbook and the handbook for managers is often mentioned in the press, but
we would like to have a date for the completion of this very necessary
process.

The important question, however, is whether the executive has the political
will and the political guts to take these crucial steps against corruption.
The Minister for the Public Service and Administration is the only one who
can fire a director-general, for instance. Will Minister Baloyi be willing
to take such a step in order to prove that he is serious in combating
widespread corruption in the Public Service? Is he willing to compel public
servants, at all levels, to sign their key performance agreements?

In the Western Cape, the DA implemented some alterations to the Public
Service handbook in order to develop a climate of ethics in the Public
Service. Is the Minister willing to do the same? May I remind him that he
said, in July this year, while addressing the Anticorruption Learning
Network in Port Elizabeth, that government needed to fight and improve its
efforts to tackle this serious problem of corruption in the Public Service?

Mr Baloyi can be assured that the DA will support him all the way in
fighting this immense problem, because only in doing this will we be able
to start reversing public dissatisfaction and disillusionment with the
Public Service in our country. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs M S MANGENA: Hon Speaker, I think I’ll continue where my colleagues in
the committee left off. I will deal with one or two areas that the Auditor-
General highlighted in the performance audit, that is noncompliance with
both Treasury regulations and with value- added tax legislation.

Before I tackle the findings and the committee’s resolutions thereon, it’s
important to remind the House what those Treasury regulations pertain to.

Firstly, TR 16A8 regulates compliance with ethical standards, read with
practice note number SCM 4 of 2004. It prescribes that all employees and
other role-players involved in supply chain management must adhere to the
National Treasury’s code of conduct for supply chain management
practitioners.

Secondly, TR 16A8.5 states that an official in the supply chain management
unit who becomes aware of a breach or failure to comply with an aspect of
the supply chain management system, must immediately report such to the
accounting officer in writing.

Thirdly, TR 16A9.2 states that the accounting officer may disregard the bid
of any bidder, if that bidder or any of its directors had abused the
institution’s supply chain management system; had committed fraud or was
guilty of any other improper conduct in relation to such a system, or had
failed to perform on any previous contract.

Fourthly, practice note number SCM 5 of 2004 states in paragraph 3.1(b)
that accounting officers should make provision for the training of at least
the practitioners who are involved in the day-to-day operations of supply
chain management.

I’m sure we all agree that all these regulations have noble intentions, and
if implemented, will ensure that government tenders go to those most
deserving. However, the Auditor-General found that though the National
Treasury’s code of conduct must be adhered to, there’s no legal requirement
for employees working in supply chain management to sign a code of conduct.
In short, departments do not have signed codes of conduct, or, perhaps more
likely, it would affect too many bank balances.

Of the 20 national departments, 17, that is 85%, indicated that officials
had not been aware of any breach or failure to comply, while officials in
two departments reported supply management system cases to the accounting
officer. One department did not respond. Of the two reported, one indicated
that no action had been taken, as required by TR 16A9.1(b).

Of the 20 departments, 19 departments, that is 95%, indicated that no bids
were disregarded, as none of the bidders nor any of their directors had
abused the system. One department did not respond, a case perhaps of “See
no evil, hear no evil”. Equally worrisome, cases were identified where
regional supply chain management employees had either not been trained,
training had been cancelled or trained staff had not been retained.

The Auditor-General recommended, and the committee strongly agreed, that
all provincial and national departments should ensure that supply chain
management sign a code of conduct committing themselves to fair and ethical
procurement practices. It is the least that our people expect, considering
the handsome packages earned by senior public servants and the fact that
they’re in the Public Service, not through compulsion, but to serve, and
there’s nothing precluding them from joining private enterprises, if they
so wish.

I now come to noncompliance with VAT legislation. It’s generally accepted
that tax authorities are not to be trifled with, as anyone who’s ever
received a letter of demand from Sars can attest. However, there seems to
be a thriving industry in noncompliance when it comes to supplying goods
and services to some government departments. Section 23(1) of VAT Act of
1991 states that all trading entities must register for VAT if taxable
supplies or services rendered during a 12-month period amount to more than
R300 000.

Section 59(1)(g) to (i) of the same Act states that any person who
intentionally evades payment of tax under this Act, or fraudulently obtains
or assists in obtaining a tax refund by another person who is not entitled
to such, shall be guilty of an offence. This may include the issuing of any
tax invoice, credit or debit note, charging tax where the supply of goods
does not occur, and, lastly, the issuing of false documentation in the form
of tax invoices, debit and credit notes and any other document falsely
intended to claim tax.

With regard to companies doing business in excess of R300 000, but not
registered for VAT, the Auditor-General reported that one company in
KwaZulu-Natal was paid R423 203, and three companies were paid R1,6 million
by the then Department of Minerals and Energy. An amount of R1,2 million
was paid out by various departments to companies or CCs that were either
registered but did not disclose the VAT amount or VAT number, or charged
VAT when they were not registered for VAT.

In light of the above, the committee resolved the following. National and
provincial departments should ensure that invoices comply with the VAT Act
before they authorise payment. National and provincial departments should
withhold payment until proof of registration is obtained from the company
or CC, and that proof should first be verified with Sars before any payment
is made.

In conclusion, I should mention that the Department of Public Service and
Administration welcomed the report as it would assist to effect necessary
reforms to the system of declaration of interests. The practical
application of the regulatory framework is being reviewed, and Scopa, the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, hopes that plans to extend the
system to nondesignated employees will soon become a reality. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

    CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF DECLARATION OF
        AMNESTY IN TERMS OF FIREARMS CONTROL ACT (ACT NO 60 OF 2000)

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Chairperson, hon members, regarding the approval by
Parliament of the request by the Minister of Police, members would know
that firearms are the most commonly used weapons in the commission of
violent crimes. Recently released crime statistics show that for 87% of
business robberies, 73% of house robberies and 57% of street robberies
committed between April last year and March this year, firearms,
particularly illegal firearms, were used.

The 2,1% increase in illegal possession of firearms and ammunition during
2008-09, is noted primarily as a result of the SA Police Service actions
such as crime intelligence, roadblocks and searches, all point in one
direction: the abundant availability of illegal firearms in our
communities.

The call by the President, His Excellency the hon J G Zuma, to do
everything possible to reduce the pool of firearms in the country is
perfectly correct. This amnesty is therefore correct. It is informed by and
responds to the President’s call. We are calling upon all citizens to heed
the call by effectively making use of this amnesty period, which starts on
11 January 2010 until 11 April 2010, a period of three months.

Firstly, this amnesty will allow those who illegally possess firearms and
do not wish to keep them to surrender them to members of the SA Police
Service at their nearest police station. According to the Firearms Control
Act, such a person may not be prosecuted for having been in possession of
that firearm without an appropriate licence, permit or authorisation or for
having been in unlawful possession of a firearm capable of discharging
ammunition.

Secondly, the amnesty will allow a person who is illegally in possession of
a firearm, but willing to keep it, to surrender it to members of the SA
Police Service at their nearest police station and apply for a licence at
that police station or any other police station. If the licence is granted,
the firearm will then be returned to the licence holder.

In all the conditions stated above, the person’s details will be taken down
by a member of the SAPS as the Portfolio Committee on Police is of the view
that an anonymous amnesty process will be open to abuse, and the Minister
agrees with the portfolio committee. Lessons learned in the 2005 amnesty,
wherein about 98 000 firearms were recovered, will help South African
police officers to improve the administration process this time around. It
is in this spirit that we call upon everybody to maximally utilise this
opportunity.
The Portfolio Committee on Police, having considered the request by the
Minister of Police, the hon Mthethwa, for approval by this House of the
declaration of amnesty in terms of the Firearms Control Act, Act No 60 of
2000, recommends that the House, in terms of section 139(2)(a) of that Act,
approve the said declaration as amended.

Sicela wonke amalungu akule Ndlu ashumayele leli vangeli lozwelo noma
likashwele wokubuyiselwa kwezibhamu ezingekho emthethweni eziteshini
zamaphoyisa, aqale ngathi, kuye komakhelwane kanye nezihlobo zethu.
Siyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We ask all the members of this House to spread the word of pardon or
amnesty for those who take their unlicensed firearms to the police
stations, starting with us, then our neighbours and our relatives. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

There was no debate.

Question put: That the Declaration of Amnesty in terms of the Firearms
Control Act (Act No 60 of 2000) be approved, subject to amendments.

Question agreed to.

Declaration of Amnesty in terms of the Firearms Control Act (Act No 60 of
2000) approved, subject to amendments.

        CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE, 2009
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

There was no debate.

Report accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON
  OVERSIGHT VISIT TO SOUTH AFRICAN SOCIAL SECURITY AGENCY OFFICE, PAYPOINTS
                    AND SERVICE AREAS IN THE WESTERN CAPE

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

 That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 18:16.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 6 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Communications


          a) South African Postbank Bill [B 14 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 32673
             of 6 November 2009.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Communications of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

The following item replaces item 1 under “Committee Reports” on page 1484
of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports dated 5 November 2009:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Police on the Declaration of an
    Amnesty in terms of the Firearms Control Act, dated 3 November 2009:

    The Portfolio Committee on Police, having considered the request for
    approval by Parliament of the Declaration of an Amnesty in terms of the
    Firearms Control Act, 2000 (Act No. 60 of  2000), recommends that the
    House, in terms of section 139 (2) (a) of the Act, approve the said
    Declaration subject to the following amendments:


    1.      That the words “No details of the person who hands in the
       firearm will be taken down, if the person wishes to utilize the
       anonymous process for amnesty“ in paragraph “(a)” of the Declaration
       be deleted.


    2.      That the words “Proper audit processes must be put in place to
       ensure the auditing of the records of all firearms, surrendered
       anonymously in terms of this amnesty” in the second last paragraph
       of the Declaration also be deleted.


    The Committee is of the view that an anonymous amnesty process will be
    open to abuse.

    Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development


          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 32652
             of 20 October 2009.]


             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
             Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, and
             referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


    (1)    Bills amended by National Council of Provinces and returned for
         concurrence on   10 November 2009:
         (a)      National House of Traditional Leaders Bill [B 56D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


         (b)      Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment
             Bill [B 57D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


        The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs of the National
        Assembly.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the President’s Fund for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the  Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 254-2009].

    (b)    Report on the Government’s Progress on the Implementation of the
        Truth and Reconciliation Commission Recommendations for 2008-2009.

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     South African Revenue Service (SARS) – Response  to  the  Joint
        Report of the Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  the  Portfolio
        Committee  on Economic Development on  Budget  Vote  7  –  National
        Treasury (Including SARS) and the  2009/10   –   2011/12  Strategic
        Plan of the South African Revenue Service.


    (b)     Government Notice No R. 975  published in Government Gazette No
        32630 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1386), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).

    (c)     Government Notice No R. 950  published in Government Gazette No
        32616 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/62), in terms
        of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (d)     Government Notice No R. 951  published in Government Gazette No
        32616 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/320),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (e)     Government Notice No R. 952  published in Government Gazette No
        32616 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/321),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (f)     Government Notice No R. 953  published in Government Gazette No
        32616 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/649),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (g)     Government Notice No R. 941  published in Government Gazette No
        32601 dated 02 October 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/60), in terms
        of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (h)     Government Notice No R. 943  published in Government Gazette No
        32609 dated 29 September 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/61), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (i)     Government Notice No R. 932  published in Government Gazette No
        32593 dated 23 September 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/59), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

       a) Letter from the Minister of Human Settlements dated 30 October
          2009, to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay
          in the submission of the Annual Report of the National Home
          Builders Registration Council’s Annual Report for 2008-2009.

          THE NATIONAL HOME BUILDERS REGISTRATION COUNCIL’S ANNUAL REPORT
          FOR 2008/09 FINANCIAL YEAR


          In terms of Section 55 (3) of the PFMA, public entities must
          within five months of the end of the financial year, submit annual
          reports on the activities of that public entity during the
          financial year, to the relevant Executive Authority for tabling in
          Parliament through the Accounting Officer of a department
          designated by the Executive Authority. Submission of Annual
          Reports for the 2008/09 financial year was expected on or before
          31 August 2009.


          I have been informed that the office of the Auditor-General
          advised the National Home Builders Registration Council (NHBRC) on
          20 August 2009 that it will only be able to complete the external
          audit at the end of September 2009. Therefore, NHBRC will only be
          able to finalise its Annual Report for submission by 29 October
          2009.


          As a result, NHBRC was not in a position to comply with the PFMA
          in submitting its Annual Report to Parliament and the Department
          by 31 August 2009.



          signed
          TMG SEXWALE
          MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT PAGES 1503 - 1575


