---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 May 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-05-06
---

WEDNESDAY, 6 MAY 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

Members assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 10:34.

The Serjeant-at-Arms announced the Honourable Chief Justice, Justice Pius
Nkonzo Langa, who was received by members standing.

The Chief Justice took the Chair.

The national anthem was sung by the Parliamentary Choir.

The Chief Justice requested members to observe a moment of silence for
prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                        MEETING OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

The Chief Justice stated that the meeting had been convened in terms of
section 51(1) of the Constitution and requested members to swear or affirm
faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution in terms of
section 48 of the Constitution.
                         OATH AND SOLEMN AFFIRMATION

The following members made and subscribed the oath or solemn affirmation:

   Abram, S; Adams, L H; Ainslie, A R; Balfour, B M; Balindlela, Z B;
   Baloyi,  M R; Bapela, K O; Bam-Mugwanya, V; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P;
   Bhoola, R B; Bikani, F C; Blaai, B C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Boinamo, G G;
   Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Bosman, L L;  Botha,
   Y R; Botha, T; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G; Carrim, Y I; Carter, D;
   Cebekhulu, R N; Chabane, O C; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I;
   Coetzee, T W; Coetzee, R; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza,
   B N;  Dandala, H M; Davidson, I O;  Davies, R H; De Freitas M S F; De
   Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Dexter, P D; Dhlamini, B W; Diale, L N;
   Dikgacwi, M M; Ditshetelo, I C; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma , N C; Dlodlo,
   A; Dlulane, B N; Doidge, G Q M; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Du Toit, N D;
   Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Duma, N M; Duncan, P C;  Dunjwa, M
   L; Ebrahim, E I; Ellis, M J; Farisani, T S; Farrow, S B; Figlan, A M;
   Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L; Fritz, A T; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gaehler,
   L B; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gcume, N P; Gcwabaza, N E; Gelderblom, J P;
   George, M E; George, D T; Gigaba, K M N; Gina, N; Godi, N T; Godongwana,
   E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Goqwana, M B; Greyling, L W; Groenewald, P J;
   Gumede, D M; Gungubele, M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana,
   N E; Hendricks, L B; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Holomisa, B H; Hoosen, M
   H; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; James, W G; Jeffery, J H; Joemat-Pettersson, T
   M; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalyan, S V; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E;
   Kganare, D A; Kganyago, N M; Khoarai, L P;  Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E;
   Khunou, N P; Kilian, J D; Kloppers-Lourens, J C; Kohler-Barnard, D;
   Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W;  Koornhof, N J J V R; Kopane, S P; Kota-
   Fredericks, Z A; Kotsi, C M P; Krumbock, G R; Kubayi; M T; Lamoela, H;
   Landers, L T; Lee, T D; Lekgetho, G; Line, H; Lorimer, J R B; Lotriet, A;
   Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; Lucas, E J; Luthuli,  A N; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J
   J; Mabaso, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabudafhasi, T R; Mabuza, M C; Mackenzie, G P
   D; Madikizela-Mandela, N W; Madisha, W M; Madlala, N M; Maduna, P;
   Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N;
   Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makasi, X C; Makhuba, H N;
   Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malale, M I;
   Malgas, H H; Maluleka, P H; Maluleke, J M; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C;
   Manganye, J; Mangena, M S; Mangena, M A; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N
   N; Marais, S J F; Marais, E J; Martins, B A D; Masango, F T; Masango, S
   J; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashishi, A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M;
   Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matladi, M N;
   Matlanyane, H F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maynier, D J;
   Mazibuko, L D; Mbalula, F A; Mbili, M E; Mcgluwa , J J; Mda, A; Mdaka, N
   M; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J; Mfeketo, N
   C; Mgabadeli, H C; Michael, N W A; Mjobo, L N; Mkhize, H; Mkhize, L N;
   Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A; Mmusi, S G; Mncwango, M A;
   Mnguni, P B; Mnisi, N A; Mnqasela, M; Mocumi, P A; Mohale, M C;
   Mokgalapa, S; Molao, S K; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J
   C; Monareng, O E; More, E; Morgan, G R; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motau, S
   C; Motimele, M S; Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Motsoaledi, P A;
   Mpahlwa, M B M; Mphahlele, L M; Mpontshane, A M; Msimang, C T; Msweli, H
   S; Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mubu, K S; Mufamadi, T A;
   Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M
   E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V B; Ndude, H
   N; Nel, A C; Nelson, W J; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcobo, B T;
   Ngele, N J; Ngonyama, L S; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhanha, M A;
   Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkoana-Mashabane, M E;
   Nkwinti, G E; Nonkonyana, M; November, N T; Nqakula, C; Ntanzi, S P;
   Ntapane, S Z; Ntshiqela, P; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T W; Nxumalo,
   M D; Nyalungu, R E; Nyama, M M A; Nyanda, S; Nyanda, N F; Nyekemba, E;
   Nzimande, B E; Odendaal, L M; Oliphant, M N; Ollis, I M; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Oriani-Ambrosini, M G; Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M; Peters, E D;
   Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pillay, S M; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E; Poho, P D;
   Pretorius, P J C; Pule, D D; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M W; Radebe, B A;
   Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A; Ramodibe, D M; Rantsolase, M
   A; Rasool, E; Robinson, D; Rwexana, S P; Saal, G; Schäfer, D A Schmidt, H
   C; ; Schmidt, J; Schneemann, G D; Sefularo, M; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau,
   G J; Selfe, J; Sexwale, T M G; Shabangu, S; Shiceka, S; Shilowa, M S;
   Shinn, M R; Shoba, K N; Sibhida, N N; Sibiya, N A; Singh, N; Sisulu, L N;
   Sisulu, M V; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Skosana, M B;
   Smiles, D C; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Smuts, M; Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M;
   Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Spies, W D; Steele, M H; Steyn, A;
   Steyn, A C; Stofile, M A; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Surty, M E; Swart, M;
   Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Terblanche, J F; Thabethe, E; Thobejane, S G;
   Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Trollip, R A P;
   Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase,
   T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van Dalen, P; Van
   den Berg, N J; Van der Linde, J J; Van der Merwe, S C; Van der Merwe, J
   H; Van der Walt, D; Van der Westhuizen, A P; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk,
   M C J; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Vukuza-Linda, N Y; Waters, M; Wenger, M;
   Williams, A J; Xaba, P P; Xasa, T; Xingwana, L M; Yengeni, L E; Zikalala,
   C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z; Zulu, L D; Zuma, J G.


                    RULES FOR ELECTION OF OFFICE-BEARERS


The Chief Justice announced that Rules as contemplated in item 9 of Part A
of Schedule 3 to the Constitution had been made available to members.

                      APPOINTMENT OF RETURNING OFFICERS

The Chief Justice further announced the appointment of Mr M B Coetzee as
Returning Officer, and as Assistant Returning Officers, Mr M K Mansura,
Mr M Xaso, Dr N Ismail, Ms M R Mohlomi, Ms M C Griebenow, Ms A A Kisten,
Ms N Giba, Ms C S Abell, Mr C V Mahlangu, Mr F J Basson, Adv J M Manyange,
Mr V P Ngaleka, Mr P Hahndiek and Mr M E Philander.

                 NOTICE CALLING MEETING OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

The Returning Officer read out the following notice, dated 29 April 2009:

   It is hereby notified for general information that under and by virtue of
   the power vested in me by section 51(1), read  with  sections  52(2)  and
   86(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of  South  Africa,  I,  Pius  N
   Langa, Chief Justice of South Africa, have fixed Wednesday, 6  May  2009,
   at 10:30, as the date and time, and the Chamber of the National  Assembly
   in the Houses of Parliament, Cape Town, as the place for  the  nomination
   and election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the  National  Assembly
   and 14:00 for the  nomination  and  election  of  the  President  of  the
   Republic of South Africa.


   Signed on this 29th day of April 2009 at Johannesburg.


   P N Langa
   Chief Justice

                             ELECTION OF SPEAKER

The House proceeded to the election of a Speaker of the National Assembly.

The Chief Justice reminded members that nominations had to be submitted in
the prescribed form and duly seconded.

The Chief Justice informed members that in terms of item 4 of Part A of
Schedule 3 to the Constitution no debate would be allowed.

The Chief Justice called for nominations.

Mr Andrew Mlangeni, seconded by Ms Nombuyiselo Joyce Ngele, nominated
Mr Max Vuyisile Sisulu for election as Speaker of the National Assembly.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chief Justice that the nomination
paper had been properly completed.

There being no further nominations, the Chief Justice declared Mr
Max Vuyisile Sisulu duly elected as Speaker of the National Assembly.

The Chief Justice, on behalf of all present, congratulated Mr Sisulu on his
election as Speaker and requested him to take the Chair.

The Serjeant-at-Arms conducted the Speaker to the Chair and placed the Mace
in its position.

                      ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY NEW SPEAKER

The SPEAKER: Honourable Chief Justice Langa, hon President and Deputy
President, hon members of the executive, hon members of the National
Assembly, esteemed members of the diplomatic corps, distinguished guests
and members of the public, it is with great humility and a deep sense of
honour that I take the Chair as Speaker of the National Assembly.

As Speaker, I want to express my sincerest appreciation to hon members for
the confidence that they have placed in me, and for the great
responsibility that has been entrusted to me. I assure hon members that
your trust is not misplaced and that I vow to execute my duties as Speaker
in a manner that befits your trust and the requirements of our
Constitution. [Applause.]

No Speaker can accept this important position without acknowledging the
efforts and contributions of his or her predecessors. In this respect, I
want to pay a special tribute to the first Speaker of the democratic
Parliament, Dr Frene Ginwala. [Applause.] Dr Ginwala, the first Madam
Speaker of our democratic dispensation, worked tirelessly to lay the
foundations of a new and vibrant people’s Parliament during the first ten
years of our democracy. She created and enhanced procedures and systems so
that Parliament could claim its rightful place in our constitutional order.
The initial work guided by Dr Ginwala will resonate in this House and has
left us with a lasting legacy on which to build.

I wish also to take this opportunity to pay tribute to two other former
Speakers, hon Baleka Mbete and hon Gwen Mahlangu-Nkabinde, who have
returned as members of the National Assembly. Their sterling work over the
past five years in entrenching democracy and uplifting the status of
Parliament will not be forgotten. The people of South Africa owe them a
great debt of gratitude. [Applause.]

Furthermore, their dedication to enhancing the third Parliament as a
participatory Parliament and improving its oversight mechanisms are a
lasting legacy that will shape much of the life of this, the fourth
democratic Parliament. For that, we thank them and pay tribute to their
foresight and perseverance. Thank you. [Applause.]

On 22 April 2009, the people of South Africa spoke, and we now know what
they said. They gave us, their elected representatives, an unequivocal
mandate. We may be tired after the election campaign, but we are compelled
to put aside our weariness and immediately tackle the challenges that await
us, head on. It is time to put our shoulders to the wheel, to demonstrate
that we are worthy of the trust placed in us by the electorate.

I have been informed that about half of the members sworn in today did not
serve in the Third Parliament. That is a high percentage, and for many of
you, it will be a fast-tracked learning process and an adjustment to a new
way of doing things. However, I want to assure new members that the former
members, as well as returning members, have created an enabling environment
in this House that will undoubtedly assist you in adjusting to your new
surroundings and working environment.

Hon members will know that all three previous Speakers of the democratic
Parliament were women. The term “Madam Speaker” rolled very easily off the
tongue for many years. But now, all members, both new and returning, will
have to make another big adjustment, as gender sensitivity has been
officially recognised by the Chair. [Laughter.] [Applause.] I am sure that,
under the glare of the television cameras and the gaze of the public, I
will be called “Madam Speaker” at least a few times! [Laughter.] That is to
be expected, and will be forgiven, at least once! [Laughter.] I would,
however, urge all hon members to resist the great temptation to call the
Speaker “Madam Speaker”. The title “Speaker” will suffice.

Finally, I want to welcome returning members to the House. Very
importantly, I wish to express a warm welcome to the new members of this
honourable House. I thank you. [Applause.]

                         ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER
The House proceeded to the election of a Deputy Speaker of the National
Assembly.

The Speaker called for nominations.

Ms Nomkhumbi Bertha Gxowa, seconded by Mr Eric Mtshali, nominated Ms
Nomaindiya Cathleen Mfeketo for election as Deputy Speaker of the National
Assembly.

The Returning Officer reported to the Speaker that the nomination paper had
been properly completed.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Hon Speaker, it appears that there are no further
nominations. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

There being no further nominations, the Speaker declared Ms Nomaindiya
Cathleen Mfeketo duly elected as Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly.

The Speaker, on behalf of all present, congratulated Ms Mfeketo on her
election as Deputy Speaker and afforded her the opportunity of addressing
the House.

                   ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY NEW DEPUTY SPEAKER

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Hon President and
Deputy President of the country, president and deputy president of the ANC,
hon members, I accept this nomination with humility. I thank my
organisation, the ANC, for having the confidence in me that I can do this
job. I promise that, together with the Speaker, we will do our utmost and
not disappoint the expectations of this House.

I am looking forward to working with all parties to make this House what
our voters expect it to be. My role is definitely to assist the Speaker,
and I will use all my experience and knowledge to do exactly that.
[Applause.]

                              BLESSING OF HOUSE

Sheikh Achmat Seddick of the Muslim Council, Chief Rabbi Dr W Goldstein of
the Union of the Orthodox Synagogues of South Africa, The Very Reverend
Raphael Hess of the South African Council of Churches, Mr Siyabulela
Mkhangisa, a representative of traditional African religion, and Guru
Krishna of the Hindu communities of South Africa blessed the House.

Business suspended at 12:36 and resumed at 14:03.

                              Afternoon Sitting

                    ELECTION OF PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

The Speaker took the Chair and announced that the House would proceed to
the election of the President.

The Chief Justice took the Chair as required under section 86(2) of the
Constitution.

The Chief Justice called for nominations.

Ms N W MADIKIZELA-MANDELA: Thank you. For the nomination of the fourth
democratically elected President of the Republic of South Africa on 6 May
2009 – NdinguNobandla Nomzamo Winnie Mandela [I am Nobandla Nomzamo Winnie
Mandela]. [Applause.]

Chief Justice Pius Langa, Mr Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Presiding
Officer, hon members, distinguished guests and fellow South Africans,
history is littered with barbarisms and the worst that humanity has to
offer. Similarly, history is littered with the noble determination of
various peoples across the world so that the most noble of humanity’s
attributes may prevail.

Today I am proud, once again, to nominate for the highest office in the
land a fellow South African who, in the historical and contemporary
conflicts between the worst and the best of what humanity has to offer, has
distinguished himself as a capable leader of our people’s determination to
prevail over whatever obstacles there may be.

Many names and descriptions have been used to characterise him, and the
bookshelves have not witnessed the last of perspectives about him. But, as
Shakespeare would write in Romeo and Juliet, “What is in a name? That which
we call a rose by any other name would smell as sweet.” [Applause.] Our
people have democratically concurred.

I nominate for the vacancy of President of the Republic of South Africa a
fellow South African –


   Osomanxebanxeba zinsizwa,
   Osomanxebanxeba zinsizwa zangakubo,
   Osomanxebanxeba akhula nazo zinsizwa.

Mr Speaker, if I were asked to further motivate for his candidature as
President of our Republic, I would simply say that he is a capable leader
who epitomises our continued and resilient struggle against the worst that
humanity has to offer and the hope that we, as a nation, shall triumph
against all odds because of the best that, collectively, we can offer - and
only the ANC can offer that. [Applause.]

The Chief Justice, Mr Speaker, the Presiding Officer, hon members,
distinguished guests and fellow South Africans, I, Nobandla Zanyiwe Nomzamo
Winnie Mandela, on behalf of the ANC, nominate, for the President of the
Republic of South Africa, the president of the ANC, the man of the people –



   uMsholozi!
   uNxamalala!
   Lugaju ka Matomela!
   Abaphuma bephethe inyama na masi!

He is the hon member Mr Jacob Mhlanganyelwa Gedleyihlekisa Zuma. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: The hon Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma has been nominated. Is
the nomination seconded?

Mr L N DIALE: Thank you, Justice Pius. I, Letsau Nelson Diale, on behalf of
my party, the ANC, support the nomination for the President of the Republic
of South Africa, Comrade Gedleyihlekisa Jacob Zuma. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Please present the nomination form to the
Returning Officer. Are there any further nominations?

Mr M S SHILOWA: Thank you very much, Chief Justice. From its inception, the
Congress of the People raised issues of what we would want to see in a
president: rule of law and equality before the law, defence of our
democracy, defence of the Constitution, commitment to serving the people,
dealing effectively with issues of corruption, and many other issues.

We have, as a consequence of that, decided, as the Congress of the People,
to field a candidate for the position. I, Mbhazima Samuel Shilowa, have the
pleasure to nominate for the position of President of the Republic,
Hamilton Mvumelwano Dandala. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Order! The hon Hamilton Mvumelwano Dandala has been
nominated. Is the nomination seconded?

Ms L M ODENDAAL: Chief Justice and members, I second the proposal of the
Congress of the People for the presidential position of Dr Hamilton Mvume
Dandala. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Please present the nomination form to the Returning
Officer. Are there any further nominations? We proceed. The following
candidates have been properly nominated: the hon Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma
and the hon Hamilton Mvume Dandala. Since more than one candidate has been
nominated, a secret ballot will take place in terms of item 6 of Part A of
Schedule 3 of the Constitution. I now suspend proceedings to allow the
Returning Officer to prepare the ballot papers. We shall resume proceedings
when the bells are rung. That will be in about 10 minutes.

Business suspended at 14:18 and resumed at 14:30.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: We shall now resume the proceedings. Assistant returning
officers are now going to make sure that ballot boxes are empty and close
them. Are they closed? This will be the procedure to be followed. Members
are going to be called in alphabetical order according to their surnames.
When their names are called out, members should collect a ballot paper from
the voting table. [Interjections.] After collecting a ballot paper, each
member should proceed to one of the ballot booths and make a clear cross in
the box alongside the name of the nominated member of his or her own
choice.

After making the mark on the ballot paper, and whilst still in the booth,
members should fold their paper in a way that the official mark can be seen
by the returning officer at the ballot box. After the returning officer has
noted the mark on the ballot paper, members should deposit it in the ballot
box and resume their seats. I hope that the procedure is clear.
[Interjections.] Good. The returning officer will now call upon members to
vote.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chief Justice, I am rising to announce that the DA will be
abstaining from the ballot. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: The returning officer will now call upon members to
vote.
Dr C P MULDER: Hon Chief Justice, I am sorry to disrupt the proceedings. I
just need some clarity on specific points in terms of the Rules. I have
taken note of the fact that the DA indicated that they were going to
abstain and I have noticed during proceedings that they do not collect
their ballot papers and do not vote either. My concern is that I think it
is not in order with the Rules.

If we look at the Rules issued for today – Rule 5(3)(b) clearly indicates
that when the name of a member is called, he or she must, if present at the
meeting, be issued with a ballot paper and record his or her vote in
accordance with Rule 5(5). My concern is that in the end we are going to
have fewer ballot papers in the box than members in the House. I just need
some clarity on the matter. Is it in order that members are present, and
are not making use of the ballot papers, in terms of the Rules? In terms of
what the rule says, if they are present, they must be issued with a ballot?
I thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chief Justice, in response to what the hon Mulder has
said, may I say that I believe that the House has great faith in the
officials who are here, and that they will be able to make a simple
calculation - that 400 minus 67, leaves 333. [Applause.] [Laughter.] I
would seriously suggest that whether the DA picks up its ballot papers or
not, it would make no difference to the results whatsoever. [Applause.]
The CHIEF JUSTICE: Hon members, we have already started and are under way.
We have adopted a particular procedure and I think we should continue.
[Applause.] [Interjections.] Order!

Mr M J ELLIS: Hon Chief Justice, on a point of order: One doesn’t even
start to understand what that meowing was all about – the animal noises.
[Laughter.] I would really submit that that was totally and utterly
unparliamentary. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: You will appreciate that I was not a parliamentarian.
[Applause.] [Laughter.] Therefore, the language that is used here is
sometimes strange to me. I suggest that we should proceed. [Interjections.]
[Laughter.] What I would like to say is that members should avoid being
provocative. Let us get on with it.

The SPEAKER: Chief Justice, we agree with the objections and the fact that
the language used was unparliamentary.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Shall we get on with it?

I am trying to be the centre of attraction too. [Laughter.] Are there any
members who have not voted, and would like to do so now? [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chief Justice, about 67 of us did not vote. [Laughter.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: If not, the assistant returning officers will now close
and seal the ballot boxes. The ballot boxes have been closed and sealed. I
am now suspending proceedings to enable the returning officers to count the
votes and report to me. We shall resume proceedings when the bells are
rung. I estimate that it would be about 30 minutes.

Business suspended at 15:27 and resumed at 16:00.

The Chief Justice took the Chair and announced the results of the ballot as
follows:

  Mr Hamilton Mvumelwano Dandala: 47
  Mr Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma: 277

Mr Zuma, accordingly, elected President of the Republic.

The Chief Justice congratulated Mr Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma on his
election as President.

The Speaker took the Chair.

The Speaker thanked the Chief Justice for conducting the proceedings.
Parties and the President-elect were afforded the opportunity to address
the House.

                     CONGRATULATIONS TO PRESIDENT-ELECT

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr President, Mr
President-elect, on behalf of the DA I would like to congratulate the
President-elect, Jacob Zuma, on his election as the next President of South
Africa. [Applause.]

The President-elect will take up the highest office in the land with a
great deal of support but also with the burden of high expectations on his
shoulders. The most important job for the new President will be to build a
society in which all South Africans have the opportunity to improve their
lives. It is our sincere wish that he will rise to this challenge.

We hope the President-elect will act to bring South Africans together and
build confidence in our future. We call on him in particular to ensure the
Constitution and the critical institutions that uphold constitutional
values are protected and strengthened. After years of bitter conflict,
these very foundations of our democratic institution are in desperate need
of healing and repair.

For its part, the DA will support the President–elect in any endeavour
which respects and upholds the Constitution and which efforts will make
real and sustainable inroads into rolling back crime, poverty and in
particular unemployment.

There are, however, serious issues that must still be resolved regarding
the alleged conduct of the President-elect. The real test of the
forthcoming Presidency will be whether the judicial process is allowed to
run its course in an unimpeded and dignified manner. For the sake of the
future of our democracy, it is a test we dare not fail as a nation.

But, Mr President, we congratulate you and we wish you well. [Applause.]

Rev H M DANDALA: Mr Speaker, Mr President, Mr President-elect, on behalf of
the Congress of the People, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
election as the President-elect of the Republic of South Africa.

We accept that the people of South Africa have spoken and we shall give our
support to this high office of the Republic and its occupant. We extend our
goodwill and best wishes to you, honourable Sir, in the years ahead as you
lead the country to face its many challenges.

Our support as the Congress of the People to you and your executive is
premised on our own mandate from the electorate to form part of a vibrant
democracy where the voices of all citizens are heard, both those who voted
for the ruling party and those who did not. We assure you that our role in
this Parliament will be a constructive one, focused on working with all who
desire to build a vibrant institution of democracy in our country.

We look forward to you assuming the role of first citizen of the Republic
and striving to become an embodiment of all that the people of the Republic
aspire to and wish to uphold as definitive of who they are as a nation.

We wish you well, Mr President-elect, assuring you of our goodwill, our
best wishes and our prayers. [Applause.]

Rev K M ZONDI: Mr Speaker, the leader of the IFP, Prince Mangosuthu
Buthelezi, has had to leave the House owing to pressing business back home
and he requested me to convey this message on his behalf. On behalf of the
IFP, I wish to add my party’s felicitations to the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr J G Zuma. We wish the President strength and
wisdom, which can only come from our Almighty Father.

We have gone through many trials together, particularly in the part of
South Africa from which we both hail. After our discussions earlier this
year and also yesterday, as well as my chat with the deputy president of
the ANC, His Excellency Mr Kgalema Motlanthe, I do hope that we can
complete the unfinished task of reconciliation between our two
organisations in the interests of our people in South Africa. [Applause.]

With the President’s track record of peace-making in Africa, we hope that
the time may have come to end once and for all the depression of national
spirit that has afflicted our country for too long. Nothing makes me as sad
as to see the depth of the chasm that still divides us even in the very
twilight of my years.

As we have assembled here to elect our head of state and head of our
government, there are cases in courts where there are members of both our
parties involved, and there is finger-pointing to the effect that members
of both of our parties are still killing each other.

The President has, like me, lived amongst the poor all his life and we both
recognise that the biggest challenge we face is the banishment of the
poverty of our people in rural areas, in the squatter areas, in urban
townships and amongst all South Africans of all races. Our greatest primary
task is the effort to put people to work.

I realise that this task cannot be accomplished without sacrifices and
changes in our mind-set because of the conflict of the past. We hope that
this is the time for the country to unite around a common purpose if this
nation is to fulfil its destiny. This will demand courage, sacrifices and
devotion from all of us collectively. On behalf of the IFP, we wish you
Msholozi, Nxamalala, every blessing as you fulfil your destiny to lead our
country at this time. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Hon Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, let me
start by congratulating the Speaker on his election today. I hope that we
will get it right and not say “Madam Speaker”.

The ID would like to congratulate Mr Zuma on his election as President of
our country today. We acknowledge that the road to the Presidency has not
been a smooth one, and many questions have been asked. But we respect the
choice of the South African voters and we also respect the Office of the
President.

President Zuma takes over at a difficult time, and we hope that he puts
together a good team to meet the enormous challenges we face. We need to
increase our fight against unemployment, poverty, crime and corruption, and
improve health care, education and service delivery to all our people.

The ID acknowledges that there are many good ideas and policies, but the
key challenge is implementation. We hope that the President will show the
necessary political will to drive implementation and to ensure effective
monitoring and evaluation at all levels of government.

As the ID, we will continue to be vigilant and keep a close eye on
government to ensure that it remains accountable and transparent, and
upholds the letter and the spirit of the Constitution. The ID, Mr
President, remains committed to playing its part in the transformation and
development of our country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu B H HOLOMISA: Nxamalala, le nkqubo yenu yedemokhrasi ithath’ ixesha,
hi! [Kwahlekwa.] Ndiyakucebisa ngowubhenela kulaa mgaqo wethu
singooNjengele wokuthi xa ufuna ukuthatha umbuso, uwuthathe qha.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mr B H HOLOMISA: Nxamalala, this democratic process of yours takes a long
time, hey. I advise you to take a leaf out of our book as generals, that
when you want to stage a coup d’état, you go ahead and do it. [Laughter]].

Mr Speaker, hon President of the Republic, the President-elect and hon
members, firstly, we need to say thank you to the voters who brought all of
us here. Secondly, collectively, we must now recapture the lost ground of
the past few years when service delivery took a back seat to other issues.
Indications on the ground suggest that the population is becoming restless.
Those who have studied the phases of revolution would be concerned about
the signs of anarchy we are witnessing on a daily basis. This requires the
undivided attention of both the members of this House and the new executive
in order to quickly address the grievances of the citizens. We urgently
need to address those issues that promote lawlessness and anarchy.

It is for that reason, sir, therefore, that we congratulate His Excellency
President Zuma and his party, who have been mandated to govern.

Kodwa ke, Nxamalala, kuya kufuneka ukuba ulawule ukusukela ngoku, ngoba
amaxa amaninzi uye ufumanise ukuba abantu benza nje unothanda phandl’apha.
[However, Nxamalala, you have to start cracking the whip from now on,
because many a time you find that people just do as they like.]

In the same vein, we must acknowledge that the opposition parties are not
here by accident. We also have a mandate to play a certain role. To all of
us, the interests of the country must come first, as opposed to the
interests of our parties.

Finally, I wish to assure the President and the public that the UDM will
continue to act in the national interest when called upon to do so, as we
have demonstrated in the past. Indeed, Mr President, we expect a far better
relationship between the opposition parties and the ruling party in this
House, unlike in the past. If we respect one another, I am sure that we can
build a better and more prosperous society. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the FF Plus, I wish to
congratulate the hon Mr Zuma on his election as President of South Africa.
When we chose Mr Motlanthe as President, Mr Zuma sat up in the gallery. At
that time I told him of the two Afrikaner farmers, who had, during the
night, harnessed eight oxen to their wagon. Because it was dark they
unfortunately harnessed a lion together with their oxen. When the sun rose
and they saw the problem, they did not know how to untie the lion. I thank
Mr Motlanthe, who today retires as President. You acted with great dignity
and made it very easy for the ANC to untie the lion. [Laughter.]

I was in this Assembly on 14 June 2005 when Mr Mbeki announced Mr Zuma’s
resignation as Deputy President. I am here again today in 2009, to see how
Mr Zuma becomes the President of South Africa. [Applause.] A lot has
happened between those two dates. [Laughter.] I think the words of Muhammad
Ali, the former world heavyweight boxing champion, are applicable to Mr
Zuma here today. Muhammad Ali said:
   In your pursuit of success there will be hundreds of setbacks. Remember,
   a heavyweight match is 15 rounds.  If you lose a few rounds, or even get
   knocked down, it doesn't matter, as long as you get up and eventually
   win.

The same goes in life. [Applause.]

Mr Gordin wrote in Mr Zuma’s biography that there were a number of mementos
hanging on the wall in the living room of the rondavel of President Zuma’s
first wife. A framed one reads:

   I wish a long life to my enemies so that they might all see my successes.

[Applause.]

Meneer, ons het vandag in Suid-Afrika ons vierde President in 15 jaar
verkies. Ek dink dit is goed vir Suid-Afrika en dit is beter as Zimbabwe
wat vir 29 jaar een president gehad het. [Gelag.] Tog glo die VF Plus dat
die volgende vyf jaar in Suid-Afrika deurslaggewend en krities baie
belangrik vir ons toekoms gaan wees.

Neem President Zuma se kabinet verkeerde besluite, dan strompel ons
polities voort van een krisis na die ander, ’n donker toekoms in. Neem
hulle die regte besluite die volgende vyf jaar, is daar hoop vir die
toekoms waar elke Suid-Afrikaner sal kan voel daar is ook vir hom of vir
haar ’n plek in die son. As die VF Plus, sal ons ons rol as opposisie
speel. Ons sal prys waar nodig, maar ons sal nie huiwer om te kritiseer as
die ANC, na ons mening, foute maak nie. Baie geluk. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Sir, today we have elected our fourth President in South Africa in 15
years. I think this is good for South Africa, and it is better than
Zimbabwe, which has had one President for 29 years. [Laughter.] Despite
this, the FF Plus believes that the next five years in South Africa w ill
be critically important in determining our future.

Should President Zuma’s cabinet make the wrong decisions, we will
politically stumble from one crisis to another and towards a dark future.
If they make the right decisions in the next five years, there is hope for
a future in which every South African will feel that he or she has a place
in the sun. As the FF Plus, we will play our role as opposition. We will
praise where necessary, but we will not hesitate to criticise if the ANC,
in our opinion, makes mistakes. Congratulations. [Applause.]]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I wish to
congratulate the hon Mr Zuma on his election as President of South Africa.
There are obviously huge challenges facing us as a nation. The ACDP calls
on all South Africans to pray for our incoming President and our elected
officials and leaders, individually and collectively, to pursue
righteousness and justice. Pursuing the opposite, will not prosper the
nation. One of the prophets of old, Isaiah, once said that the fruits of
righteousness will be peace. I believe that everybody in this House desires
lasting peace, which can only be found by the pursuit of righteousness.

Clearly, the President needs wisdom and God’s guidance in finding solutions
to the many issues that we face. After a hard-fought election, nation-
building, poverty alleviation and service delivery must be high priorities.
Our greatest desire should be to serve and help our people, as opposed to
seeking personal gain from leadership positions. In this, the fourth
democratic Parliament, the ACDP will, as we have done in the past, give
constructive input at all times. We will, however, also remain vigilant to
any abuse of state power and trust that Parliament will exercise its
oversight function more robustly.

I personally want to encourage you, President-elect Mr Zuma, to continue
attending church services even though campaigning is now over. [Laughter.]
I trust that you will also allow church leaders to minister to you and
speak into your life, and that you will receive God’s salvation, wisdom and
guidance that you need to lead the nation.

Lastly, I wish God’s richest blessings on all the members who have been
sworn in today. I thank you. [Applause.]
Ms M N MATLADI: Thank you, hon Speaker. Let me also congratulate you for
being the Speaker of the House, as you were elected today. The hon
President is not totally new to a post in the Presidency. He served as a
Deputy President for a term and some years. The challenges of South Africa
did not face him directly, since he was serving under the President of the
time. The UCDP says to him to brace himself for the tough task of dealing
directly with the issues of the country, in leading his party and other
political parties of South Africa.

A week after the elections, we have already seen people picketing because
they are unhappy about service delivery. The GDP of the country has
dropped, leading to predictions of a high unemployment rate, to mention but
a few of the challenges awaiting him.

The campaign and also the results of the 22 April 2009 election showed that
South Africans have trust in the hon President as the leader of the
country. They therefore expect better service delivery, the creation of
jobs, less crime, a healthy environment as well as economic growth.

There is a saying: “Motho ke motho ka batho ba bangwe.” [A person is a
person because of other people.] The respect that he will give to other
people and other political parties will be given back to him. The UCDP will
respect, honour and give support to the President. He must, however, always
guard against the yeast of the Pharisees that will lead him astray. It does
not matter how many times you get knocked down; what matters is how many
times you get up. So get up, hon President, for the people of South Africa.
Congratulations! [Applause.]

Mr M L MPHAHLELE: Morena Sepikara, ke a go dumediša. Ke dumediša le
Mopresidente le Mopresidente wa ka moso. [Hon Speaker, I greet you. I also
extend my greetings to the President and the President-elect.]

The people have spoken and they have spoken loud and clear. [Applause.]
This House has simply echoed the voice of the people. Congratulations,
uMsholozi, on being the people’s choice. [Applause.]

South Africa remains fundamentally untransformed. The ownership of the
means of production is skewed in favour of those who benefited during the
apartheid era. You can count on PAC support for transformation and the
redistribution of the country’s resources in favour of the indigenous
African people. By the same token, you can rest assured that the PAC will
brook no corruption. We will fight it in whatever form and at all levels.

On a lighter note, Mr President-elect, I was so hopeful that the PAC was
going to win the elections that I wrote an acceptance speech. [Applause.]
If you don’t mind, Mr President-elect, I can give you this acceptance
speech ... [Laughter.] ... and you will only have minor corrections to
make. Instead of “Pan Africanist Congress of Azania”, just say “African
National Congress of South Africa”. Thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Hon Speaker, on behalf of the leader of the MF, Mr A
Rajbansi, and everyone in the MF, I congratulate His Excellency Mr Jacob
Zuma on being elected as the third President of free South Africa. No one
can stop President Jacob Zuma from going to the Union Buildings!
[Applause.]

The MF regards President Jacob Zuma as the friend of all communities,
especially the minorities. We congratulate the ANC on a wonderful victory.
We also congratulate other parties such as the DA and Cope on their
wonderful performance in the elections. [Applause.]

On billboards throughout the country President Jacob Zuma asked everyone,
“Let us build a country together”. In KwaZulu-Natal, the ANC has scored an
amazing victory. The ANC came into power in 2004 with the help of the MF,
the ACDP and the UDM, and that must never be forgotten. [Applause.]

It is very important that the government must be inclusive and, at all
times in KwaZulu-Natal, the government indeed has been inclusive. The ANC
in KwaZulu-Natal must never forget the difficult days when they called upon
other parties, especially the MF, to help them. [Laughter.]

While the ANC talks of inclusive government, in this capital city this
province’s premier is not only talking about it, but she is doing it, and I
hope that she does not outshine the KwaZulu-Natal ANC by announcing an
inclusive cabinet this week.

It is very important that, while President Jacob Zuma has reportedly said
that the ANC will call upon others to play a role, at the time of victory
the ANC must never forget its friends. [Laughter.]

We would like this audience and the country to know that the MF leader,
while occupying the position of MEC for Sports and Recreation, was declared
the best sports MEC in the country. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have to work with the government at national and
provincial levels ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please allow the speaker to be heard.

Mr R B BHOOLA: It is unfortunate that one political party believes that
colonial rule will come back to our country. To our President, we make an
appeal: Please, listen to the genuine concerns of the minority communities.
We are with you. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: I didn’t want to interrupt
Mr Bhoola because he was very entertaining, but I do have to ask whether it
is appropriate for an hon member to come up here and so blatantly seek jobs
for his leader. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members.

Mr M A MANGENA: Mr Speaker, hon members, hon Zuma, we in Azapo congratulate
you on your election by this House to the highest Office in our land. We
wish you well. We wish you good health. We wish you strength and fortitude.

You have just emerged from a gruelling election campaign during which you
must have entered many a shack, many a hut, many a house, but also many a
grand mansion. We know that the huge levels of inequality among our people
have not escaped you. In particular, the grinding poverty and squalor under
which a sizeable percentage of our population live must have made your hair
stand on end at times, for when I look at you I don’t see any hair on your
head! Wherever it is, it must have responded to that difficult situation.

In all our efforts to fight that poverty and create a more egalitarian
society, we will need not only your leadership as President of the
Republic, but also your inspiration. We need you to inspire our children to
learn, our health workers to heal, our security forces to protect and our
farmers to produce food. For you to carry the hopes and aspirations of all
our people you need broad shoulders, good health, strength and loads of
wisdom. We wish you well. Congratulations, Mr President! [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Mr Speaker, Sir, comrades and hon members, on behalf of the
APC and indeed on my own behalf, I wish to extend our comradely
congratulations on your election as the fourth President of the democratic
South Africa. Your ascension to the high Office is not only a measure of
success for your organisation but also a personal triumph. Congratulations!

When we fought for freedom the masses were not fighting for ideas or things
in anyone’s head. They wanted to see an improvement in their material
conditions, better health facilities, education for their children,
employment for the unemployed and so on. Thus, as you add your footprints
on the sands of history, the challenges facing our people and their
expectations from your stewardship abound, and what needs to be done is
obvious.

We hope that under your leadership government will firmly focus on ensuring
that our democracy works for all our people and that the promise of freedom
does not remain a dream perpetually deferred for the majority of our
people.
The APC has consistently advocated a government of all talents, meaning
eschewing sectarianism in matters of state administration. We look forward
to working with you and making our own contribution to bettering the lives
of our people.

Your election today as the fourth head of state is a confirmation that we
are indeed transient on the stage of history. We are nothing but tools of
history and when we are gone history shall find new tools. Congratulations
once more. The struggle continues! [Applause.]

Mr A MOTSHEKGA: Mr Speaker, it is the highest honour to speak on behalf of
the ANC to congratulate Comrade President Jacob Zuma on being elected
President of the democratic Republic of South Africa. Comrade President, as
the members of the House, we pledge ourselves to work tirelessly with the
executive branch of government you are about to lead for the total
liberation of all our people from the continuing bondage of poverty,
deprivation, lack of decent jobs, suffering, gender, class and other forms
of discrimination.

The ANC is quite aware that the task at hand will not be easy. But our
people have mandated President Zuma and the ANC to change South Africa from
a country in which the majority lived with little hope to one in which the
people as a whole can live and work with dignity, with a sense of self-
respect and respect for others. Furthermore, they have mandated President
Zuma and the ANC to continue working for the creation of a united,
democratic and prosperous South Africa in which the value of every citizen
is measured by our common humanity: ubuntu, botho [humanity].

In pursuit of this ideal, we will unreservedly support you, Comrade
President, to enable you to improve the lives of all our people, both black
and white. Our road to that glorious future lies, as you always told us, in
collective hard work to accomplish the objective of creating a people-
centred and people-driven society, realising the moral and ethical values
embedded in our Constitution, and creating a cohesive and caring society in
which the collective wellbeing will reign supreme.

We have fought for the realisation of a spiritual, humane and caring
society since the 1880s. You taught us that our struggle has always been
informed by the sound moral vision that informed the ANC’s human rights
charters and finally found its way into the 1996 Constitution.

In conclusion, in our campaign Comrade President ably made out the case for
the creation of cohesive, caring and sustainable communities, based on the
ANC’s moral vision and the human rights culture embedded in our
Constitution. The overwhelming majority of South Africans, both black and
white, gave you a full mandate to govern. Good luck! You have our
unreserved support.

The ANC pledges itself to work with all parties in Parliament, to deepen
the oversight role of Parliament. We know that under President Zuma we will
continue to promote and defend the integrity of state institutions,
including the judiciary and law-enforcement agencies, and to speed up the
transformation of our society and institutions.

Usiphathe kakuhle! [Treat us well!] O re tshware ka kgotso! [Treat us
well!] Congratulations! [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT-ELECT: Hon Speaker, hon Chief Justice, President of the
Republic of South Africa, who is outgoing, Deputy Speaker, hon members of
the House, members of the diplomatic corps, distinguished guests, ladies
and gentlemen, I stand before this House and the nation overwhelmed by the
responsibility that is being thrust upon my shoulders. I am truly humbled
by the opportunity to serve as the fourth President of the Republic of
South Africa.

South Africa is a remarkable country with very special people. We normally
get caught up in our day-to-day challenges and forget to appreciate this
fact. We made history in the world in 1994, when together we discarded our
tragic past and opted for a future of harmony, peace and stability. We
elected our first President, our icon, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, whom we
all love dearly. Madiba taught us the importance of forgiveness,
reconciliation and humility. He made us walk tall and feel proud to be
South Africans.
As President of the Republic, I will do my best to lead the country towards
the realisation of Madiba’s vision of a truly nonsexist, nonracial South
Africa, united in its diversity.

With the support of my organisation, the ANC, as well as all South
Africans, I hope to lead the country on a path of friendship, co-operation,
harmony, unity and faster change.

We have just emerged from very vibrant elections. The Independent Electoral
Commission, which can always be relied upon to deliver free and fair
elections, rose to the occasion. The millions of South African voters made
us their public representatives, the custodians of their hopes and dreams.
During the next five years they will depend on us as public representatives
to serve them with dignity and respect, and to maintain the decorum of
Parliament, which is the face of our democracy. Our people have high
expectations.

As the executive, we will do our best to be more hands-on, more accessible
and to deliver on our commitments. We also intend to start a new chapter in
the relations between government and the opposition. We reiterate that it
should be possible to work with opposition parties on issues that are in
the national interest. While appreciating a robust opposition, we also
trust that we will be able to move slightly away from the dogmatic approach
which turns every issue into a contestation among parties. It is in this
regard, Nondaba, that we certainly look forward to the discussion of
reconciliation between the IFP and the ANC, as we have agreed. [Applause.]

On the side of the executive we will also need to try to avoid being over-
defensive, and not view all criticism from the opposition in a negative
light. We will surely be able to build a working relationship that
emphasises oversight, while also allowing co-operation where necessary.

Hon members, it is going to be a busy five years. We have deliberately
given ourselves five priorities to focus on, which will make us more
effective in implementation.

As you are aware, we will focus on education, health, land reform and rural
development, the fight against crime, as well as creating decent work. We
are determined to leave an indelible mark in these five areas. Our most
immediate priority is to respond decisively to the challenges posed by the
global economic downturn. We must move quickly to implement the framework
agreed by the government, business and labour to protect jobs and boost the
economy. It is my fervent hope that our public servants heard our campaign
message and understand that it shall not be business as usual. We expect
hard work and the utmost dedication.

Allow me to point out that it was quite a moving moment for me to be sworn
in again as a Member of Parliament, even though my membership was just for
a few hours. [Applause.] I have a special relationship with Parliament,
especially this House. I have sat in various sections and now know every
corner of the House. In 1994 I used to sit in the cross-benches as an NCOP
KwaZulu-Natal representative, when I was still MEC for Economic Affairs and
Tourism.

In 1999 I moved to the front benches as Deputy President of the Republic.
Members who were part of the last Parliament will confirm that I was a very
well-behaved member, even when later I came as a guest and I sat there to
observe the proceedings of Parliament. I attended sessions and presented
myself timeously for the fortnightly Deputy President’s question time. I
dutifully answered all questions, amid occasional heckling from the
opposition benches. Hon members who would not let me rest and kept me very
busy with questions, including the hon Koos van der Merwe and hon Velaphi
Ndlovu of the IFP, who questioned me in deep Zulu, the hon Pieter Mulder of
the FF Plus and the hon Cheryllyn Dudley of the ACDP.

I was also a proud recipient of little notes from hon members of various
political parties, usually gossiping about each other, which I have kept
very safely at home. [Laughter.]

I left rather unceremoniously on 14 June 2005, without an opportunity to
say goodbye to all my friends. However, members will recall that I
continued to visit, now sitting in the public gallery during the opening of
Parliament and on other occasions. However, despite all this dedication, I
automatically lose my seat on being elected President! Membership of this
Parliament! I am going to lose it, and I thought I had come again to be a
member for a long time. I am therefore considering running for honorary
life membership, if that is allowed! [Laughter.] I am sure that even the DA
would support such a motion!

Let me use this opportunity to congratulate our new presiding officers, and
wish them well on their appointments. We also recognise the contribution of
our former presiding officers. We would like to thank them a lot for a job
well done when they were presiding in the past session. We must also
acknowledge and thank the outgoing Cabinet for their good service. I will
not dwell too much on the matter of Cabinet; I understand the anxiety.

I intend to have my Cabinet assume office by 11 May, so that we can get
down to business. I have gained immensely from the wisdom of the top five
ANC officials whom I have consulted on the matter. I should be able to
produce a team that will work very hard, and with the necessary speed. We
mean business when we talk about faster change.

The new team will build on the work of the Cabinet of my long-time friend,
comrade and brother, the outgoing President of the Republic, Comrade
Kgalema Motlanthe. On behalf of all South Africans, let me extend our
sincerest gratitude to President Motlanthe for his service to the nation.
[Applause.] He has acquitted himself well, and has definitely been equal to
the task. [Applause.]

I also wish to reiterate our appreciation to all South Africans for
participating actively in the elections. We must emphasise that the
responsibility of voters did not end at the polling stations.
Working together, we must now do much more to build a better South Africa.

I wish all hon members an enjoyable, successful and fruitful stay in
Parliament. I thank you all for your confidence in me and in the ANC. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, on your behalf, I would like to thank the
President-elect for his address to Parliament. That concludes proceedings
for the day. Members and guests are requested to remain in their places
until the procession has left the Chamber. The order of procession is as
follows: Serjeant-at-Arms, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the President,
the President-elect, the Deputy President and the Acting Secretary to
Parliament. Thank you.

The House adjourned at 17:05.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 27 MARCH 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Proclamation No R 12 published in Government Gazette No 31930 dated
        19 February 2009: Commencement of section 13 of the National
        Prosecuting Authority Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 56 of 2008).

     b) Proclamation No R 13 published in Government Gazette No 31948 dated
        23 February 2009: Commencement of the Renaming of High Courts Act,
        2008 (Act No 30 of 2008).

 2. The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Government Notice No R. 85 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Correction Notice: proposed amendment of the
        compulsory specification for motor vehicles of Category M2/3, in
        terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act,
        2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


     b) Government Notice No R. 86 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for motor vehicles of Category N2/3, in terms of the
        National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No
        5 of 2008).

     c) Government Notice No R. 87 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for motor vehicles of Category 01/02, in terms of the
        National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No
        5 of 2008).

     d) Government Notice No R. 88 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for motor vehicles of Category 03/04, in terms of the
        National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No
        5 of 2008).

     e) Government Notice No R. 89 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Amendment to the compulsory specification
        for electrical and electronic apparatus, in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).

    (f)     Government Notice No R. 90 published in Government Gazette No
        31844 dated 6 February 2009: Introduction of a compulsory
        specification for lamp controlgear, in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).

    (g)     Government Notice No R. 91 published in Government Gazette No
        31844 dated 6 February 2009: Amendment to the compulsory
        specification for personal flotation aids, in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).
    (h)     Government Notice No 201 published in Government Gazette No
        31925 dated 27 February 2009: Standards matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).

     i) Government Notice No 202 published in Government Gazette No 31925
        dated 27 February 2009: Standards matters in terms of the Standards
        Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


     j) Government Notice No 203 published in Government Gazette No 31925
        dated 27 February 2009: The South African Sugar Association, notice
        under clause 82 of the Sugar Industry Agreement, 2000.


     k) Government Notice No R. 206 published in Government Gazette No
        31926 dated 27 February 2009: International Trade Administration
        Commission of South Africa: Import control, in terms of the
        International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) Notice No 138 published in Government Gazette No 31884 dated 11
        February 2009: National Environmental Management: Integrated
        Coastal Management Act, 2008 (Act No 24 of 2008).


     b) Government Notice No R. 149 published in Government Gazette No
        31901 dated 13 February 2009: Waste Tyre Regulations - 2008, in
        terms of the Environment Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of
        1989).

     c) General Notice No 165 published in Government Gazette No 31885
        dated 13 February 2009: Draft Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: For public comment, in terms of the National
        Environmental Management Act, 1989 (Act No 107 of 1998).

     d) General Notice No 166 published in Government Gazette No 31885
        dated 13 February 2009: Listing Notice 1: List of activities and
        competent authorities identified in terms of section 24(2) and 24D
        of the National Environmental Management Act, 1989 (Act No 107 of
        1998).

    (e)     General Notice No 167 published in Government Gazette No 31885
        dated 13 February 2009: Listing Notice 2: List of activities and
        competent authorities identified in terms of section 24(2) and 24D
        of the National Environmental Management Act, 1989 (Act No 107 of
        1998).


    (f)     General Notice No 168 published in Government Gazette No 31885
        dated 13 February 2009: Listing Notice 3: List of activities and
        competent authorities identified in terms of section 24(2) and 24D
        of the National Environmental Management Act, 1989 (Act No 107 of
        1998).


      g) Government Notice No 148 published in Government Gazette No 31899
         dated 13 February 2009: Notice in terms of section 57(2), in terms
         of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004
         (Act No 10 of 2004).

      h) General Notice No 170 published in Government Gazette No 31899
         dated 13 February 2009: Marking of rhinoceros horn and hunting of
         white rhinoceros for trophy hunting purposes, in terms of the
         National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No
         10 of 2004).

     i) Government Notice No R. 214 published in Government Gazette No
        31968 dated 2 March 2009: Norms and Standards for Biodiversity
        Management Plans for Species, in terms of the National
        Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
        2004).

     j) Government Notice No 248 published in Government Gazette No 31981
        dated 6 March 2009: Declaration of land to be part of the Garden
        Route National Park, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

     k) Government Notice No R. 249 published in Government Gazette No
        31982 dated 6 March 2009: Amendment of Regulations published in
        Government Notice No R 1111 of 2 September 1998, in terms of the
        Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

     l) Notice No 278 published in Government Gazette No 32000 dated 10
        March 2009: National Environmental Management: Waste Act, 2008 (Act
        No 59 of 2008).

     m) Government Notice No 263 published in Government Gazette No 31987
        dated 13 March 2009: The Identification of substances in Ambient
        Air and establishment of National Standards for the Permissible
        Amount or Concentration of each Substance in Ambient Air, in terms
        of the National Environmental Management Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of
        2004).

    (n)     Government Notice No 291 published in Government Gazette No
        32006 dated 16 March 2009: Guideline regarding the determination of
        bioregions and the preparation of and publication of bioregional
        plans, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

                           TUESDAY, 31 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B 1 – 2009] (assented to and
         signed by President on 25 March 2009).


      2) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
         Amendment Bill [B 3B – 2009] – Act No 8 of 2009 (assented to and
         signed by President on 25 March 2009).
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Government Notice No 293 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 Natura pure gold coin series, in terms of the
        South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

     b) Government Notice No 294 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 Protea coin series, in terms of the South African
        Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

     c) Government Notice No 295 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 R2 pure gold coin series, in terms of the South
        African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).
     d) Government Notice No 296 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 R1 pure gold coin series, in terms of the South
        African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

     e) Government Notice No 297 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 sterling silver coin series, in terms of the
        South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (f)     Government Notice No 298 published in Government Gazette No
        32007 dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and
        compilation of, the year 2009 “FIFA 2010 coin series,” in terms of
        the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (g)     Government Notice No 299 published in Government Gazette No
        32007 dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and
        compilation of, the year 2009 crown size and 2½c sterling silver
        coin series, in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989
        (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (h)     Government Notice No R.321 published in Government Gazette No
        32014 dated 20 March 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/3/6),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (i)     Government Notice No R.322 published in Government Gazette No
        32014 dated 20 March 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/5/145),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (j)     Government Notice No R.323 published in Government Gazette No
        32014 dated 20 March 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/5/146),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (k)     Government Notice No R.324 published in Government Gazette No
        32014 dated 20 March 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No 6/14), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      a) Government Notice No R.92 published in Government Gazette No 31844
         dated 6 February 2009: Notice of Fixed Line Operators, in terms of
         section 31 of the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
         Provision of Communication-related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70
         of 2002).


      b) Government Notice No R.93 published in Government Gazette No 31844
         dated 6 February 2009: Mobile Cellular Operators, in terms of
         section 31 of the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
         Provision of Communication-related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70
         of 2002).

National Assembly

 1. The Speaker

    Reply from the Minister of Finance to requests for detailed information
    from National Treasury and SARS made in the report of the Portfolio
    Committee on Finance on Vote No 7: Strategic Plan for 2008/11 of
    National Treasury and Strategic Plan for 2009/11 of the SA Revenue
    Service.

                            MONDAY, 20 APRIL 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      a) Report of the Auditor-General on the special audit of the N2
         Gateway Project at the national Department of Housing – June 2008
         [RP 177-2008].
    (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of
        entities that are connected with government employees and doing
        business with national departments – August 2008 [RP 242-2008].

    (c)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of service
        delivery at police stations and 10111 call centres at the South
        African Police Service – March 2009 [RP 22-2009].

                           TUESDAY, 21 APRIL 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


    (1)     Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill [B
         10B – 2007] Act No 49 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President
         on 19 April 2009).


    (2)    Companies Bill [B 61D – 2008] – Act No 71 of 2008 (assented to
         and signed by President on 8 April 2009).

      3) Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44D – 2008] –
         Act No 72 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 19 April
         2009).
      4) National Conventional Arms Control Amendment Bill [B 45B – 2008] –
         Act No 73 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 14 April
         2009).

      5) Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54D – 2008] – Act No 74 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 15 April 2009).

      6) Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70D – 2008] – Act
         No 2 of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 30 March
         2009).


      7) Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2B – 2008] – Act No 6 of 2009 (assented
         to and signed by President on 30 March 2009).

      8) National Land Transport Bill [B 51D – 2008] – Act No 5 of 2009
         (assented to and signed by President on 3 April 2009).

      9) Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 – 2009] – Act No 7 of
         2009 (assented to and signed by President on 19 April 2009).


     10) Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill [B 75D –
         2008] – Act No 9 of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 14
         April 2009).

     11) Reform of Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of Related
         Matters Bill [B 10D – 2008] – Act No 11 of 2009 (assented to and
         signed by President on 19 April 2009).

     12) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2009] – Act No 12 of 2009 (assented
         to and signed by President on 3 April 2009).

     13) Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill [B 12D – 2008]
         – Act No 70 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 19
         April 2009).

