---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 September 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-09-17
---

THURSDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NO MOTIONS

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I’ve been informed that the
Whippery has agreed that there will be no Notices of Motion or Motions
Without Notice, except the motion on the Order Paper, which I will come to
later on.

However, I need to indicate that in the Programming Committee yesterday we
agreed that we would look at the question of next week and pronounce to the
House today. The Chief Whip will then later on, after the questions, move a
motion in that regard. We will now proceed to the Question Paper, and I
call upon the Deputy President. Thank you, Deputy President, for coming. We
are aware of the problems that you had last time. The House considered them
and postponed your questions until today.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

    Co-operation between government and NMA Salga and/or Salga regarding
                 service delivery at local government level

1.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


      (1)   Whether there has been any discussion between the government and
           the National Members Assembly of the SA Local Government
           Association (NMA Salga) and/or Salga regarding the recent
           protests in several provinces; if so, what was their response
           with regard to the issues raised by the communities;

      (2)   whether there was any commitment towards working together in
           developing a plan to address the issues that communities raised
           about the inability of municipalities to deliver efficient and
           effective services; if so, what are the relevant details; if
           not,

      (3)   whether the government considers it necessary to engage this
           structure in order to find solutions for the grievances that
           communities are raising around the delivery of services at local
           government level; if not, what is the position in this regard;
           if so, what are the relevant details?
                       CO29E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, allow me to tender my apologies for
inconveniencing the NCOP before I deal with my response to the questions
asked by hon Ntwanambi.

Government has had numerous engagements with organised local government,
represented by Salga, on the recent service delivery protests and many
other issues that are of interest to all of us.

A few weeks ago, President Zuma and various Cabinet Ministers met with
premiers from all the provinces, mayors of metros, and the Chairperson of
Salga as well as senior officials from the three spheres of government. The
purpose of the meeting was to discuss ways in which the three spheres of
government can work together in a co-ordinated fashion to speed up the
delivery of services and to address the concerns of citizens so that we can
prevent the eruption of similar protests in future.

Other leaders of government, especially the Minister for Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs and the Minister in the Presidency:
Performance Monitoring and Evaluation as well as Administration, have been
visiting municipalities, particularly those affected by protests, to find
out about problems faced by communities and, together with the affected
communities, to discuss solutions for dealing effectively with problems
experienced.

We consider Salga and other institutions of local government to be
important partners in addressing problems faced by our people and
accelerating service delivery. In due course government will present a
comprehensive strategy on how to address problems in local government. We
hope Salga and other role-players, in government generally and society at
large, will join us in addressing the problems and uplifting the quality of
life of all of our citizens. I thank you.

  Discussion between government and other social partners and stakeholders
   regarding improvement of quality of services rendered by municipalities

2.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether there has been any discussion between the government and
           other social partners and stakeholders such as civil society and
           the private sector to work together towards improving the
           efficiency and effectiveness of the quality of services that are
           delivered by municipalities; if so, (a) which stakeholders were
           engaged, (b) what issues were highlighted and (c) what plans
           were established; if not,

      (2)   whether government considers this necessary; if not, what is the
           position in this regard; if so, when can such an initiative be
           expected?                                    CO30E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members, allow me to reiterate what
we have said before: Our government values the contribution that our social
partners and stakeholders in civil society and the private sector are
making towards the development of our country.

We are immensely grateful for the support we have received from
organisations and institutions such as the Development Bank of Southern
Africa through the “Siyenza Manje” [We are doing it now] programme, which
has deployed about 500 experts, especially development planners, financial
specialists and engineers to 174 municipalities.

We are also grateful for the support that we have received from the
business trust, which is a partnership between government and business that
is focused on job creation through tourism. The business trust has also
provided support to municipalities for their management of capital projects
and assets. Examples of the involvement of civil society and other
stakeholders in improving service delivery reaffirm our belief that the
enormity of the challenges facing our country can only be addressed if all
of us pool our resources and efforts and channel them towards a collective
effort.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we will be asking for more support
from civil society and the private sector to assist us in addressing the
enormous challenges municipalities face in delivering services to our
people. I thank you.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Sekela-Mongameli, ndikhawulezile, kule
ndlela yokuzama ukuthetha-thethana nabantu jikelele, ingaba iinkokheli
zemveli niyazibiza na ukuba nazo zize kwesi sithebe senu?

USEKELA-MONGAMELI: Mhlalingaphambili, ewe kunjalo. Njengokuba ndanditshilo
ngaphambili, uMphathiswa woRhulumente woBambiswano neMicimbi yeMveli nguye
osikhokelayo kule mizamo siyenzayo yokuba sincede abantu bakuthi kule
ngxaki bajongene nayo yokungafumani zinkonzo kakuhle. Kunjalo. Enkosi.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Deputy President, without wasting time, I
would like to know if you have invited traditional leaders to be part of
the discussions you are going to hold with people in all spheres.
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, yes, it is like that. As I mentioned
before, the Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs is
the one leading us in our efforts to assist our people with the challenges
they are faced with as far as lack of service delivery is concerned. It is
like that. Thank you.]

Mr T HARRIS: Chairperson, Deputy President, one of the most obvious forums
for collaboration between government, the social partners and business is
Nedlac. The response to the global financial crisis was published more than
six months ago by that body. Can you explain why it has taken so long for
that body to respond to the global financial crisis, given that some papers
are already reporting that we may be coming out of the recession; and why
the state and its social partners and business have yet to implement its
plans to respond to that recession?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy President, to me it sounds like that is
a new question, but my view has always been that if you are ready and have
an answer, you may continue. However you are not compelled to answer.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon Harris, as we all know, the response
to the global crisis was developed early in the year, around February, and
the efforts to implement it were interrupted by the election campaign.

Since the establishment of the new administration, all stakeholders have
hit the ground running. We are, in essence, busy with our efforts to
respond adequately to this global meltdown. In fact, our framework has been
accepted by the International Labour Organisation, ILO, as a template that
they recommend to all other countries that are affected by this economic
meltdown. Therefore, the commitment is intact. I know that the President is
due to convene his meeting with the parties represented in Nedlac to assess
where we are in terms of the implementation of that framework. Thank you.

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, okokuqala nje asiqale sibongele uSekela Mongameli
wezwe ukuthi wasinda kulesehlakalo esicishe samvelela. Sibonge ukuthi
uNkulunkulu wamgcina.

Umbuzo wokuchibiyela kungaba wukuthi ehhovisini likaSekela yini abayibone
ukuthi yenza ukuthi izidingo zabantu zingalethwa kahle ngomasipala kuze
kube khona nale mibhikisho ekhona? Bazibalile yini ezinye izinto ukuze
umphakathi nawo wazi ukuthi uhulumeni kukhona akwenzayo ngoba usezibonile
mhlawumbe lezo zinto. Ngiyabonga.

USEKELA MONGAMELI: Ngiyabonga baba, siwuhulumeni esikubonayo ukuthi lapha
koHulumeni Basemakhaya empeleni abantu bakithi abawenzi umehluko phakathi
kwamakhansela nathi njengamaLungu ePhalamende kanye noMkhandlu Kazwelonke
Wezifundazwe.

Okusho ukuthi kulenqubo Kahulumeni Wokubambisana kusobala ukuthi uma
singaxhumani kahle senze futhi ukuthi amaKhansela ethu abenalo ulwazi
ngalendlela esisebenza ngayo, bahlale ngaso sonke isikhathi benalo ulwazi
ukuthi uHulumeni Kazwelonke uzimisele ukwenzani, izinhlelo zime kanjani,
nakuzona izifundazwe. Leyonto iyona edala inkinga ngoba abantu bakithi
basuke bacele kuKhansela izinsiza ngesinye isikhathi okungukuthi lowo
ngumsebenzi wezifundazwe kanye nohulumeni kazwelonke bese kudaleke ukuthi
manje kubekhona ukungaboni ngasolinye.

Kanti futhi kukhona nokuthi izinhlelo (IDP) azivezwa kahle ukwenzela ukuthi
nomphakathi wazi ukuthi yikuphi okubalulekile okufuneka kuqalwe ngakho.
Umasipala ezokwazi ukuthi asebenzele phezu kwazo. Ziyemukelwa kodwa
kutholakale ukuthi zaziwa laphaya yikhansela ngaphandle umphakathi awazi
kanti futhi nabanye uma ubabuza usuxoxa nabo bakuchazele ukuthi inkinga
ababhekene nayo ngeyamanzi. Leyonto ayaziwa yiwo wonke umuntu, ngithatha
ukuthi yiyo inkinga enkulu esibhekene nayo kumakhansela. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, firstly, let’s start by rejoicing with the
Deputy President of the Republic for having survived the incident that
nearly befell him. We thank God for saving him.

An additional question would be whether they have noted, in the office of
the hon Deputy President, why people’s needs are not being met with regard
to service delivery by the municipalities, which has led to these protests
that are taking place? Did they list some of these things, so that civil
society also knows that there is something that the government is doing,
because they have already noted those things? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, sir. What we see is that our people cannot
differentiate between the councillors at local government level and us as
Members of Parliament as well as those from the National Council of
Provinces.

This means that with regard to the procedure of this Government of  National
Unity, it is clear that we have to communicate  well  with  our  councillors
and inform them of the way in which we do our work, and also inform them  at
all times what the  Government  of  National  Unity  is  going  to  do,  for
example, what programmes are in the pipeline, even in  the  provinces.  That
creates problems because our people end up  asking  for  services  from  the
councillors when that is the responsibility of  the  provinces  as  well  as
national government, which results in disagreements.

The  Integrated  Development  Planning  programmes   are   also   not   well
communicated; hence civil society does not know what should be  prioritised.
The municipality will be guided by them. They  are  submitted  but  only  to
discover that they are known by the councillor only and that  civil  society
out there does not know about them. Hence, when you engage  in  conversation
with them they will tell you that their problem is  with  regard  to  water.
That is not known by everybody. I assume this is a  major  problem  that  we
are facing with regard to our councillors. Thank you.]

Rre G G MOKGORO: Modulasetulo, ke kopa gore Motlatsamoporesitente wa naga
ya rona a re bontshe tsela jaaka ikonomi ya rona e amegile bobe. Re le
baeteledipele mo malatsing a gompieno, a go sengwe se se bontshang gore se
ka re fa tshepo ya gore kwa re yang teng re ka bona ikonomi e botoka? Ke a
leboga.

MODULASETULO WA KHANSELE YA BOSETŠHABA YA DIPOROFENSE: Rre Mokgoro, ke
potso e ntšha eo. Ga se potsotlaleletso e e tshwanetseng e theiwe mo
potsong e e boditsweng. Fela ka gore ke a lemoga gore ga re a tlwaela, nka
se thibele Motlatsamoporesitente gore fa a na le karabo a go arabe fela o
itse gore ga e tsamaelene le potso e e kwadilweng mo pampiring.
Motlatsamoporesitente ga ke itse gore a o batla go e araba.

MOTLATSAMOPORESITENTE: Modulasetulo, ke a leboga Modulasetulo gore ke bo ke
boditswe potso e e ntseng jaana. Ke tla e araba ka gore mathata a ikonomi
ga a aparela rona re le esi jaaka Aforika Borwa. Ke mathata a tota a
simolotseng kwa Amerika, jaanong ke ka moo mafatshe a G20 a rileng Amerika
e tshwanetse go tswa pele mo mathateng gore le rona re tle re tswe mo
mathateng a ka gonne ke yona mmaraka o mogolo.
Sekai, fa re lebelela dijanaga, e rile fa ba sa tlhole ba reka dijanaga tse
dintšha kwa Amerika, kgang eo ya re utlwisa botlhoko ka gonne Volkswagen le
Mercedes Benz kwa Kapa Botlhaba di ne di aga dikoloi tse di rekisiwang kwa
Amerika mme fa ba sa tlhole ba di tlhoka batho ba fokodiwa mo ditirong.

Dimmaene tsa rona tsa polatinamo le tsona di kgona go nna le mmakete fa
dijanaga di ntse di dirwa. Selo se sa fetela kwa dimaeneng kwa diketekete
di fokoditsweng mo tirong. Ke ona mathata a re leng mo go ona mme a tlile
go tsaya gongwe dingwaga di le pedi tse re yang mo go tsona. Re tla tswa mo
sekgweng gongwe ka ngwaga wa 2013. E tla bo e le gona re tswang mo
mathateng a a ikonomi. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr G G MOKGORO: Chairperson, I would like to request the Deputy President
of our country to lead us in this time when our economy is in a crisis. As
the current leaders, can we say there is hope for a better economy for the
future? Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Mokgoro, that is a new question. It is not
an additional question arising from a question that was asked. Since I am
aware that it is not a habit, I cannot stop the Deputy President from
answering you if he has an answer, but just know that it does not correlate
with the question on the Question Paper.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I like this kind of question. I would
answer by saying that the economic crisis is not only faced by us in South
Africa. It is a crisis that started in America. That is the reason why the
G20 countries said America has to recover first, so that all of us can also
recover, because they are the big economic market.

For example, when we look at the motor industry, as soon as people in
America stopped buying new cars, it hurt us very badly because Volkswagen
and Mercedes Benz in the Eastern Cape were building cars that were sold in
America, so when they no longer needed them, people had to be retrenched.

Our platinum mines also benefit from the market when cars manufactured.
This thing also made its way to the mines where thousands of people were
retrenched. That is the crisis we are in and it is going to be like this
for up to two years. We will get out of this jungle by 2013. That is when
we will get out of the economic crisis.]

 Particulars regarding keeping of data in respect of total number of persons
                       benefiting from indigent policy

3.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether during the past five years the Government undertook a
           national audit or currently keeps data in respect of the total
           number of persons benefiting from the indigent policy; if so,
           how many persons benefit from this policy in each province;


      (2)   whether the statistics are sufficiently in line with the
           Government’s commitment to protect and cater for the most
           vulnerable in our communities such as the poor, child-headed
           households and pensioners; if so, what are the relevant details;
           if not,

      (3)   whether there are any plans to keep such information to
           determine the effectiveness of the indigent policy; if not, what
           is the position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                                     CO31E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members, with regard to whether a
national audit is being done to track beneficiaries of the indigent policy,
we do keep data, but we cannot say that it has been professionally audited.
The indigent policy covers all areas of social services. Households earning
below R800 per month, as per the census of 2001, are classified as
indigent. Should their circumstances change, they are removed from the
beneficiary category. New ones are added accordingly if they fall within
the category.
Those falling within this category benefit from the various services of
government: health, education, basic services and other related initiatives
that relieve distress. For example, municipalities retain the details of
those falling within the category of free basic services. The Department of
Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs only stores statistical
data on the number of households which are benefiting. The statistical data
is updated annually. So, regarding the second part of your question, which
is whether national government keeps data, the answer is yes, but only to
the extent that the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs collates data from municipalities and aggregates it.

With regard to beneficiaries, in March 2009 there were 3 226 000 out of 5,5
million households who were classified as indigent as per the census.
Significantly, over half of the households that qualify for free basic
water do benefit in all provinces. The picture with regard to free basic
electricity is mixed with some provinces doing better than others. The
provincial breakdown shows that with regard to free basic electricity the
Western Cape province and the Free State province are in the highest
bracket, while provinces in the lowest bracket are the North West and
KwaZulu-Natal. With regard to free basic water, both the Free State and
Gauteng provinces fare much better with 99% and 90% respectively.

The Minister of Education declared 40% of learners to be in no-fee schools
in 2009. Individual provinces, given the availability of provincial
funding, have exceeded the 40% determined by the Minister. The School
Nutrition Programme is targeting 5,6 million learners in 18 000 quintile 1,
2 and 3 primary schools. About 6 053 schools have vegetable gardens as a
result of this programme.

The majority of the municipalities are in the process of reviewing their
indigent registers to ensure that services are provided only to intended
beneficiaries. This will include child-headed households as a means to
protect and cater for the most vulnerable in our communities. Yes, there
are plans to retain such information to determine the effectiveness of the
indigent policy. This information is housed in the database within the
Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. Follow-ups
are conducted with respect to local municipalities that are not performing
well.

To improve systems, speed and capacity to deliver on our commitments to the
poor is our priority. We are fully aware of the role of other spheres and
we are accordingly engaging them to intensify our efforts. We believe that
through initiatives like integrated planning, capacity-building and
performance monitoring the identified weaknesses will be eliminated in due
course. I thank you.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Sihlalo, Sekela-Mongameli, kubakho
oomasipala abaye bathi bona abaphisi ngambane, ingakumbi apho umbane uza
ngo-Eskom. Urhulumente uthini kulo ndawo?

USEKELA-MONGAMELI: Mhlalingaphambili, lungu elibekekileyo, yingxaki leyo
urhulumente azimisele ukuba uza kuyicazulula ngoba njengokuba sisazi ukuba
ngeli thuba imilinganiselo ikwinkqubo yokumiselwa. Sibonisene ukuba oku
kubalulekile. Lo mba wokuba ngowuphi umboneleli oza kubonelela ngombane
ubaluleke gqitha ngoba oomasipala abaninzi bafumana ingeniso yabo
ngokubonelela ngombane. Ngalawo mazwi ke ndithetha ukuba yingxaki esiyaziyo
leyo, umcimbi uphethwe. Ndiyabulela. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chaiperson, Deputy President, there are
municipalities who say they don’t provide free electricity, especially
electricity provided by Eskom. What does the government say about that?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon member, that is a problem that
government is going to deal with, as we know that measures are in the
process of being implemented. We are convinced that this is important. This
issue of which service provider will provide electricity is very important
because the revenue of most municipalities is increased through providing
electricity. With those words I mean we are aware of that problem. The
matter is being dealt with. I thank you.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Chair, I thank the Deputy President for
his response. Further arising from the issue of the supply of electricity,
there is another problem that we have picked up in our constituencies. That
problem relates to the role of water boards. We have discovered that some
areas are being charged differently. Some areas are even worse in the sense
that they do not even get these services.

Municipalities always respond by saying that they are not in control of the
supply of water; the supply of water is in the hands of the water boards.
Can the Deputy President shed some light on this by telling us to what
extent government is working towards radically transforming these water
boards to respond to the needs of our people wherever they exist? Thank you
very much.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon member, I think I’ll be able to
elaborate on this question when I respond to one of the questions posed by
hon member Worth. If you allow me, Chairperson, I would rather deal with it
when I respond to one of those questions on rural development.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We are allowing you, Deputy President, to do
so.

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, arising from the Deputy President’s response with
regard to the indigent policy and the beneficiaries of that policy, last
week the Governor of the Reserve Bank asked:


   When millions of people depend on social grants for sustenance, and urban
   legend has it that teenagers fall pregnant so as to gain access to
   grants, are we not running the risk of these social grants becoming an
   end in themselves and thus nurturing a dependency syndrome, destroying
   the fabric of our society?

With regard to the indigent policy you referred to in your response, can
you comment on the risk that the Governor of the Reserve Bank mentions in
that statement? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, on 18 July, Prof Muhammad Yunus of
Bangladesh delivered an inspiring lecture in honour of former President
Nelson Mandela. One of the profound points that he made was that charity
freezes poverty. I thought that was a very profound statement, which meant
that, instead of giving people charity, we should all be looking at ways of
empowering them to be able to help themselves.

This professor formed the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh to assist women. To
date, it has about 8 million women who benefit form it. These women also
own and control the bank. So, he was saying we have the potential as a
country to condemn poverty to the museum. He also challenged us by saying
we can wipe poverty out completely in this country in the next 20 years if
we adopt the attitude that for every problem we find a solution,
particularly with regard to poverty.

So, social grants are really not sustainable and desirable in the long
term, except for the aged and those who are completely incapacitated. With
regard to the rest of the sections of our people who are beneficiaries of
social grants, we should really find a way of empowering them in our
approach so that the number of social grant recipients can decrease instead
of increase. We should really strive to take it in that direction. Of
course, when we go through difficult times such as recessions, job cutbacks
and an increase in numbers of the unemployed, as government we have to be
in a position to give relief to those who are in dire need. In the long
term the correct approach is to eliminate reliance on social grants,
particularly for able-bodied people. Thank you.

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, last Friday $1,3 billion, which was
earmarked for unemployment, was received from the European Union. Could the
Deputy President tell us whether this money is going to be used for
opportunities, such as those he just spoke of?

I would also like to know, if I may add on to my question, if there is a
single database for indigents? This question arises from the fact that
there is a correlation; it’s not just in a municipality, it goes on to
further grants.

Thirdly, in our constituency weeks we picked up a huge problem with child-
headed families in schools. We would like to know whether there are special
programmes for them in the pipeline somewhere. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, one of our antipoverty strategies is to
find change agents within households that live in abject poverty. We
realised that if we tackle this challenge of poverty in that fashion, we
could very well identify one or two members of a household who, with the
correct focused support, could lift that family out of the poverty in which
they are mired. Therefore, when we receive any resources, it will be
channelled in that direction to try and ensure that these households do not
pass poverty on to the next generation.

This morning I met with a group of youngsters who lived on the streets for
years. Some of them lived on the streets for up to seven years. They play
street football, which is now an organised sport. These youngsters have
just returned with silver from Milan in Italy. Therefore they are world
champs and they add to the array of world champs that we have. These are
street kids. They were so inspired by what they have been able to achieve.

This is something which indicates that even for those whose conditions seem
quite hopeless it is possible to find a way of assisting. There are two
gentlemen who are managing and coaching them. Now they’ve got support from
a group of Americans and a film about their achievement, which will be
shown across the globe, is about to be made. The timing is perfect, because
we are hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup next year.

To be more direct in responding to the question, our approach in tackling
the issue of poverty is one that seeks to empower people. We do understand
that relief by way of grants is but a palliative; it’s not really a
solution to the problem.

I’m not aware of a consolidated database of the indigent across all
municipalities. The Ministry for Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs will, without a doubt, work on the efforts of trying to consolidate
that. At the moment I’m not aware that they already have that. Thank you.

   Assessment of progress made in respect of gender transformation in the
                               public service

4.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether, over the past five years, there has been an assessment
           or audit of gender transformation in the Public Service
           particularly at management and senior management levels to
           determine the progress that the government is making in
           implementing its commitment to gender equality and the
           empowerment of women; if not, why not; if so,

     (2)    whether such progress is satisfactory; if not, what is the
           position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                              CO32E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, our government has committed itself
to the acceleration of gender mainstreaming in the Public Service, and it
regards the issue of gender equality to be of the utmost importance in the
development of our country.

This commitment has led to the development and implementation of a number
of policies and programmes targeting women’s empowerment and gender
mainstreaming in the Public Service. Amongst these initiatives is the
inclusion of gender equality in the Public Service as one of the strategic
imperatives in government’s programme of action, with a target set at
achieving 50% women’s representation at all levels of senior management.

Although we did not meet the set target by March this year, as planned, we
have nevertheless made good strides that are worth noting. For instance, in
2002, the total number of women in the Public Service was 52% and by
December 2008 that percentage had increased to 54,38%, which is slightly
higher than the 52% population of women in this country.

The representation of women at senior management level also increased from
17% in 1999 to 34% in 2008. In this regard, South Africa exceeded the SADC
minimum requirement of 30% in March 2006.

Evidently, much work still needs to be done. To address this challenge,
government has introduced the Gender Equality Strategic Framework, which is
specifically aimed at meeting the 50-50 target.

In addition to the Gender Equality Strategic Framework, government has also
introduced the head of department’s eight-principle action plan for
promoting women’s empowerment and gender equality within the Public Service
workplace.

Furthermore, gender focal points have been established in seven out of nine
provinces and in 30 out of 43 national departments. The primary function of
the focal points is to ensure the successful implementation of gender
policies according to the gender policy framework.

Government is committed to the advancement of gender equality in the Public
Service and South Africa at large. It is for this reason that we have
established the Ministry of Women, Children, Youth and People with
Disabilities. One of the important tasks the new Ministry has been
requested to undertake is to conduct a study to identify factors hindering
government’s progress in meeting equity targets with regard to women at
senior management levels. We hope that the findings of the study will
assist us to work even harder to meet the targets during the term of this
government. I thank you.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Sekela-Mongameli, uza kuthini urhulumente
ngokubhekiselele kumanqanaba karhulumente angahambisaniyo nendlela
urhulumente afuna ukuba umasilingane ahambe ngayo?

USEKELA-MONGAMELI: Sihlalo, kaloku xa sisithi ... (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy President, how is the government
going to address the challenge of spheres of government that are against
equity and the way the government wants it to be implemented?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, when we say...]

... we are mainstreaming ...

... loo nto ithetha ukuba sisonke siza kuwuqwalasela lo mcimbi ngalo lonke
ixesha. Ndiyazi ukuba kwiKhabhinethi, ibhodi ayisoze yamkelwe xa ingenalo
inani eloneleyo loomama. Loo nto ithetha ukuba siza kukwazi ukuba lo mcimbi
noko siwuchane kuba sisonke siza kusebenza ngendlela ethi ... (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... that means we will be attending to this matter all the time. I know
that the Cabinet would never approve a board that does not have the
required number of women. That means we will be able to handle the matter
accurately because together we will be working in a manner that suggests
that ...]

... we are mainstreaming.

Asifuni ukuba oomama babekelwe bucala. Sifuna ukuba kuyo yonke into
eyenzekayo xa kupapashwe izithuba, kubantu abenze izicelo nekuza kuqhutywa
udliwano-ndlebe nabo, amanani oomama noko aqwalaselwe. Ndiyabulela.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We do not want women to be isolated. When vacancies are advertised,
amongst the applicants who will be interviewed the number of women must
also be considered. Thank you.]

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, Sekela Mongameli, kukhona isilinganiso esabekwa
sokuqashwa kwabantu abaphila nokukhubazeka okungamaphesenti amabili.
IMinyango eminingi kahulumeni isakuthola ukunzima ukufika kulesi sibalo.
Imiphi imizamo manje ethe ukuqinaqina ezokwenziwa ukuze iMimnyango
kahulumeni ifike kulesi silinganiso samaphesenti amabili? (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Hon Chairperson and hon Deputy President, a 2% target was
set for employing people living with disabilities. Most government
departments find it difficult to reach this target. What other stronger
initiatives are going to be implemented so that government departments can
reach the target of 2%?]

USEKELA-MONGAMELI: Sihlalo, urhulumente wethu umisele eli Sebe loLawulo
laBasetyhini, aBantwana, uLutsha naBantu abaKhubazekileyo ngenxa
yokubaluleka kokuba abantu bakuthi, nabo bakhubazekileyo, bakwazi ukuba
nabo badlale indima yabo.

Kusasa nje, ndigqithe kwii-ofisi zecandelo loonobhala zeShumi leMinyaka ye-
Afrika elikhokelwa ngabantu bakuthi balapha eMzantsi Afrika, abagogekileyo
ngokwamalungu omzimba. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, our government created this Ministry
for Women, Children, Youth and People with Disabilities so that our people,
including those who are disabled, can realise the importance of playing
their role.

This morning I passed by the offices of the Secretariat of the African
Decade of Persons with Disabilities, which is led by South Africans who are
physically disabled.]

Both the United Nations and the African Union recognise that we are
leading, as a country, in ensuring that people living with disabilities are
also integrated. We should not believe that they cannot make a
contribution. That is why even in this government the Deputy Minister of
Public Works ...

... ngumntu okweli candelo silikhankanyileyo. Ngenxa yegalelo lakhe,
sithemba ukuba ... [is someone in this category that we have mentioned. We
hope that because of her contribution ...]

... over and above the fact that we have a dedicated Ministry, we will be
able to meet this target of 2%. Ndiyabulela. [Thank you.]]

    Co-ordination of projects of Department of Rural Development and Land
                   Reform with those of other departments

     5. Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Deputy President:


      How will the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform co-
      ordinate its projects with other Departments such as Health, Public
      Works, and Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs to ensure
      (a) that rural development projects are successful and (b) food
      security?                               CO54E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, as articulated in the Medium-Term
Strategic Framework, a document translated from the electoral mandate of
the governing party and approved in principle in the extended Cabinet
meeting in May this year, the main aim of the rural development strategy is
to transcend the rural and urban divide and improve the quality of life of
rural households, enhancing the country’s food security through a broader
base of agricultural production and maximising the diverse economic
potential of each area.

The White Paper on this important matter will be presented to the hon
members early next year for discussion and enrichment. In broad terms,
though, the Medium-Term Strategic Framework asserts that the building
blocks for the rural development strategy should include implementing
meaningful land reform linked to water rights and stimulating agricultural
production through: one, strengthening institutional support and creating
economies of scale as well as facilitating access to business services,
agricultural inputs, markets and value chains; two, enabling access to
fencing off agricultural areas, agricultural loans, high-quality
agricultural extension services through marshalling public and private
resources; three, revitalising rural towns because dynamic regions require
vibrant centres or service nodes; four, exploring and supporting nonfarm
economic activities, including tourism – domestic and international – light
manufacturing and cultural initiatives; five, implementing a development
programme for rural transport, the objective being to improve mobility and
access; six, enhancing the role of agricultural co-operatives in the value
chain, including agro-processing; and, seven, improving service delivery in
education, health, housing, water, sanitation and energy, as well as
enhancing skills development.

As the successful Eastern Cape rural development project and the pilot in
Muyexe village in the Greater Giyani demonstrate, critical to a successful
rural development strategy is a strong and dedicated co-ordinating body.
The Eastern Cape rural development project succeeded in planting and
harvesting maize on 6 000 hectares of land that was last cultivated 20
years ago. This was enabled by bringing together various stakeholders,
including the private sector, under the auspices of Asgisa Eastern Cape.

The initiative formalises a number of business relationships of
stakeholders ranging from communities to those who will be involved in off-
take agreements such as large retail chains, value-addition activities or
providing input, business, field and technical support.

In Greater Giyani the rural development department took the lead and
mobilised communities and many government departments to intervene and
bring hope to the rural people of Muyexe. For example, I am informed by the
department that no less than three departments have already pledged various
forms of assistance in their particular areas, the result of which will be
an integrated rural development intervention.

The Department of Rural Development and Land Reform will continue to take
the lead in co-ordinating, facilitating and integrating rural development
interventions. However, in the medium to long term, consideration will be
given to establishing an overarching rural development agency.

Working together with the department, the agency will have responsibilities
that include co-ordination, thus ensuring the participation in and support
for the programme by all departments, provinces, municipalities, state-
owned enterprises, NGOs, donors, financial institutions, and so on. This
includes, among other things, the co-ordination of development planning and
social facilitation, planning and resource mobilisation, monitoring and
evaluation. The difference between previous rural development strategies
and this one is that in this one the role of co-ordination is highlighted
and will be the focal point. Infrastructure has been placed at the centre
of sustainable rural development. And rural development, together with
decent job creation, is now the central mandate of all government
departments.

Lastly, lessons from previous rural development strategies have been
incorporated. We are confident that working together with all social
partners, and our communities in particular, we will indeed transform our
rural areas into thriving and successful social and economic spaces. I
thank you.

If you could now allow me to also deal with the question the hon member
asked about the water boards, a question I undertook to deal with when I
responded to this question. We are a country that is semidesert, so water
is a very scarce commodity. As a government we are alive to this challenge,
that our next crisis is going to emanate from this very problem.

We are preoccupied with ways of addressing this problem. We are looking at
various options as to how we can solve this problem. One option may very
well be that we pipe water from neighbouring countries such as the
Democratic Republic of Congo. Otherwise, we are indeed going to run into
difficulties. Many of our communities that are targeted for development
under this new Ministry of Rural Development and Land Reform will be faced
with serious water challenges.

We are looking at water rights as well because in many of the areas where
dams have been constructed we find that the surrounding villages and
communities do not have access to that water. These are some of the
bottlenecks that we are looking at. And, of course, the water boards in the
urban areas do suffer like local municipalities do in general from poor
billing systems. Most of the time, residents receive bills that are
inconsistent because the billing system is very poor. So that is a problem
that we are alive to, and I believe we will be able to find the solution to
it. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I’d like to thank the Deputy President for his
comprehensive reply to my question. I’d also like to ask the Deputy
President if I could please have a copy of that for our committee.

Deputy President, as you stated, the Department of Rural Development and
Land Reform is a new department, and it has a budget of only some R500
million. Now, as I understand it, this department is there to initiate
projects, and there will then be co-ownership of these projects through
health, public works, co-operative governance, etc.

Have certain monies been earmarked or ring-fenced to assist the Department
of Rural Development and Land Reform via the other departments, such as
Public Works, that may have to come to assist, or is this going to be just
part of their budgets? I’m worried that with the pressures on all the other
departments they will not have sufficient funds or can’t assist this new
department. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The approach, as I said, is that other services that
come from other departments, such as in the areas of health and education
and so on, are meant to assist this new department. In fact, in their pilot
project in Muyexe, the department was really, at that point, in the
embryonic stage and yet it was able to co-ordinate all other departments in
order to inspire that community and to ensure that it rendered the
necessary services.

Now, for starters, the resources allocated – set aside – are very, very
limited, but this is a priority area and we are quite certain that they
will be able to be given a substantial percentage of the national Budget
because this is a very, very important area. We are mindful of the fact
that the one area of growth in our economy at this point in time, which is
construction, is going to come to an end after the Fifa World Cup, and we
would want, at that point, to be sure that there is enough development
taking place in rural areas to countervail the impact of construction in
urban areas coming to a halt. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Chairperson, thank you very much to the
Deputy President. Chair, you will forgive me if I do not ask a question, or
if my question is irrelevant. I can see that they are seated next to each
other because maybe the question is relevant to the Minister of Higher
Education and Training. It has to do with rural development.

Hon Deputy President, last week during provincial week, and understanding
rural development as one of the key priority areas, we visited an area in
Vaalharts in the Northern Cape. Having visited the research station, we
came across very serious information that was quite disturbing. The senior
researcher disclosed to us that one of the things that was going to affect
our approach or governance programme of rural development negatively is the
question of skills development. This is because, he said, in the country at
the moment there were only 10 agricultural engineers and he said that he
was left with about three or four years until he retired.

The question is: what deliberate effort is being made to ensure that there
is a programme aimed at skills development in the area of rural development
and, in particular, with regard to agricultural engineers, agricultural
economists, and so forth? He was blunt: He said that the problem we were
faced with was that all 10 were over the age of 50 and white; that very
soon they would be retiring and that they didn’t know what the country was
going to do. That is why I apologised before, Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Tau, you are setting a bad example. Two
minutes for supplementary questions. Please don’t relate a story. You’re
all aware. You’re an old member.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon member, for bringing this
very important challenge to our attention. You couldn’t have posed it at a
more apposite time than you have done now, even though you are sliding it
in as an additional question. It is very important because the Minister of
Higher Education and Training here next to me is in charge of our human
resource development strategy, and he took note of the comments you’ve
made.

The poverty of skills in our country – very important skills - is a general
challenge. I think, and the Minister has taken note of it, we will apply
our minds as to how best to tap into those skills and ensure their input in
the approach of reproducing similar skills. These retirees, I think, would
be very important to mobilise and ensure that we get larger numbers to be
trained by them. Retirement must not mean that you stop working. It must
mean that you simply slow down. So, we hope that the Minister here, in
implementing the human resource development strategy, will indeed be able
to mobilise those skills. Thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President, given the fact that
we have a skewed geographic-economic dispensation in South Africa in that
the eastern part of South Africa is much more developed than the western
part of our country, and in terms of the very serious drive from this
government to engage in rural development, would you agree that a deep-sea
harbour in or close to Port Nolloth in terms of export potential would
address that issue?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, well, that’s a new question and I’m
willing to take note of it so that I can tap into the collective brain in
the various Ministries with regard to that issue. Port Nolloth would be ...
[Interjections.] [Laughter.] No. [Interjections.] Port Nolloth and Saldanha
would be in the same line. I don’t know – we’re taking note of that and
we’ll have to look at it. As part of rural development, an area such as the
Richtersveld, which, I think, could be developed for both domestic and
international tourism, would benefit from that kind of development, I
suppose. So, we are taking note of it. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I would just like to say to the Deputy President
that most of these places are rural. We went to Giyani, but I never saw any
solar heaters or solar panels there. Hopefully, that will be the intention
with the development, especially in these remote areas, as well as
introducing water-saving devices. In Giyani there is a dam, but it looks
like the dam is going to be dry, in this very dry area, and water might
have to be piped in eventually to the dam. I would just like to ask the
Deputy President what his ideas are on that.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, yes, I agree, hon Mr Worth, that an area
such as Giyani should really be assisted with the generation of solar
power. In fact, I am aware that there are initiatives, led by the Ministry
of Trade and Industry, to establish factories for the manufacturing of
solar panels in these rural areas, particularly in the Northern Cape
because there is a lot of sunshine there.

I am also aware that part of the challenge facing us with the generation of
electrical power is the fact that the use of private generators is kind of
limited because their price. We’ve always prided ourselves on marketing the
country as a country that supplies the cheapest electricity in the world.
And, I think, if we are to succeed in addressing rural development, we have
to look at other forms of generating electricity for it to remain
affordable but that would also address our obligations with regard to
carbon emissions. I am aware of work that is being explored in that regard.

The essence of our rural development strategy is really to close the gap,
the divide, between urban and rural and that would see investment in bulk
infrastructure in rural areas. That is the only way in which development
can become sustainable and properly diversified.

A province such as the Northern Cape, which is vast and sparsely populated,
unfortunately, has not been selected to host in 2010 and therefore has not
benefited from investment in infrastructure development that other
provinces have been able to benefit from. I think that province deserves
special attention. Thank you. [Applause.]

 Particulars regarding line functions and responsibilities of new Department
                           of Economic Development

6.    Mr T Harris (DA) asked the Deputy President:


      Whether the line functions and responsibilities of the new Department
      of Economic Development have been identified and formalised; if not,
      why not; if so, (a) what are they, (b) how do they relate to the
      responsibilities of the Department of Trade and Industry in the (i)
      old and (ii) new Cabinet structures and (c) how do they relate to the
      planning and policy development responsibilities of the National
      Planning Commission in the Presidency?
      CO55E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, substantial work has been done in
identifying the line functions and responsibilities of the Department of
Economic Development. To clarify the Ministry’s focus and mandate, I shall
draw on two policy statements made by the President which remain the
position of government.

In motivating the new Cabinet structure, President Zuma stated on 10 May
this year that “Cabinet has been reorganised to achieve better alignment
between the structure, our electoral mandate and the developmental
challenges that need to receive immediate attention from government.”

In line with this, the President announced that a new Department of
Economic Development had been established to focus on economic policy-
making. And, during the Presidency Vote on 24 June this year, the President
stated:


  Some people are wondering why we have both the Department of Trade and
  Industry and that of Economic Development. Trade matters will require a
  strong focus to have a direct impact on industrial organisation and
  output. The Economic Development portfolio will have a strong domestic
  focus and will address, amongst others, matters of macro and micro
  economic development planning.

The establishment of the National Planning Commission does not replace the
need for planning in departments and spheres and agencies of government.
The way in which the national planning process has been structured takes
cognisance of the fact that departments, spheres and relevant state
entities would have the requisite strategic planning capacity and
responsibility.

The role of the Minister in the Presidency responsible for the National
Planning Commission would be to integrate the work of the NPC into
government and Cabinet. Additionally, the Minister will also facilitate the
input of the various departments and spheres with regard to the development
of the national strategic plan.

As members should be aware, the Green Paper on National Strategic Planning
was tabled in this House on 4 September this year. As President Zuma
indicated, the affected Ministries are working together to align their work
and respective responsibilities. I thank you.

Mr T HARRIS: Chairperson, Deputy President, in light of the recently
released Cosatu report, which notes that there is not a single reference to
the role of the Economic Development Ministry in that Green Paper on
National Strategic Planning you referred to, how do you envision the co-
ordination of the policy, given that the Minister in the Presidency does
not even acknowledge the Minister of Economic Development in his plans?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, well, I thought the words of our
President, who has stated publicly that these Ministers work together,
answered that question. Anyway, the Green Paper is a discussion paper and
it is meant to generate debate and discussion, and it will therefore evolve
into a much more coherent document after all of the inputs and debates and
discussions have been concluded. At the moment, it is a Green Paper, and I
don’t think we should make much of whatever comes across as weak. The idea,
really, is that it should elicit inputs from all of us. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you very much. Is there any other
supplementary question? If there are none, then let me take the opportunity
on behalf of the Chairperson of the Council and the Council to thank the
Deputy President for having availed himself. And, once more, I express our
happiness and excitement about the fact that despite all the things that
have been reported or said, the Deputy President was able to come today and
respond to questions in the manner in which he did. Thank you very much,
hon Deputy President. [Applause.]

                               SOCIAL SERVICES
                                  Cluster 2
MINISTERS:

    Particulars regarding cashing of social grants at private businesses

7.    Mr R A Lees (DA) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (1)   Whether beneficiaries of social grants are able to cash their
           grants at private businesses; if so,

      (2)   whether participating businesses which pay out the grant on
           behalf of the state can impose conditions on the paying out of
           such grants, such as insisting that a certain portion of the
           grant be used to purchase goods at the business; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        CO65E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, with regard to cash
payment contracts, beneficiaries of social grants may choose to cash their
grants at private businesses. The SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, is
aware that beneficiaries are receiving their grants at private businesses,
which have been subcontracted by cash payment contractors in terms of the
current payment contracts.

Private businesses cannot impose conditions on the paying out of grants as
beneficiaries are entitled to receiving their full grant amount. The
outstanding service level agreements signed between Sassa and service
providers explicitly state that beneficiaries should be paid the full grant
amount they are entitled to. The service level agreements do, however,
permit service providers to introduce alternative payment channels that are
meant to improve access to social grants by beneficiaries through the
provisions of the service level agreement and legislation.

In terms of these alternative payment channels that the service providers
enter into with private businesses, there is also a new service level
agreement that we have entered into which looks into improving the quality
of service we deliver to our people. Maybe we should specify that it’s not
all the provinces that have contracts with private businesses. This service
is rendered throughout the provinces of KwaZulu-Natal and the Northern
Cape. In the Western Cape, it is rendered only in rural areas, and in
Mpumalanga it is rendered in some parts of the province. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr R A LEES: House Chair, Madame Minister, thank you very much for that
reply, and I do appreciate it. But given the reply that there should be no
conditions imposed on the paying out of social grants, there appears to be
conditions that are being imposed. Is your department not aware of this
happening? If it is aware of this happening, is any action being taken
where cash payment contracts are being abused or not adhered to by the
service provider?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, there are instances
where the department, working together with Sassa, has intervened. This is
where you will find that businesses are forcing especially the aged to take
groceries instead of their money. Where this has happened, we have
cancelled the contract. It’s actually not us but the service providers that
cancel the contracts because people don’t meet the standards.

I also think it is important for us to say that, with regard to service
level agreements, service providers and private businesses have to consult
with Sassa before entering into the contract. What is also important is
that people are not forced to get their grants from private businesses.
They can go back to where they received their pensions before going to
private businesses. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: House Chair, Deputy Minister, I think you will agree with me
that this issue of outsourcing is a serious problem in the country, and
this is an example of outsourcing. If it is found that these people are
outsourcing, what are you going to do with such people? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I think we have
already dealt with the issue that when people do not meet standards the
service provider cancels the contract.

Mr F ADAMS: Chair, I just want to ask the Deputy Minister what the
department and Sassa can do about the loan sharks that enter the halls were
people are getting paid in the Western Cape. Is there any way we can just
restrict them to maybe 2km away from the halls so as to protect our
vulnerable people, because these guys sometimes keep their cards and Ids?
They go in with the people to the vending machines to collect the money.
While they collect the money on the one hand, they give the money over to
these sharks on the other hand. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, what we all know is
that there is an agreement that no one should be around the area where
pensioners receive their grants. The department is in the process of
dealing with this matter, working together with the special investigation
units.

As to how we are going to deal with the matter, we are not going to say it
here. But we are trying to ensure that none of the cases we have lodged is
dropped. This is because, for instance, here in the Western Cape there is a
case that was reported and then dropped during the process. So, we are
trying to strengthen our cases so that we can deal with the matter once and
for all.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, is there any
service fee payable to these service providers? If so, what are the
relevant details? Thank you.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, if we are actually
talking about private businesses, they have this contract because they want
to attract more people to their businesses. They are the ones who hire
gadgets from service providers for paying out pensions. So, the service
providers don’t get a cent out of this because we don’t pay businesses.
They only pay for the gadgets they hire. That is why we see no reason why
they should force people to get groceries instead of their pension grants.

 Mechanisms to monitor and evaluate quality of services at state clinics and
                                  hospitals

8.    Prince M M M Zulu (IFP) asked the Minister of Health:

      Whether his department has any mechanisms in place to monitor and
      evaluate the quality of services that the various state clinics and
      hospitals provide to the public; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                            CO74E

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, in reply to the question, I wish to
refer the hon member to our government’s new programme of action for the
next five years, which clearly reflects that we put a big premium on the
issue of improving the quality of health care services. Point no 3 of our
programme of action, or our 10-point plan, is about improving the quality
of health care services. This means refining and scaling up a detailed plan
on the improvement of quality of services, and directing its immediate
implementation.

But, already, a set of national core standards for health facilities was
released as early as 2008 and was used to benchmark an initial set of
hospitals and health care centres. These standards are being extensively
revised currently through a process of wide consultation and technical
review. The organisational standards reflect existing national policies and
guidelines and are organised in a number of domains in which quality or
safety could be at risk, namely patient rights, patient safety, clinical
governance and care, public health, strategic leadership and corporate
governance, operational management and facilities management.

The revised standards will be piloted shortly in all provinces, prior to
widespread use, to improve quality, to monitor and benchmark compliance and
to accredit facilities. These standards will be expanded over time to
become more complete and include other systems.

The department is planning and supporting a project for improving the
quality of services in four specific identified problem areas within these
domains. These are patient safety, infection prevention and control,
waiting times and cleanliness in about 1 000 health care centres – that
means both hospitals and clinics. The facilities and projects within them
will provide detailed monitoring information as implementation proceeds.

Supervision is an integral function of managers at all levels – as a
process to improve the quality of services on an ongoing basis. In the case
of clinics, it is supported through a structured tool which we call a
supervisory manual that guides the monitoring of services and the process
towards improvement.

The District Health Information System, or DHIS, is a national system that
collates data collected at all the clinics and hospitals in the country on
a regular basis. This monitors both detailed programme plans as well as
strategic objectives set for the department. Quality of services is
monitored through measuring coverage of specific services or activities.
The analysis of these, which forms a specific quality perspective, is being
strengthened and gaps in indicators identified to be able to produce a
customised response by the end of this financial year.

Complaints from patients constitute an important monitoring system for
quality, and the existing call centres in some provinces and the national
department will be integrated and their capacity to analyse complaints as a
monitoring mechanism strengthened, ensuring co-ordination with similar
centres, for instance the call centre in the Presidency.

Patient satisfaction surveys are carried out on a regular basis by external
teams. The national protocol is several years old and is being revised to
ensure standardisation. Patient satisfaction also forms part of several
other surveys carried out over the past few years, for example, the
evaluation of the national comprehensive Aids treatment plan. Thank you.

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Mphathisihlalo, ngiyabonga. Phini likaMongameli wezwe,
oNgqongqoshe abakhona, maLungu ahloniphekile ale Ndlu. Ngqongqoshe
ngikhuluma njengendoda yasemakhaya kwaNongoma, yikho ngithi endabeni
yokuqapha ingabe ikhona yini into obusuyicabangile, noma-ke mhlonishwa
Ngqongqoshe kuzofuneka ukuthi uke ugcizelele ezintweni ezithile.

Kukhona into ekade yenzeka, ngisho nayizolo lokhu mhla ziyi-12, ingane
yaphathwa yikhanda kodwa kwathi uma sifika kwaNongoma esibhedlela
basitshela ukuthi umbhede awukho, kwaze kwazanywa ezinye izindlela zokuthi
ize isiwe kwesinye isibhedlela Enkonjeni lapho eyafika yashonela khona.

Bese kuba khona le mitholampilo yasemakhaya, njengoba ngikhuluma
njengendoda yasemakhaya elusa izinkomo, le mitholampilo yasemakhaya
iyavalwa ebusuku. Ngakho-ke uma ugula ufuna ukushayela inqola yeziguli,
kufanele ushayele eHhovisi Lesifunda eliseMgungundlovu ukuze ukwazi
ukuthola inqola yeziguli ezosuka Olundi ihambe iye KwaNongoma izokwazi
ukuhambisa umuntu esibhedlela.
Zonke lezi zinto mhlonishwa - njengoba ninegunya elininikwe ngabantu
bakuleli lizwe bethi bafuna impilo engcono – kuzodingeka ukuthi ukubheke
lokho ngoba angikwazi ukukubeka icala ngalezo zinto ngoba yizinto ekufuneka
zilungiswe lezo ngoba sikhonela khona ukulungisa izinto la emhlabeni.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy President, hon Ministers
who are present here, hon members of this House and Minister, I am speaking
as a rural man from Nongoma, which is why I am asking whether you managed
to come up with something with regard to monitoring. Otherwise, hon
Minister, you will have to emphasise certain issues.

Something has been happening for a long time. Yesterday,  the  12th,a  child
had a headache but when we arrived at Nongoma Hospital  we  were  told  that
there was no bed available. We  used  other  means  to  take  the  child  to
Enkonjeni, where the child died.

Then there are these rural clinics - I am a rural man  who  herds  cattle  -
which are closed at night. Therefore,  if  you  are  ill  and  you  need  an
ambulance,  you  have  to  phone  the   district   office,   which   is   in
Pietermaritzburg. The ambulance will  then  be  dispatched  from  Ulundi  to
Nongoma so that you can take someone to the hospital.

Since you have the authority given to you by the people of this country  who
say that they want better health care, you  need  to  look  into  all  these
issues. I cannot blame you with regard to these  issues  because  these  are
the things which need to be corrected because we are here to make sure  that
such things are corrected here on earth.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I have just outlined a plan to do
exactly what the hon member is asking me to do. That is exactly why I read
such a long statement. I was not saying that we’ve eliminated all the
problems mentioned, but that we have a plan to make sure that we resolve
them. Thank you.

Mr W F FABER: Mr Chair, on the question the hon Prince asked, I saw that in
the 2008-09 budget, which we went through the other day in the workshop,
the department in the Northern Cape underspent on their budget. But if you
look at the clinics, there isn’t enough medicine, cleaning materials, and
so on. We saw some clinics in a very bad state. Then, a big worry to me is
the new hospital in Barkly West in the Northern Cape, which is a state-of-
the-art hospital, but I think it’s called the “hospital of death” as two or
three people have died because there weren’t any doctors on duty. In terms
of the monitoring process, I’d just like to know why our clinics and our
hospitals don’t have staff or don’t have sufficient materials. What is the
position and how are you monitoring it if we don’t spend our budgets
correctly? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I also wish to say to hon members that
when they meet specific problems, as I have just said, in terms of
monitoring, they have the right to inform us on an individual basis, to
phone us – in the same way that there is a hotline in the President’s
Office – and tell us what they are experiencing.

But I have just said that in recognition of this problem, the department
has come up with a 10-point programme of action. If you go through it, it
outlines the steps that we are going to be taking to eliminate some of
those problems. I am quite aware of the problem of underspending, and of
the problem of overspending in some areas in provincial departments. We
have sat down with the Auditor-General and gone through that. We have
instructed the CFO in the department to call the CFOs of all the provinces
to sit down to develop a policy so that such things don’t happen again.
Such a meeting took place about two weeks ago, and we are waiting for the
report of what all the CFOs said. There is overspending on personnel but
underspending on service delivery and we are worried about that because
that is very abnormal.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Hon Chairperson, thank you very much. My question to
the hon Minister is about the participation of the community at the service
delivery points of government. What responsibilities are there and also
what opportunities are there to make use of the community in the councils
of hospitals and clinics so that we can monitor from the community’s side
service delivery from the hospitals and the clinics? Thank you very much.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, they do play a very important part.
That’s why, in this programme of action, the very same point which we put
down, which we are working on, is to provide strategic leadership and
create a social compact for better health outcomes. “Social compact” means
exactly that: that the department must provide leadership and go to all the
stakeholders and have a social compact with them, and find a role for each
and every one of them for better health outcomes, because better health
outcomes cannot be achieved by the department alone. Thank you.

 Measures to enable persons without electricity and/or access to a TV set to
                        watch 2010 World Cup matches

9.    Prince M M M Zulu (IFP) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      Whether, in light of the fact that many persons living in the rural
      areas do not have electricity and/or access to a television set, his
      department has any measures in place to ensure that these persons also
      watch various matches on television and experience the excitement and
      the atmosphere during the 2010 World Cup Tournament; if not, why not;
      if so, what are the relevant details?
      CO75E

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Prince, I have been informed that
the Minister or the Deputy Minister is not available, unless things have
changed in terms of any Minister standing in for the Minister of Sport and
Recreation. If not, then the idea was to allow the question to stand over
and to proceed with the other questions.

 Particulars regarding formulation of uniform policy on transport subsidies
                             for rural learners

10.   Mr M P Jacobs (ANC) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      Whether, with regard to the transport subsidy system for learners in
      the rural areas (details furnished), her department will formulate
      uniform policy on transport subsidies for the rural learners in all
      provinces; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                   CO76E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, all nine provinces
provide learner transport programmes in rural areas as a point of focus.
Currently, the policies governing the provision of learner transport in
terms of subsidies vary from province to province.

The Department of Education, in collaboration with the Department of
Transport, is developing a national scholar transport policy. The focus is
on improving access to schools and redressing the imbalances of the past,
with the emphasis on rural schools. The policy will provide guidelines in
the provisioning, funding and management of learner transport. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, that will do. Thank you. Deputy Minister, am I
correct in hearing you say that all provinces provide transport in the
rural areas? If that is the case, then I have a problem because in my area
there is no such transport. I’m talking about KwaZulu-Natal.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, in terms of the policy
and the allocations provided to provinces, each province should be
providing transport to all learners that live in areas beyond the radius of
five kilometres. I would imagine that particularly in areas such as KwaZulu-
Natal, the Eastern Cape and Limpopo, adequate scholar transport is being
provided for.

However, the allocations provinces provide for that particular purpose vary
from province to province. Most of the provinces provide for transport for
learners through the Department of Education. However, in two of the nine
provinces, it’s provided for by the Department of Transport.

We are of the view, particularly with regard to issues such as those that
you have raised, that everybody is caught within the network and that the
Department of Transport should be the service provider so that there should
be a uniform base of allocation with regard to subsidies and policy in
relation to transport.

This attempt at achieving this unity has resulted in the engagement between
the Department of Transport and the Department of Basic Education to ensure
that a uniform policy, which will result in guidelines for the various
provinces, is provided for. If there are instances where transport is not
provided for where it should be, in terms of the existing policy, please
draw our attention to it and we will make the appropriate intervention.
Thank you very much.

Mr W F FABER: Chairperson, I would like to know something with regard to
the funding. We were at a workshop the other day, and Treasury stated that
the allocation of school funds for learners was R807 per school learner,
and that at some schools only R400 or just over R400 got to them, and the
department deducted for books on their own. I would like to know if that is
legal, and if the full amount is not supposed to be paid to the school?
Thank you, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, norms have been set
out in terms of the allocation to schools per learner. The allocation has
increased. At one stage it was, indeed, less than R500. It increased to
R600, R642, and currently, it’s more that R800. We are of the view that the
minimum threshold for an adequate provision in relation to a learner should
be an amount exceeding R800. We would recommend, in terms of our guidelines
and norms and standards, that provinces make the appropriate allocations.

However, you are correct. In the past, there were inconsistencies with
regard to the allocation of resources to schools. In fact, in provinces
such as Limpopo, the amount was much less than R400. This was not because
they wanted to deprive the school or the learner, but because of the high
poverty levels. Learners that made up quintiles 1, 2, 3 and 4 were far
greater in Limpopo and the Eastern Cape than you would find in the Western
Cape or in KwaZulu-Natal.

However, what Treasury did was to deal with the matter equitably. The
weighting must be such that Limpopo is able to provide for learners on an
equitable basis, in other words, on par as would occur in the Western Cape,
which is more urbanised and where there is greater affluence, or in
Gauteng. This has resulted in a better distribution.

However, there might be some inconsistencies. If you are aware of any,
kindly bring it to our attention so that we can raise it with the
leadership in the province. Thank you.

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I would like to ask the Deputy Minister –
I’m not sure if I understood him correctly – does each province have its
own guidelines as to how it allocates its budget? The second question is:
Is the 5km radius only linked to primary schools or to all schools? Thank
you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, with regard to the
policies and in terms of our constitutional arrangement, provinces have
concurrent competencies. In fact, education falls within the purview of the
provinces. As a result, there have been variations. That is why we have
norms and standards to guide provinces in terms of the appropriate
allocation.

What we are saying is that we provided an environment where there are
standardised norms – standards which would guide provinces in terms of the
allocation of resources. Such norms and standards did not apply in the
past, but do apply now.

The reality, however, is that even though the provinces - the MECs for
education in collaboration with the Ministry of Education - agreed to the
allocation of resources for a particular purpose, say, transport in a
province, the provincial treasurer could allocate those resources which are
received globally from the National Treasury and utilise them for other
purposes.

The unfortunate reality is that instances do occur, from time to time,
where monies that have been allocated for a particular purpose by National
Treasury are used for other purposes by the provinces. What we are trying
to achieve as a government through our Performance Monitoring and
Evaluation unit and the National Planning unit, which is led by the Deputy
President, would be to ensure that where monies are allocated for a
particular purpose in relation to a particular plan, those resources are
spent in a particular way. It might well be that some resources should be
spent centrally in order to ensure that it reaches the target. This might
very well occur in relation to transport.

With regard to the norms, they apply to primary schools and high schools as
well. Certainly, we are more sensitive to ensuring, where little children
are concerned, that there should be absolutely strict compliance and
adherence to those norms. Thank you very much.

    Particulars regarding timeous disbursement of funds for no-fee school
                                   system

14.   Mr B A Mnguni (ANC) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      (1)   With reference to the no-fee school system which was introduced
           with the intention to address the plight of parents who could
           not afford to pay their fees, how will she inculcate the culture
           of learning and teaching when the administration has ground to a
           halt due to the unavailability or late arrival of funds;


      (2)   whether she will intervene to ensure that funds are disbursed
           timeously; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   CO80E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, after numerous
complaints had been received from schools about the late or nontransfer of
allocations to schools, particularly to no-fee schools that had been
assigned functions in terms of section 21 of the South African Schools Act,
the Minister of Education amended the national norms and standards for
school funding.

The effect of these amendments was the following: In terms of the
amendment, the transfer of funds from provincial departments of education
to schools must take place in two instalments, firstly, on or before
15 May; and, secondly, on or before 15 November of each year.

We anticipate that this will assist in eliminating the problems experienced
in the past. What used to happen in the past is that schools would receive
one allocation. That allocation would be in May. A school’s calendar year
starts in January. The result is that the monies are spent in a particular
calendar year, with no resources available for the next year. By splitting
it in the way we are doing now, schools are already in possession of the
money for the following year in November of the preceding year, and are
therefore able to budget and plan better.
In relation to the second part of the question, if any instance is brought
to our attention the Ministry would indeed intervene. We would, however,
urge members to report noncompliance to their provincial MECs responsible
for education. That does not detract from our national responsibility, but
we do believe that noncompliance would be managed more appropriately by the
MECs for education in the provinces. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for
his reply. My question is: How will the Minister inculcate the culture of a
work ethic in schools?

Even if the funds are available, some of the educators are not there. What
is the Deputy Minister going to do to address that issue?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, that is not a follow-
up, but it speaks to an aspect that the President has mentioned repeatedly,
namely the non-negotiables in education: The teacher should be in class, on
time, doing the task at hand; the learners should be present at school,
learning; the parents are responsible for sending their children to school
and ensuring that they do their homework.

This comprehensive plan by the ruling party, which was adopted by
government and repeatedly endorsed by the President in his state of the
nation address, addresses what has been raised by hon Bloem. It states that
it is not only about resources being allocated to schools; education must
be regarded as a societal issue. Unless and until all of us – district
officials, circuit officials, teachers, principals, parents, and
communities at large – take collective responsibility, we will not succeed
in creating the kind of transformation in education that we want. So we do
believe that your party in particular will have an enormous role to play in
assisting us to achieve this outcome. Thank you.

Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Chairperson, my question is a follow-up on the issue of
no-fee schools.

It is with regard to quintiles 1, 2 and 3. I don’t have any information on
the ratio of quintile 3. I would also like to know the formula which is
used to classify schools into quintiles 1, 2 and 3, as there are so many
inconsistencies. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, if I understand the
hon member correctly, what he said was that he was not very clear in terms
of how and on what basis we arrive at different quintiles.

There are five quintiles, encompassing the poorest schools to the most
affluent schools. Various factors are taken into account when determining a
school’s quintile rating: whether the school community is urban or rural;
whether the community living in the area surrounding the school is affluent
or poor; what the school’s infrastructure is like; and what resources are
available to the school.

So, many factors are considered and weighed in order to establish the
quintiles. We have discovered, however – and I think this is a concern of
the hon member – that the quintiles that had been established some time
ago, have changed.

You might, in certain instances, find that a school has the infrastructure
of a quintile 5 school – in other words, of a most affluent school – while
the surrounding community or the learner population in that school belongs
to quintile 1 – in other words, learners who should actually be exempted
from fees. In such a case, it would not be appropriate to place that school
in quintile 5.

We thus revise these quintiles annually. In fact, we are going to amend the
legislation even further to allow provincial departments and MECs to change
the quintiles, from quintile 1 to 2, depending on the variation that occurs
within that learning environment.

So, these quintiles are not etched in stone. MECs for education have, in
terms of our practice, always had the right to change them. In fact, while
the Minister declares no-fee schools, the MECs for education – as the
Minister of Health, who was a former MEC for education in Limpopo, would
know, and, in fact, when he was, did something quite extraordinary: instead
of declaring for just two quintiles, he declared for three quintiles, in
terms of poverty alleviation in his particular province – have the right
and discretion to increase the allocation and amend the identification of
schools in terms of the no-fee school policy.

So, what we are saying then is that the national Minister determines in
consultation with the provinces, but the MECs for education do have the
right, the authority and the mandate to include or expand on that number,
based on changes that may occur within the quintile arrangement of those
particular schools.

I hope that has helped the hon member. Thank you.

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Voorsitter, ek gaan die vraag in Afrikaans stel, as
dit in orde is.

Ek wil dit aan die agb Adjunkminister stel dat daar verneem word dat
sommige van die provinsies nie die volle bedrag wat aan die leerders by
geengeldskole toegeken word, oorbetaal nie en dat ’n sekere bedrag deur die
provinsies teruggehou word. Ek wil graag weet of daardie inligting aan die
Adjunkminister bekend is, of hy bereid is om die saak te ondersoek, en wat
sy optrede in dié verband sou wees?

Die ADJUNKMINISTER VAN BASIESE ONDERWYS: As daar so ’n voorval in u gebied
sou plaasvind, maak dit gerus aan ons bekend. Ons sal die nodige stappe
doen.

Wat wel in die verlede gebeur het, is dat daar nie ’n uniforme benadering
ten opsigte van die uitbetaling van toelaes aan skole was nie. Volgens die
huidige norme word daar wel ’n meer uniforme benadering toegepas. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I am going to ask the question in
Afrikaans, if that is all right.

I would like to put it to the hon Deputy Minister that it is understood
that some of the provinces are not transferring the full amount that has
been allocated for the learners at no-fee schools, and that a certain
amount is being held back by the provinces. I would like to know if this
information is known to the Deputy Minister, whether he is willing to
investigate this matter, and what action he would take in this regard.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Should such an incident happen in
your area, please make it known to us. We will take the necessary steps.

Indeed, what happened in the past was that there wasn’t a uniform approach
with regard to the payment of grants to schools. In accordance with the
existing norms, however, a more uniform approach is being applied. Thank
you.]

Mr M P JACOBS: Chairperson, I have requested the ratio from the Minister
for quintile 3. I have done so because in the booklet that we were given by
Treasury only the allocations for quintiles 1 and 2 were indicated. There
is no indication for quintile 3. I would like to draw a comparison because
I have gathered information at a particular school that, for quintile 3,
R100 per learner is allocated. I would like to determine whether this is
correct.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I really don’t want us to put the
Minister on the spot here by asking for quantitative information, which he
might not have available. Maybe we could agree that the information could
be supplied by the department at a later stage. Is that okay? Thank you
very much.

That brings us to the end of Question 14.

            Safety measures at Sithembele Matiso Secondary School

16.   Ms M W Makgate (ANC) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      Whether there are any safety measures in place at Sithembele Matiso
      Secondary School in the Western Cape where the acting principal was
      shot; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                 CO82E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, I want to thank Ms
Makgate for raising this issue. The Sithembele Matiso Secondary School,
situated in New Road, Gugulethu, is one of the 109 high-risk schools
identified by the Western Cape department of education. A risk assessment
was conducted by the department of education in the Western Cape education,
safety and management unit.

The following infrastructure and safety measures are in place: The school
fence consists of a solid steel palisade and is in good condition. The
school also has palisade fencing between the various block sections. With
regard to windows, they are fully secured and some of the windows are
fitted with burglar bars and others with mesh stone guards. With regard to
doors, all the classroom doors are fitted with steel safety glass. The
entrance to the administration building is fitted with safety gates, and
all corridors and entrances are secured. The school has an alarm system
that is linked to armed response, and it is part of the closed-circuit
television, cctv, pilot, which is fitted with 26 cameras, including pan,
tilt and zoom cameras on a nine-metre mast on the perimeter.

The Western Cape department of education has, through partnership with the
department of community safety, deployed five school safety volunteers at
the school who assist with access control and patrol the school perimeter
and hotspots on the playground, as identified by the school safety
committee.

What we can say to you is that we share in the loss experienced by the
school and the community. The Minister of Basic Education, the Deputy
Minister of Basic Education and the Deputy Minister of Police visited the
school, and we also had an opportunity to visit the family.

It does appear that even if you have the best measures in terms of safety,
there is an important dimension that we tend to ignore, ie that of conflict
management, values and attitudes that are so critical in ensuring that we
create a safe environment that is conducive to learning. Thank you.

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, since this sporadic shooting happened and
the community is threatened, is the Minister planning to declare that
school a firearm-free zone?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, I can share with the
hon member that that is a firearm-and drug-free zone. In fact, most of our
schools are encouraged to do so, and we have also provided for
opportunities for search and seizure to take place. So, that is definitely
a firearm-free zone.

 Particulars regarding set standard for numeracy and literacy for grades 7,
                                   8 and 9

18.   Mr M J R de Villiers (DA) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      (1)   Whether there is a set standard for numeracy and literacy for
           grades 7, 8 and 9 learners; if not, why not; if so, what is the
           standard;


      (2)   what is the information of the standard on numeracy and literacy
           achievements for grade 7, 8 and 9 learners currently;

      (3)   whether the set standards on numeracy and literacy are being
          achieved; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
          what are the reasons for the set standards not being achieved;

     (4)    whether any measures have been taken to improve the standards;
          if not, why not; if so, (a) what measures and (b) when will it be
          implemented?                       CO84E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, the reply is as
follows: In relation to the first part, yes, our protocol and assessment
defines adequate achievement in mathematics and language in these grades as
scores between 50% and 59%. In relation to the second part, currently,
information on learner performance in these particular grades resides at
individual school level. With regard to the third part, achievement of this
standard varies from school to school.

There are learners who achieve and exceed the standard, but some do not.
With regard to the reasons, I can say my department is currently piloting
an external national assessment of performance in mathematics and language
at Grade 9 level to better understand factors that might impact on the
achievement of learners.

From 2010, the Department of Basic Education will have this information at
provincial and national levels. However, studies that have been conducted
at Grades 3 and 6 indicate that some of the factors are associated with
poor learner performance. Amongst others, there are the following:
availability and proper use of appropriate resources, in order words, many
schools don’t have adequate resources, including books and the appropriate
calculators and equipment; language of learning versus the home language,
where opportunities present themselves to teach in the home language
schools tend to favour a language that is foreign to the learner in terms
of his or her home language; teaching methods are not appropriate and often
the educators are underqualified. Our current interventions therefore
target these factors.

What we can share is the fact that, as a result of our assessments in
Grades 3 and 6, which are conducted nationally, we have noticed an
improvement in literacy, and particularly in numeracy in the nine
provinces. However, the reality that the achievement and performance of
learners in both numeracy and literacy is not satisfactory is not
acceptable and much more has to be done to intervene in those areas.

The last part is part four. It’s answered in three, and part four relates
to the interventions that have been made. Thank you.

        Position regarding current number of beds at children’s homes

19.   Mr M J R de Villiers (DA) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (1)   Whether there are any problems with the current number of beds
           at children’s homes; if not, what is the position in this
           regard; if so, (a) what are the problems and (b) at which homes;

      (2)   whether any measures have been taken to address the backlog; if
           not, (a) why not and (b) who is responsible for the drawing up
           of these measures; if so, what measures;

      (3)   whether any steps are in place to ensure that these measures are
           implemented; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
           (a) what steps and (b) when will it be implemented?
                                             CO85E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the reports that
were received in July 2009 from all provinces show that, currently, we have
vacancies, in terms of children’s homes, of 1 114. Actually, looking
countrywide, we have a maximum capacity of 14 581, and the actual number of
beds that are in use are 13 440, and then the vacancies are at 1 141. What
we are trying to do now, is to ensure that we move towards the rural areas
because most of the youth and child care centres are in urban areas.

Yes, although there are no backlogs reported with regard to the placement
of children in children’s homes, we sometimes have administrative delays
such as waiting for final court orders and designation letters. Despite
this, there are measures in place to avert backlogs in the placement of
children as prescribed in the Child Care Amendment Act, No 74 of 1983.
These measures include the development of regulations, guidelines, norms
and standards for placement of children into alternative care.

Lastly, yes, the national Department of Social Development has taken
measures to ensure that there is monitoring and evaluation. As I’ve said
before, there are also norms and standards that we are using to ensure that
we are able to evaluate ourselves, heads of Social Development and heads of
the forum, which takes place quarterly. Thank you.

    Position regarding funding for schools qualifying for National School
                             Nutrition Programme

20.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      (1)   Whether, in each of the past two financial years up to the
           latest specified date for which information is available, there
           were any schools in provinces that qualified for the National
           School Nutrition Programme (NSNP) but (a) did not receive
           funding or (b) received funding which was subsequently
           discontinued due to insufficient funds;

      (2)   whether her department has put any measures in place to ensure
           that (a) all schools that qualify for the programme receive
           funding, (b) sufficient funds are allocated to implement the
           programme and (c) there will not be any disruption in the
           feeding of learners?                    CO86E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, my response to the hon
Nosipho Ntwanambi is as follows: 1(a) According to the information
available to the Department of Basic Education, there are no schools that
qualified for the National School Nutrition Programme that did not receive
funding; and 1(b) no school discontinued feeding due to insufficient
funding.

In 2008, the exceedingly high food inflation experienced nationally as well
as internationally put severe strain on the programme as the prices of
staples rose remarkably. This was alleviated through an adjustment budget
allocation from the National Treasury in October 2008.

2(a) Yes, measures were put in place and are in place to feed all deserving
schools in 2009; quintiles 1 to 3 in primary schools and quintile 1 in
secondary schools, according to the approved minimum norms of the
programme.

Ms Ntwanambi would be glad to learn that in the Eastern Cape, for example,
as a result of the expansion to Quintile 1 high schools, we are able to
feed 72 822 additional learners and we are able to provide support to 182
additional schools.

Finally, all provinces verify the Education Management Information System,
EMIS, data each year. In essence, schools that are not satisfied with their
quintile status have an opportunity to raise any objections with their
respective provincial offices, and if there were any schools in the
province that qualified for the National School Nutrition Programme but did
not receive the necessary funding, the funds will be allocated to these
schools.

2(b) Sufficient funds are allocated to implement the programme in targeted
schools as gazetted learner numbers are used to calculate provincial
allocations. The resources that are allocated for the nutrition scheme are
ring-fenced for that particular purpose. So, they are indeed verified,
submitted to the national department and allocations are made accordingly.

2(c) The department is committed to ensuring that learners are fed on all
school days, with no interruptions. We may share with you, Chairperson,
that last year there were provinces that did this on only three out of the
five days. Today we can say, in this year, five of the five days children
in our schools are being fed. Officials from the national, provincial and
district levels monitor and support the implementation of the programme in
schools. Thank you.

Mr M P JACOBS: Chairperson, the Deputy Minister said that they are only
allocating this to quintile 1 schools. What happens in other quintiles, for
instance quintile 2 or 3? Some of the children from primary schools were on
the nutrition programme, but when they go to secondary schools and they
fall under quintile 2 or 3, that stops immediately. When will they extend
it to other quintiles?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson. I share in
the concern of the hon member, but as a result of the very same concern,
and in terms of the discussion between the Ministry and the MECs for
education, we believe that it has to be expanded. Previously, nutrition was
only provided in primary schools, particularly for quintiles 1, 2 and 3. As
a result of the decision taken by the ANC at the Polokwane conference, and
the mandate given by our people, we have indeed expanded our programme to
include quintile 1 high schools.

One must recognise that this has to be a progressive measure. Currently, we
are feeding more than 6,3 million learners in our education system through
the nutrition scheme. The expansion would obviously cover larger numbers of
our learners. What we can share with this House is that the Department of
Education in concurrence with the provinces has put a bid for quintiles 2
and 3 high schools. This means that we would not or should not have a
situation where one child in primary school is being fed while the sibling
in high school is being excluded. That speaks to the concern raised by the
hon member and we do hope that, notwithstanding the constraints, Treasury
is able to accommodate us, in which event quintiles 2 and 3 will also be
fed at high school level. Thank you.

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, if I am irrelevant, will you please stop me?
During the provincial week, we went to Phezulu and Zamazama schools in
Limpopo. They are just 1,5km apart. Zamazama School gets feeding and
Phezulu does not, because of these quintiles. Could the Minister be
sympathetic and help Phezulu to get feeding?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, the hon member is
indeed correct. There are situations like that, where schools within 1 or
2km of each other are in different quintiles. Therefore, through the
Education Management Information System we submit to provinces, annually,
the data that we have and the ranking of each school, and we invite them to
review and revise them.

We have also indicated that if an MEC is of the view that the quintile is
not correct, he or she could adjust that. I have even given the example of
the former MEC for education - who is now the Minister of Health - who has
adjusted many, many of the schools in the Limpopo province that may have
been ranked as quintile 4, but had to be changed because of the poverty
index.

Indeed, this is an ongoing process. From year to year there is a review
that is taking place. But, indeed, it is an inconsistency, it is a
contradiction that we have two schools on either side of the road, one
being a beneficiary of the programme and not the other. Therefore, you
should be the eyes and the ears of the communities and draw it to the
attention of the MECs and the Ministry wherever you discover that. Thank
you.

 Position regarding discussions with Higher Education South Africa on long-
                     term solutions to certain concerns

21.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Higher Education and
      Training:


      (1)   Whether he had discussions with Higher Education South Africa
           (HESA) on any concerns about (a) learners entering the higher
           education sector being poorly prepared and (b) the low rate of
           completion in regulation time in many higher education
           institutions across the country; if so, what was the outcome of
           the discussions in respect of the long-term solutions; if not,


      (2)   whether he considers it necessary to engage this sector on the
           issue; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                        CO87E

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: In answering this question,
I have not had the opportunity to raise this matter formally with Higher
Education South Africa, Hesa. It is my intention to consult with Hesa soon
on this and other related matters. There are other initiatives currently in
place, like the cohort studies, monitoring of graduation rates at
institutions and introduction of foundation problems, which involved sector-
wide consultations.

I consider it essential that I engage the higher education sector on the
issues of poorly prepared learners and low completion rates. Government
cannot deliver on its commitment to equity in the higher education system
if large numbers of students from disadvantaged backgrounds fail their
first year of studies and drop out of the higher education system.
Commitment to equity involves more than just entry to higher education
studies, it also involves ensuring success.

The department has two equity-driven funding mechanisms in place. These are
the funding of foundation programmes and that of teaching development. The
foundation programmes are sets of learning activities designed to improve
the success rates of students from disadvantaged education backgrounds.
Because these programmes involve the offering of additional teaching
services to students, their curricula are normally extended by one year
beyond the minimum time set for the corresponding regular programme.

The additional teaching services in an extended programme are organised
into foundation courses, which prepare students for entry to regular
mainstream courses. I would also like to say to hon Ntwanambi that there is
also a very important initiative by the University of Fort Hare. where they
have introduced what they call the grounding programme. The programme
involves more than just assistance with the formal courses that the
students are doing, but offer something like life skills on how to cope
with life at university.

This is a very interesting initiative which we are looking at closely,
possibly as a pilot that needs to be extended to all universities in order
to improve the performance of students generally. We have had a funding
cycle that is ending in 2009 in terms of allocations to foundation
programmes. We are going to be renewing it from next year to 2012 as the
next cycle. There are a total of 243 foundation programmes that have been
submitted for my approval. I do provide further details there that I can
leave for the hon member, in order for her to be able to get further
information.

On teaching development funds, which are very important, the department
also has such funds for development of teaching in regular programmes.
These teaching development funds are variable amounts that depend on the
operation of a mechanical formula. The average amount generated each year
is about R350 million. However, I have asked the department to recommend a
new teaching development policy so that we are able to make sure that we
continue with these programmes.

Lastly, the policy proposals will include recommendations that the annual
amount available for teaching development should be set initially at
R400 million. This should increase at the same rate as the annual increase
in the higher education budget. I thank you.

Mr G G MOKGOBI: Chairperson, I am glad that we have the Minister of Higher
Education in our House today. Mr Minister, I know very well that in
principle you have agreed to establish a university in the Northern Cape. I
would like you to tell this House how soon will this institution of higher
learning be fully fledged? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Order! Order, hon Mokgoro. [Laughter.]
Is there a follow-up question? Because that was a separate question which
is actually on the Question Paper, and the Minister will respond to that
later on. There is a question related to that on the Question Paper. If you
can just look at your Question Paper, you will see that.

   Position regarding discussions with Higher Education South Africa about
               financial exclusions in higher education sector

23.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Higher Education and
      Training:

      (1)   Whether he had discussions with Higher Education South Africa
           (HESA) about financial exclusions in the higher education
           sector; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether his department and/or the sector has any plans to
           support financially needy learners that are unable to continue
           with their studies due to insufficient funds; if not, why not;
           if so, what plans;

      (3)   whether he will consider engaging the sector in respect of
           financial exclusions before the commencement of the 2010 term?
                                                              CO89E

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, since taking
office I have met with different stakeholders, including the leadership of
Higher Education South Africa, Hesa, to discuss several issues pertaining
to the higher education sector. As I said, I am also going to be having
further consultations on a variety of issues.

The National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS, remains the flagship
vehicle by which government supports poor and academically deserving
students. NSFAS continues to provide support to needy students who cannot
afford to pay for their fees. In 2008, 153 795 students were supported by
means of the scheme and since its inception NSFAS has distributed
approximately R12,2 billion to needy students.

On 15 June 2009, I appointed a ministerial committee to review the National
Student Financial Aid Scheme. The key objectives are to assess the strength
and shortcomings of the current National Student Financial Aid Scheme, and
to advise on the short, medium and long-term needs for student financial
aid. The two objectives aim to promote the twin goals of equity of access
and provision of free undergraduate education to students from working
class and poor communities who cannot afford further or higher education.
The review will evaluate different models of student financial aid, and
make recommendations on the policy and operational changes required to
ensure the effective and efficient achievement of these goals. It is
envisaged that a final report will be submitted by December 2009.

With your permission, Chairperson, let me state here that part of this
review also wants to respond to the problem of students who get assistance
for tuition and accommodation but do not have any money for food. That
creates many problems. We want to look at how we can actually give
comprehensive support to poor students, especially to ensure that those who
deserve support are not deprived of higher education because they come from
poor families.

The last point is that next month I will be meeting with all the
chairpersons of higher education councils to discuss, amongst other things,
the issue of financial exclusions. We will be convening this meeting
because we want to be able to respond better to this challenge by engaging
before it actually overwhelms us. Thank you very much.

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chair, could the hon Minister explain to us how the
deserving students will benefit? The report of the ministerial committee
will be available in December, and in January or February the schools are
reopening. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, that is a very
important question. However, the difficulty in answering it now is that we
do not know what the recommendations of that ministerial committee will be.
From the government’s point of view, we would like to introduce measures as
soon as is practically possible.

We might find that some of the recommendations require some preparatory
work or might have some budgetary implications that we might have to
prepare for. But on our side we are committed to implementing as soon as
possible measures for improvement that are needed in order to realise the
goal of ensuring that every deserving student who is poor is able to access
higher education.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Mphathiswa ndiyabulela ngale mpendulo.
Ndiyayiva le ngcaciso yesibini, kodwa ndiyafuna ukuba undiphendule okanye
uyithathe njengesiphakamiso. Kukho amakhaya apho abantu bexhomekeke kule
mali yendodla kuphela, akukho yimbi. Kwaye eyona mali incinci yobhaliso
kwezi yunivesithi, xa ndicinga mna, ngama-R3 000. Mhlawumbi ingabe ilungile
kum kodwa la makhaya angenanto akasoze abenawo ama-R3 000 okungena
esikolweni, ezinye izinto ezinjengoo-NFSAS zilandela oko kungena.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: I thank you, Minister, for this response. I
understand the second explanation, but I would like you to respond to me,
or rather, consider this as a proposal. There are families that depend
solely on pension grants, and there are no other sources of income. And,
the minimum registration fee at universities, I think, is R3 000. I may not
have a problem with that, but disadvantaged families may not have R3 000
for registration. Other things, like the NFSAS, follow after registration
only.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEMFUNDO EPHAKEME KANYE NOKUQEQESHA: Ngibonga kakhulu sisi. Lo
mbuzo wakho ubalulekile ngoba lokho ngezinye zezinto engethemba ukuthi
lelikomidi lizosicushisa kuzona ukuthi senzenjani. Ngoba uzothola ukuthi
abanye abantwana bavinjwa wukuthi - njengoba usho nje – awukho lo-R3000
noma u-R4000 ofuneka phambili. Kodwa abantwana bebe bengakwazi ukuthi
basebenze baphase. Ngenye yezinto leyo esizoyibuka. Kukhona futhi enye into
engifisa ukuthi nginethembise yona, uma ngibuyela kuloya mbuzo obukade
ubuziwe ekuqaleni okhuluma ngokuthi sisho isikhathi sokuthi sizoyenza nini
le nto.

Ukuthi ngokwethu sifisa ukuthi uma uphuma lo mbiko walolu phenyo siwulethe
nalapha kule Ndlu, siwuhambise nangale eNdlini Yesishayamthetho,
siwukhiphele emphakathini ukuze sikwazi ukuthi sithole izincomo zokuthi
abantu bakithi bayibona kanjani le nto.

Enye into yokugcina nje, noma ungayibuzanga, kodwa ngithi Sihlalo, ngemvume
yakho angiyisho: ayiqali lapha empeleni inkathazo yemali kubantwana
abantulayo, iqala nje besafaka izicelo zokwamukelwa. Uthola ukuthi umtwana
ufaka izicelo zokwamukelwa emanyuvesi mhlawumbe angaba yisikhombisa noma
ayisishiyagalombili, kuthi leyo naleyo nyuvesi ifune imali yokufaka isicelo
eyaziwa nge-Application Fee. Bese uthola ukuthi umtwana ugcina esebenzise u-
R700 ukuya ku-R800 efaka izicelo kule nyuvesi nakuleya nyuvesi.

Into esifuna ukuyenza-ke isifundazwe saKwaZulu-Natali sesiyayenza le  nto  –
sifuna ukuyenza manje kuzwelonke ukuthi uma ufuna  ukuya  enyuvesi  kufanele
ufake isicelo endaweni eyodwa  kuphela  bese  bona  bathatha  uhlu  lamagama
abantwana abafake izicelo bawahambise  e  manyuvesi  ukuthi  naba  abantwana
abafuna ukufunda. Sifuna ukwenza  le  nto  kuzwelonke  ukuthi  uma  umntwana
efuna ukuya enyuvesi, yinye kuphela indawo ekufanele  afake  kuyona  isicelo
bese ekhokha leyo  madlana  encane  kuleyo  ndawo  bese  kubhekwa-ke  ukuthi
iyiphi inyuvesi noma ikolishi elingakwazi ukumthatha. Ngiyabonga.
Mnu D D GAMEDE: Ngqongqoshe Mphephethwa, siyabonga ngempendulo osinike
yona. Ukulandelela nje, kungenzeka yini kubekhona ukuthi kubhekelelwe
ikakhulukazi abafundi abasuka ezindaweni ezisemakhaya, njengoba
uNgqonqgoshe ephathe indaba yokufaka izicelo nje kuyafana nendaba
yokugibela. Ngoba omunye umfundi osuka ezindaweni zasemakhaya ukhokha
kakhulu kusadingeka ayofaka isicelo enyuvesi ubanenkinga yemali ukuthi
uzogibela afike nini kuthi uma efika afike umugqa usumude.

Ngabe ikhona yini indlela yokuthi sibhekelele laba bafundi abasuka
emakhaya? Ziningi izindawo zasemakhaya, ngisuka eGingindlovu nje mina,
bakhona abafundi basemakhaya abaswele izimali zokuya esikoleni namanje,
nanokuthi-ke Ngqongqoshe, kukhona yini olunye uhlelo lokuthi uma kuqala
unyaka ozayo abafundi balungiselelwe lolu hlelo oluzayo ukuthi basizakale?
Ngiyabonga.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEMFUNDO EPHAKEME KANYE NOKUQEQESHA : Ngiyabonga kakhulu lungu
elihloniphekile. Udaba lwabantwana basemakhaya udaba oluphambili kakhulu
kithina kangangoba kwamanje njengoba bengikhuluma ngendaba yokuthi kusizwe
abafundi abaqhamuka emizini entulayo ukuze bakwazi ukuphasa esikoleni.

Kunemali eyizigidi eziyi-R146 kulo  nyaka  ekhishwe  yilo  Mnyango  yokusiza
labo bafundi. Imali eningi kule mali iya ukuyolekelela  ikakhulukazi  kulawa
manyuvesi akithi asezindaweni ezisemakhaya ekuyiwona  vele  athatha  kakhulu
abantwana  abaphuma  ezindaweni  ezisemakhaya,  wona   angoNgoye,   Inyuvesi
yaseLimpopo nabo-Forte Hare. Ngizothi-ke izinto  esizibhekelele  njengamanje
–  njengoba  ngisho  nje  ngithi  yilolu  phenyo.  (Translation  of  isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you very much, Madam.
Your question is very important because that is one of the issues I hope
that this committee will help us tackle. You will find that some of the
children are prevented from registering because, as you mentioned, they
don’t have the R3000 or R4000 which is a prerequisite, but they would have
managed their work and passed. That is one of the things that we are going
to look into.

There is also something that I would like to promise you, if I may go back
to the question that was asked earlier on about setting up time frames. We
want to table a report of this inquiry in this House, and then send it to
the National Assembly as well as to the community so that we can get
recommendations based on how our people view this issue.

One last thing, even though you did not ask, Chairperson, but with your
permission let me say that the financial problem does not actually start
here for the underprivileged children; it begins when they submit their
applications for admission. You find that a child submits applications for
admission to about seven or eight universities, and each university
requires an amount of money known as the application fee. And then you find
that a child ends up spending approximately R700 to R800 on application
fees for the different universities.

The province of KwaZulu-Natal is already  doing  what  we  now  want  to  do
nationally. If you want to go to university you will  have  to  submit  your
application to only one  place  and  then  they  will  submit  the  list  of
children who submitted  their  applications  and  send  them  to  the  other
universities to indicate that these are the children who want to  study.  We
want to do this nationally; if a child wants to go to university,  there  is
only one place where he or she must pay money  and  then  they  check  which
university or college is able to admit him or her. Thank you.

Mr D D GAMEDE: Hon Minister Mphephethwa, we thank you for the response. To
follow up on that, is it possible that assistance can be made available,
especially to students from the rural areas, since the Minister mentioned
the issue of submitting applications which is the same problem with regard
to transport. Because a student from a rural area pays a lot of money for
transport when he is expected to go and submit the application at a
university. He or she encounters a challenge financially when he or she has
to travel and when he or she arrives there he or she finds that the queue
is already long.

Is there a way that we can assist these students from the rural areas?
There are many rural areas. I, for one, come from Gingindlovu, and the
students from these rural areas are in need of money to go to school even
now. Minister, is there another plan in place for the coming year so that
when it begins the students are prepared and they will be assisted? Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you very much, hon
member. The issue of the children from rural areas is our first priority,
so much so that even now I was talking about the issue of assisting
students from poor families so that they can pass at school.

R146 million has been set aside by this department for this year to assist
those students. Most of this money is going to assist the universities in
the rural areas because they are the ones that admit mostly students from
the rural areas. Examples of these are the University of Zululand, the
University of Limpopo and the University of Fort Hare. I am saying that our
focus right now is on this investigation. Thank you.]

We want the National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS, Review Committee
to come up with comprehensive proposals to deal with these problems so that
children from poor families are able to access institutions of higher
education with minimal fuss so that they are actually assisted in every way
possible. As far as this government is concerned, we want nothing less than
that. We hope that when this report comes out, with recommendations that we
think are going to address all those issues, we will have the full support
of the Council. Thank you.

 Position regarding amendment of regulations pertaining to receipt of social
                                   grants

    31. Mrs M C Dikgale (ANC) asked the Minister of Social Development:


        Whether the existing regulations should be amended to make provision
        for spouses of employees of the state to qualify to receive social
        grants; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, (a) when
        and (b) what are the further relevant details?
                                        CO99E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the response to
Question 31 is that, yes, such spouses should ideally receive a social
grant in their own right. However, the current means test focuses on the
poorest of the poor, and the income of the spouse is generally considered
in the application for a social grant. Ironically, the foster child grant
is the only grant where the means test is not applied, since it is not a
poverty alleviation grant.

Going forward, the interministerial committee on social security is
considering the gradual removal of the means test so that, in future,
neither the income of the applicant nor that of the spouse is taken into
consideration for the old age grant because we are trying to ensure that
the means test is only removed on the old age grant.

I think we all know that in Polokwane we took a decision that there should
be comprehensive social security, and this is the process of ensuring that
this is part of a comprehensive social security. Once a policy decision is
made by Cabinet on the gradual removal of the means test for the older
person’s grant the details of the implementation will be announced. Lastly,
the interministerial committee will deliberate on the matter soon and will
provide relevant details in due course.

  Measures to ensure proper allocation of social relief or distress grants

38.   Mr S P Plaatjie (COPE) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (1)   How does she ensure that the allocation of social relief or
           distress grants benefit households and/or individuals facing
           hardship;


      (2)   whether there are any conditions or qualifying criteria designed
           to protect these funds from any form of abuse?
                                             CO108E
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the SA Social
Security Agency undertakes an assessment of applicants for social relief of
distress, SRD, to make sure that they meet the requirements of the Social
Assistance Act of 2004 and regulations promulgated in August 2008.

An application form is completed for each applicant and supporting
documents to verify information must be attached to the application.
Applicants must be South African citizens, permanent residents or refugees
with insufficient means to meet their families’ most basic needs.

The following categories of persons qualify as recipients of SRD:
refugees who have refugee status; a person awaiting payment of an approved
grant; a person who has been assessed as being unfit for work for six
months; a person who is not in receipt of maintenance from a parent or a
spouse; a child to a breadwinner who has just passed away where the
recipient or the applicant must have applied for the grant – applicants
cannot merely insist that they want to qualify because their breadwinner
has passed away, they must have applied before asking for SRD; a person
whose family’s breadwinner has been admitted to an institution funded by
the state, like a prison, a psychiatric hospital, an old age home, a
rehabilitation centre for substance abuse or a child and youth care centre;
a person that has been affected by a disaster where that area had been
defined as a disaster area and is under the management of the Disaster
Management Act, Act 57 of 2002; and persons where refusal of the
application of the SRD may cause undue hardship.

We need to specify that the previous Minister, Zola Skweyiya, made a
special proclamation with regard to the regulation that allowed children of
school-going age to obtain school uniforms when they are in need of
uniforms. He did this because they were recipients of the grant and that
automatically caused them not to qualify, but the promulgation ensured that
the provision also included them. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for
her reply. This problem is a very serious one. While visiting the border
last year, we were told by security forces that people were crossing the
border at various points just to come and collect the grant, buy groceries
and cross back again. How will the Minister address that type of problem?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): That is obviously a totally different
question as it has to do with border control and related aspects. It is, of
course, up to the Deputy Minister if she wishes to respond.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I am going to be
very brief.

Security forces are part of the state. They cannot just observe people
claiming the grant or SRD and then crossing our borders. There are criteria
that apply to people who qualify for the grant.

So, if they are really security forces, they must report on fraud. I think
we all know that the Department of Social Development has a telephone
number where fraud can be reported. Also, we should take into consideration
that there are sometimes issues of human rights and poverty that affect
people across the borders of South Africa. Thank you.

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I would like to inform the Deputy Minister
that we have found – especially before the elections – ward councillors’
signatures on blank application forms for grants and food parcels. I would
like to ask the Deputy Minister whether the Minister has been made aware of
such irregularities and whether any action has been taken against those
involved.

The second part of Question 38 refers to “any form of abuse”. I would like
the Minister to explain to me how service providers of food parcels are
regulated. We have found that there are front companies that buy from
suppliers and then sell the food parcels to the SA Social Security Agency,
Sassa, at prices that make my little bit of hair stand on end. I would like
to know whether action would be taken if we gave the Deputy Minister the
names of such service providers. Thank you.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I think it would be
good for us all to fight corruption. If anyone has information about
corrupt practices, it should be presented to the department. There is
nothing the department can do if it does not have information. We have said
that we need to work together to fight corruption.

There has been a problem with food parcels. What we are trying to do right
now is ensure that we have a standard amount for food parcels so that we
don’t have people who have expensive food parcels. Issues of nutrition,
distance and so forth are going to be taken into consideration in an
attempt to ensure that we address the problems that we are experiencing.

With regard to prior elections, I don’t know what the member is talking
about. It would also have been much easier if we had those forms that were
signed by councillors.

     Engagement with provinces on reducing housing backlog and creating
                     sustainable, integrated communities

24.   Ms M P Themba (ANC) asked the Minister of Human Settlements:

     (1)    Whether he has engaged the provinces on finding innovative ways
           to reduce the current housing backlog and create sustainable,
           integrated communities; if not, what is the position in this
           regard; if so, what are the relevant details;

     (2)    whether the measures that the provinces are putting in place are
           satisfactory; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details;

     (3)    whether it is necessary to engage provinces in this regard; if
           not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                            CO91E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, yes, we have had a
series of engagements with provinces and municipalities in dealing with the
matter the member has raised. I must also say that the issue of the housing
backlog has a history. What this government is committed to doing is
exactly what the Freedom Charter wants us to do – to provide houses,
security and comfort.

I’m happy that you have been part of this process of this department in
which we are delivering housing in the Mbombela Municipality. We are not
only building houses, but ensuring that there are clinics, schools and a
crèche. At that development you would see that there is a crèche and a
multipurpose centre.

I also want to say to you that we do have a programme that we have
revitalised to ensure that we speak to the issue of the housing
backlog. We have intensified the rental stock. We are trying to ensure
that informal settlements are upgraded. We have what you call in situ
upgrading of informal settlements.

In the light of that, we are also continuing with our pilot projects. The
N2 Gateway is one example. The Zanemvula project is another example. We are
also promoting what we call community residential units, CRUs. So, at the
end of the day, we encourage co-ops in terms of housing. We are also
encouraging members of the community to build housing for themselves – the
People’s Housing Process, PHP. That programme is going ahead and we are
ensuring that we are rolling it out in all provinces.

What we also want to say is that the provision of housing is not the
responsibility of government alone. We need partnerships. We need the
private sector to come in, and we are having discussions with big companies
to ensure that they come on board in terms of the provision of housing. We
want NGOs and CPOs to be involved, as well as individual members of the
community to work with government. We are saying, “Working together, we can
do more.” I thank you.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Enkosi, Sekela-Mphathiswa, ngempendulo.
Njengoko sonke siyingxamele le nkqubo, kananjalo usazi ukuba abantu
abanazindlu kwaye sizama ukuphucula iimeko ematyotyombeni, ingaba isebe
lakho liya kubavumela na oomasipala ukuba nabo babe ngabakhi okanye le nto
sithi zii-developers ngesiLungu?

USEKELA-MPHATHISWA WOBONELELO NGEENDAWO ZOKUHLALA: Lungu elibekekileyo,
siyabavumela oomasipala ukuba bokhe izindlu, kodwa kukho oomasipala
abangenako ukuwenza lo msebenzi kuba unzima kubo.

Oomasipala, ingakumbi ezidolophini ezinkulu ezifana noo- ... (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you for your response, Deputy
Minister. I would like to know whether, as we are looking forward to this
project knowing that people have no houses and that we are also trying to
improve conditions in informal settlements, your department will allow
municipalities to be constructors as well, what we call developers in
English?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Hon member, we do allow
municipalities to build houses, but there are those municipalities that are
unable to perform that duty because of their incapacity.

Especially the metro municipalities like...]

... Durban, City of Cape Town, Mandela Municipality and others are able to
build houses. But it is difficult to have a one-size-fits-all approach. We
want to assist those municipalities that are not able to do so. But there
are particular criteria we follow to allow a municipality that is at a
particular stage to build houses.

Kodwa siyathetha nabo. Kangangokuba, siza kuyizimasa le nkomfa ye-Salga, SA
Local Government Association, izayo ngoba zisimisele ukusebenzisana
noomasipala ekuphuculeni intlalontle yabantu. Enkosi.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We are engaging with municipalities. And as such, we will attend the
Salga, SA Local Government Association, conference because we are
determined to work together with municipalities to improve the welfare of
the people. Thank you.]

Mr D A WORTH: Chair, I’d like to ask the Deputy Minister if a physical
audit has been done of all the houses that are supposed to have been built.
Why I ask this is because at a certain municipality 200 houses were
supposed to be built, but when there was an actual physical count there
were only 180 houses. The municipality hadn’t built the other 20 houses
because they needed the funds for other things. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: That is obviously not a follow-up
question. It needs investigation on its own.

Into esifuna ukuyithetha yeyokuba – uxolo ... [What we want to say is that
- excuse me ...]
... because you’re not speaking English. What I want to say is that we want
to monitor every aspect of what is being delivered. We have a legal and
monitoring unit in the department which investigates whether the projects
that a municipality says it has are in place and what the challenges are
that they are facing on the ground. We are continually monitoring that so
that, at the end of day, we want the government to get value for money.
Thank you.

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, only a lady could get my name right the
first time.

With regard to the first section of the question, I’d like to ask the
Minister whether, in the whole process of determining the current backlog,
new housing databases were put together in each local municipality, and
whether a deadline has been set for that. When will the Minister get all
the details? Are they being fed to the Minister? And when will the results
be made available to us?

And, then, something that really worries me about housing. The Minister
spoke about a programme on upgrading houses, and I presume that was for
putting in ceilings in the houses or perhaps for extending the very small
houses from earlier years. We have a problem with the maintenance of
houses. Is there a programme in terms of which people can be encouraged to
maintain their houses or improve them and have the responsibility of
protecting their own assets because those houses are now in their names?
Thank you.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, once a person has a
house, particularly if a person has a title deed, that person becomes an
owner. Then the maintenance becomes the responsibility of that particular
person. The issue of maintenance arose from the issue of rental stock
because in that case the property still doesn’t belong to you – it either
belongs to the municipality or to government, so the maintenance there
should continue because you are renting.

But if you rent to buy, as soon as you take ownership you, the owner,
should continue with the maintenance. We cannot have an issue of
maintenance in general. It’s only those units that were built by the
government with the rental stock where there is maintenance. As soon as
they get transferred to individuals, the individuals themselves must
maintain their houses.

So, it is really difficult to know about the issue of the database, because
we are allowing municipalities to audit in terms of their housing needs.
There is no way that we can close it. It should be open-ended to allow
people as they apply for the houses to continue.

What you could talk about is the consolidated database, the housing demand
database. This is exactly what the department is working on, so that we can
have a database that helps people understand where they are in terms of the
waiting list. You can press a button and know. This is so that housing
delivery can be on a first come, first served basis and there won’t be
people jumping the queue. I thank you.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Ikhona nje indawana, Mphathiswa,
endingayibuzanga, ngakumbi emva kokuba undiphendule kakuhle kangaka.
Siyayibona inkqubela e-N2 naseDelft, kodwa umbuzo wam uthi: Njengokuba siza
kwakha izindlu eziphucukileyo ngoku, ingaba niya kuyithathela ingqalelo na
into yokuba iplani le ifanelekile, kubekho izitalato, ukuze izindlu ziyeke
ukubelekana nje kuba kusithiwa ngooveziinyawo?

USEKELA-MPHATHISWA WOBONELELO NGEENDAWO ZOKUHLALA: Kunjalo kanye, lungu
elibekekileyo. Sifuna ukuba kubekho izitalato, kwaye sakhe amakhaya, hayi
iidomatri, ngoba esele sizakhile ngoku izindlu ziziidomatri.

Sifuna ukwakha ngendlela apha eya kwenza ukuba abantu balime izityalo kwaye
abantwana babe neendawo zokudlala ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: There is a question, hon Minister, that I
did not ask, especially after you have responded to me so very well. We do
see the progress at the N2 Gateway and Delft but my question is, now that
we are going to build decent houses, have you taken the suitability of the
plan into consideration, that there are streets, so that there are no back-
to-back houses based on the fact that they are called RDP houses?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR HUMAN SETTLEMENT: I agree, hon member. We want to
have streets and build homes instead of dormitories, because the houses
that we have already built now are dormitories.

We want to build in such a way that people can do gardening, and for
children to have playgrounds ...]

... in a community, which is not what we have at the moment.

Ndiyawuvuyela kakhulu lo mbuzo, mhle ngoba uchaphazela kanye kanye umba
wokuba negama lesebe libe litshintshile ukusuka kwelezeZindlu laba
leloBonelelo ngeeNdawo zokuHlala. Sifuna ukuba kube kuhle apho sihamba
khona, hayi ukuba izitalato zethu zibe mxinwa ngoko zisokole izithuthi.
Asiyifuni into enjalo, sifuna ukuba kube kuhle apho sikhoyo; nathi sifane
nabanye abantu. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I am very pleased with this question. It is good because it involves the
very same issue of name change for the department, from the Department of
Housing to the Department of Human Settlements. We want our places to be
beautiful, and not to have narrow streets that will make it difficult for
vehicles to be driven. We do not want that kind of a situation; we want our
places to be beautiful and to be like those other people.]

  Position regarding measures to curb fraud and corruption in allocation of
                                   houses

25.   Mr M P Sibande (ANC) asked the Minister of Human Settlements:

     (1)    Whether he has engaged the provinces on implementing measures to
           curb fraud and corruption in the allocation of houses to
           communities; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
           what are the relevant details;

     (2)    how many government officials have been (a) dismissed or (b)
          arrested on reports or allegations of being involved in fraud and
          corruption in the allocation of houses in the provinces?
                                             CO93E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, a housing allocation
strategy that prescribes the process of selection, evaluation and approval
of housing subsidies to qualifying beneficiaries has been approved. One of
the main changes to the allocation process is the fact that the process has
been depoliticised. Municipal councillors, in particular, are no longer
part of the selection process.
The allocation process is as follows: As soon as the houses are ready for
allocation and occupation, the project developer will request the National
Housing Database administrator to provide contact details of a
predetermined number of persons who are registered in the housing database.
This process is strictly on a first come, first served basis.

Names are provided by the National Housing Database. These names will be
given to the allocation committee comprising officials from the
municipality and provincial housing, as well as the Human Settlements
Department. The committee will evaluate the details of the persons provided
by the National Housing Database. If a person satisfies the subsidy
qualification criteria, they will then provide that name to the developer.
The project developer will then invite the selected persons to complete
housing application forms. Once the application forms are received,
verified and evaluated by the allocation committee and found in order, they
will then be presented to the MEC for final approval on behalf of the
beneficiary.

The details of the officials who have been charged with or arrested for
fraud and corruption regarding allocations will be made known at local
government level. I thank you.

Mr M P SIBANDE: Chairperson, thank you, and again thanks to the Deputy
Minister for her positive response. Nevertheless, in your observation, what
kind of fraud or corruption is dominant among government officials in the
department?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, we know the kind of
concerns people have around the issue of our officials having access to
subsidies that they are not supposed to. We want to remind people how it
started.

It came out of a report in 2006 and 2007. It was because we were not using
Persal, which is the government employment system, to check them. Now we
are using that. We are able to detect these people who are defrauding
government. What is important to know is that, to date, we have ensured
that we get government’s money from these fraudsters.

A number of people have been investigated, and the government is on track
in ensuring that those people pay back the money they took from government
by fraud. I thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, thank you very much. Deputy Minister, out of
these people who were arrested, how many are serving a prison sentence for
fraud and corruption?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, what we can say here
is that we had 2 194 cases in total. Nine hundred of those cases went to
court; 735 were convictions. We are in the process of getting government’s
money back to our coffers. We are doing our work. We don’t want to see
people in prison; we want to see people being rehabilitated, hon Dennis
Bloem. I thank you.

 Measures to assess whether and to ensure that occupants of state-subsidised
                    houses are the intended beneficiaries

26.   Mr M P Sibande (ANC) asked the Minister of Human Settlements:

      Whether his department has undertaken an assessment of whether the
      persons that are currently living in state-subsidised houses are the
      intended beneficiaries; if not, why not; if so, (a) what is the extent
      of the problem, (b) what measures are in place to curb the problem and
      (c) how many public servants have been identified so far?
                                   CO94E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chair, what we are doing right
now is to take measures to regulate the situation on the ground. The
problem with this question is that it is similar to the questions I have
just answered. That is why I am stuck.

But let me answer it as follows: The process of improving the beneficiary
management system is continuing. We curb corruption, particularly
corruption by beneficiaries who are getting subsidies from government. We
don’t want people to get a subsidy more than once. So, we developed a
system where it can easily be detected if a person has already benefited in
terms of a subsidy.

We are working closely with other departments. We are checking title deeds
with the Deeds Office; we are checking information with Home Affairs; and
we are also checking information in terms of the government system, as I
have already said, so that we can easily detect whether a person has
already benefited from the government subsidy.

I have already spoken about officials. This is almost the same question. I
thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chair, I would just like to ask the Deputy Minister if
the system also works across provincial boundaries. This is because in the
past a person would apply for a subsidy, get a house, then rent it out,
move over and apply again. Is this now in working order? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chair, that is exactly what we
are doing. We are trying to have a system like a smart card in place, where
one will just press it and then we will know that they accessed a subsidy
in the Western Cape and that they are now moving to Mpumalanga. At the
moment, we are working hand in hand with other departments to consolidate
this system so that it is linked to one government system. We don’t want to
have too many systems because then we won’t be able to detect if a person
has already benefited from the subsidy.

This is with the exception of those who are in government, because with
Persal we can see if a person does get funding from government. In terms of
title deeds, we can see if a person has a house. But with other systems
people cannot be detected. A consolidated one, which speaks to the systems
of Welfare and Education, is a better one. That is what we are busy with.
As soon as we are ready with the system, we will roll it out officially.

Mr M P SIBANDE: Deputy Chair, Deputy Minister, I want to find out whether
the findings with regard to the assessment on the occupation of these
houses will be published.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chair, we will definitely publish
the findings of the assessment on the occupation of these houses because we
must make it public. As soon as we find out exactly what the extent of the
situation is, we will make it public. We will make sure that it is
accessible to all. You will be able to see it, hon member.

      Engagement with provinces and municipalities in the selection of
                   beneficiaries for new housing projects

27.   Mr R J Tau (ANC) asked the Minister of Human Settlements:
      Whether his department engages provinces and municipalities in
      establishing a strategic mechanism to strike a balance between
      informal settlement dwellers and backyard dwellers in the selection of
      beneficiaries for the new housing projects; if not, why not; if so,
      what are the relevant details?          CO95E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, as part of the human
settlement strategy we urge provinces and municipalities to ensure that
when they do housing allocation for new projects they should also take into
account the people who live in informal settlements and the backyard
dwellers. That would help them not to allocate houses to people who are in
informal settlements only and ignore the backyard dwellers. If they did so,
it would mean they were telling people that they must go and occupy land
before they are given a house.

So, as we are getting on with the N2 gateway project, which is the pilot
project, there are 70% of people who are already staying there, and 30%
will be allocated to the backyard dwellers. This would help those people to
benefit from projects that government is giving to our people so that we
don’t have a separate system.

We encourage provinces - and this is just a policy now that we are still
piloting - to have this kind of mind-set so that all the new projects
benefit both the backyard dwellers and those who are in the informal
settlements.
Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I would like to recap what the Deputy
Minister has said. She said that the balance of the housing will be as
follows: 30% to the backyard dwellers and 70% to the informal settlements.
This is what I find a little bit disconcerting because in the past there
weren’t as many informal settlements as there are now, and people who lived
in other people’s backyards were always there and waiting patiently for
housing. They have been on the housing list for a long time.

The housing list goal post has been moved repeatedly, like they are doing
now with a new list. So, I am a little bit worried that the people in the
backyards are being neglected. And the fact that the Minister is worried
about the informal settlements coming in and that they have to first invade
land before they get attention is exactly what is being encouraged here
with this 70% and 30%.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, I think the hon
member should realise that it is important that she understands what I am
saying. I am saying that even the 70:30 ratio is not a policy, but we are
mooting something to that effect. I would agree with you because we would
have preferred that the allocation is 50:50 and not 70:30. I definitely
would have liked that kind of situation. At present, the municipalities in
terms of their criteria don’t even have the 70:30 ratio.

So, the whole thing is still under discussion, and the government is urging
municipalities to make sure, as they allocate new projects, that even the
backyard dwellers benefit from these projects, as was the case earlier on
with the project linked subsidy, where we removed the link in order to
allow flexibility for the backyard dwellers.

Government is doing its best to accommodate backyard dwellers. At the
moment we need buy-in from municipalities and provinces. We are doing our
best as government, but we need the partnership of the three spheres so
that we all speak with one voice on this matter, but I agree with the hon
members.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, there is another problem in that you give a
person a house but then after a week you see another umkhukhu [shack] next
door to that house. How are you going to deal with the problem of being
under the impression that you have given a person a house, and the next
thing there is an umkhukhu [shack] next door?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, that is what we are
talking about. We are saying that people must have ownership of the
property that we give to them. It is important that the tenants should be
proud of the little that government does, so that we don’t make squatter
camps out of the very same houses that we provide for the people. That
definitely needs partnership in communities. It needs strict monitoring in
terms of street committees. It needs NGOs, Cope and them, to do their jobs
because there is no way that they can pass the buck to government.

It is our responsibility as communities to see to that. The eyes and ears
of government are the people on the ground. We as the ANC government are
providing our people. However, let us please hold hands together and make
our people own these processes so that they can also be proud of it, and
when they see somebody putting an umkhukhu [shack] there they must go and
demolish it. Government cannot monitor all such actions; it is the
committees that should monitor that.

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, we are actually sitting with a very
difficult situation and have complete sympathy with what the Minister is
saying. In Coega, the agreement is that the title deed states that one is
not allowed to sell the house within a period of nine years or to have any
temporary shelter erected on ones premises.

The problem is then that the duty of the municipalities is to make sure
that their law enforcement agencies enforce those regulations. At the
moment they don’t do that. So, it remains an official thing and not of the
communities, because the communities are actually overburdened and the
current climatic conditions are contributing to it.

Furthermore, we are sitting with all these backyard dwellers and they are a
health problem. So, officials must do their jobs.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, I agree with the hon
member that officials must do their jobs, but who is doing the monitoring?
We must monitor the municipalities and make the authorities work. It is not
the municipalities’ issue, it is ours as Members of Parliament and as
members of communities.

It is also not a question of saying that after a period of nine years you
may sell the house. We say you must give that house back to government, so
that government can give it to another person. Because if we say sell the
house and end there, then the whole backlog is not going to be addressed.

If people have enough after eight or nine years, the first buyer should be
government so that at the end of the day we put the next person on the list
into that house. In fact, we want to do away with the sale of houses so
that, at the end of the day, if you want to sell the house you don’t
deserve to get money from government in any case.

Ours is to check the selling of houses. We are busy investigating that, and
we are going to blacklist anybody who is defrauding government, whether you
are a beneficiary or a contractor. Whoever defrauds government, the
committees must know who those people are. Thank you.

The DEPUY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, may I please address
you? Most of us in the executive are having problems with the time. Some of
us have booked flights and have tried to change them but were not
successful in getting later flights.

As a result of our executive commitments we were wondering whether we could
approach the Chair and humbly request that those questions still remaining
stand over or, alternatively, that we provide written replies to those
questions.

Either of the two that suits the hon Chair as well as the House would be
acceptable to us. So, we would like to make an application of that nature.
It’s not only myself who is affected by this, it’s several of us. We do
understand that it is as a result of the fact that the Deputy President’s
questions had to be brought in today. Our calculations were based on the
normal three hours, and it is well beyond that, Chairperson. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, all it needs is for us in the
House to agree and have consensus on the matter. I think we have to
consider what the Deputy Minister had said - that we had a longer session
with the Deputy President and, of course, this day was initially for them
as a cluster.

Mr T HARRIS: Chairperson, from the position of the Western Cape, I would
like to support the Deputy Minister in his proposal and suggest that the
questions go for written reply.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Okay, that concludes the questions.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

     WEEK OF 21 TO 25 SEPTEMBER 2009 TO FORM PART OF CONSTITUENCY PERIOD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you very much, Chairperson and hon
members. At least the Deputy Ministers and the Ministers who are here can
see that in the NCOP we don’t vote, we just reach consensus. [Laughter.]

Chairperson, I wish to move:


    That the Council resolves that the week of 21-25 September 2009 forms
    part of the constituency period and Members of the National Council of
    Provinces be allowed to undertake their constituency work until 2
    October 2009, as resolved by the Joint Programming Committee on 28 May
    2009.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, since there is no
speaker’s list on this particular subject, I shall now put the question.
The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with
in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all permanent delegates and leaders of provincial delegations are in the
House. Are all the delegation heads present?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): In accordance with Rule 71, I shall
first allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if
they so wish. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall
do this in alphabetical order per province.

Delegation heads must please insert their cards before I call the vote.
Please press button number one to confirm your presence. Have you inserted
your cards in the first place? Those whose cards are not functioning, can
you raise your hands so that the procedural staff can assist you with doing
it manually? If your card is not functioning just raise your hand so that
you get assistance with manual voting. As I call each province, please
press the button that is relevant to your confirmation, abstinence or
rejection. Have all provinces voted? If anyone has not done so can you
raise your hand? I can see that we all confirm that we have voted. I will,
therefore, declare the voting closed and request the procedural staff to
assist me with the results.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Kwazulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, Western Cape.

ABSTAIN: North West.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

  SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1) IN RESPECT OF TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL AND
                     TAXATION LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move:

    That Rule 239(1), which provides inter alia that the consideration of  a
    Bill may not commence before at least three working  days  have  elapsed
    since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for  the  purposes
    of consideration of the Taxation Laws  Amendment  Bill  [B  10  –  2009]
    (National Assembly – sec 77) and the Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill
    [B 11 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75)  on  Thursday,  17  September
    2009.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Order! I shall now put the question in
respect of the motion. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their province’s votes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please insert their
cards.

Before I call the vote, please press button number one to confirm your
presence. There should be a light flashing. If not, the Chamber staff will
assist you.

We now come to the voting.  When I call the name of the province the
delegation heads will vote by pressing button number four for those who
vote in favour, button number two for those who vote against, and button
number three for those who abstain.

The delegation heads know by now how the system works. I don’t need to
remind them to press button four to confirm, and so forth. We all
understand now.

I now call upon the provinces: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-
Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Have all the provinces voted? In case there is any member who has
mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, he or she is given an opportunity
to press the correct button.

Hon members, provinces have voted in favour. I therefore declare the motion
agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                     TAXATION LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bills and Reports thereon)

Mr C J DE BEER: Hon Chairperson, hon members, thank you for this
opportunity. Our Constitution forms a sound basis for the way we must
conduct government business and must account to our people - a Constitution
that has been built over 15 years to improve the lives of our people. As
legislators we, at all times and on an ongoing basis, review current and
past legislation to improve the lives of our people, specifically our poor
people. We must at all times act in the interests of our people, and we
have to reduce the divide between the rich and the poor and socioeconomic
inequalities.

I present the report of the Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations
with regard to the proposed changes contained in the Taxation Laws
Amendment Bills, 2009. The objective of the 2009 Taxation Laws Amendment
Bills is to give expression and meaning to the tax measures and other
aspects of the fiscal framework meant to provide and consolidate the strong
base for our economy to remain resilient in the current global financial
downturn. The Bill is therefore in line with the objectives of streamlining
fragmented taxation laws inherited pre-1994.

The Bill seeks to enhance and protect the competitive edge of the South
African economy in the global economic environment and to reduce leakages
in the system; to maximise revenue collection locally and internationally
from companies and individuals trading or doing business with South Africa;
and to fast-track economic integration and stimulate growth.

In deliberating on the Bill the select committee considered the following
challenges: how the proposed amendments will improve or benefit the lives
of ordinary people, our citizens; the impact of the current global
financial downturn and its impact on job creation or job losses; the
implications and impact of revenue deficit under collections; and the
overall implications of all these challenges in terms of the priorities of
government.

The Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations did not have time to
conduct public hearings as we received a briefing by Treasury on 16
September 2009, and I had to report to this House on 17 September 2009. I
am of the view that we must hear the voice of our ordinary people and small
business, and Parliament and the select committee must devise means and
mechanisms to make this matter and other related issues more interesting to
society as a whole.

The select committee is of the view that the overall thrust of the proposed
amendments does complement the stimulus package government has put forward
in response to the national framework agreement. We must also commend the
pre-emptive and proactive steps the former Minister of Finance, hon Trevor
Manuel, took in February 2009 when he made personal income tax adjustments
that resulted in R13,5 billion tax relief for individuals.

Most importantly, the new treatment of lump sum withdrawals of retirement
savings must not serve as a perverse incentive for workers to withdraw
their much-needed retirement savings for the future. The draft Bill will
also play a serious and mitigating role in the short term to assist
families in rearranging their lives.

It is also the responsibility of all role-players to act in a manner that
suggests that we are all appreciative of these challenges. We call on
employers not to go the easy way and resort to retrenchments. Throwing
workers out on the street will not solve all company problems. You actually
create a social problem. For example, employers can have shorter working
weeks and have shorter shifts and look into cost-cutting initiatives other
than retrenchments.

With regard to the film industry, we agree that further consultation is
needed. We then recommend to this House that the proposed Taxation Laws
Amendment Bill of 2009 be supported by the House. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Taxation Laws Amendment Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution.

Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75
of the Constitution.

          POINT OF ORDER RAISED BY MR A WATSON ON 16 SEPTEMBER 2009
                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Order! Hon members will remember that
yesterday I promised I was going to give a ruling on a matter that was
raised yesterday. Therefore I wish to present the following ruling. I would
like to bring to the attention of members the allegation that was made by
Mr Watson against the hon Gamede during our plenary. The hon member asked
that a ruling be made on the statement that was made by the hon Gamede.

Members will recall that I indicated that since I did not hear what the
statement was about, I would peruse Hansard and make a ruling. After
perusal of the Hansard records, I couldn’t find any statement by the hon
Gamede. However, I would like to request that members desist from engaging
in discussions during debates not related to the subject matter of the
debate as this makes it very difficult for the presiding officer to give a
ruling on matters that he or she cannot hear. So, please, that is the
ruling – that we desist from doing that.

The Council adjourned at 17:35.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 17 September
         2009:


          a) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2009] (National Assembly
             – sec 77).


          b) Taxation  Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Amendment Bill [B
             12 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
       a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
          of the People’s Republic of China concerning Mutual Legal
          Assistance in Criminal Matters, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
          of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
          of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Hong
          Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of
          China concerning Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters


       c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
          of the People’s Republic of China concerning Surrender of
          Fugitive Offenders, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
          Constitution, 1996.


       d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
          the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Hong Kong
          Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China
          concerning Surrender of Fugitive Offenders.


       e) Report on the upliftment of the provisional suspension of a
          magistrate: Ms A Bacharam, an additional magistrate at
          Scottburgh.


       f) Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mrs N E
          Ndamase, an additional magistrate at Pretoria in terms of section
          13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


       g) Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr C M
          Dumani, a magistrate at Graaff Reinet in terms of section
          13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


       h) Proclamation No R.50 published in Government Gazette No 32494
          dated 14 August 2009: Commencement of sections 8 to 10 of the
          Judicial Matters Second Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 55 of 2003).


       i) Government Notice No R.841 published in Government Gazette No
          32494 dated 14 August 2009: Scale of fees payable in respect of
          matters referred to in section 80 of the Attorneys Act, 1979 (Act
          No 53 of 1079).


2.    The Minister of Human Settlements

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Servcon Housing
        Solutions (Proprietary) Limited for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.

3.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Alexkor Limited for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


4.    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of Land
        Affairs for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 27
        for 2008-2009.


5.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic
        Media Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for 2008-2009, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.



