---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 03 June 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2009-06-03
---

WEDNESDAY, 3 JUNE 2009
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 11:00.

The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces took the Chair. The Speaker of the National Assembly
requested members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                          CALLING OF JOINT SITTING

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker of the National Assembly announced that the President had
called a Joint Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces in terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic
of South Africa, 1996, read with Joint Rule 7(1)(a), in order to deliver
his state of the nation address to Parliament.

                    ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces; Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly and
Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP; Deputy President of the Republic, Kgalema
Motlanthe; former President of the Republic, Thabo Mbeki; our icon, the
first President of a democratic South Africa, Isithwalandwe Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela ... [Applause.] ... former Deputy Presidents;
distinguished Premiers and Speakers of our provinces; esteemed members of
the judiciary; Chairperson of Salga; mayors and leaders in our system of
local government; Chairperson of the National House of Traditional Leaders
and our honoured traditional leaders; heads of Chapter 9 institutions;
Governor of the Reserve Bank; religious leaders; directors-general and
other leaders of the Public Service; President of the Pan-African
Parliament, the hon Idriss Ndele Moussa; Your Excellencies Ambassadors and
High Commissioners; distinguished guests, comrades and friends; fellow
South Africans, dumelang, abusheni, molweni! [Good day.]

On 22 April 2009, millions of South Africans went out to cast their votes.
They exercised their democratic right, spurred on by the desire to change
their lives for the better. In their overwhelming numbers, they confirmed
that, working together, we can do more to fight poverty and build a better
life for all. They were encouraged by the vision of an inclusive society, a
South Africa that belongs to all, a nation united in its diversity, a
people working together for the greater good of all. We are humbled by this
decisive electoral mandate given by the people of our country, who have
chosen their government in a most convincing manner.

Hon members, our nation has, over the past few years, gone through very
challenging times. It is thanks to the fact that we have a strong and fully
functional constitutional democratic system, with solid institutions, that
we overcame these difficulties smoothly and with dignity.

Today’s occasion is a celebration of what makes this democracy work. It is
also a celebration of our culture of continuity and collective
responsibility.

This is evidenced by the presence here of our icon, Madiba, who laid the
foundation for the country’s achievements, and that of former President
Thabo Mbeki, who built on that foundation. [Applause.] The continuity is
also evident in the fact that former President Kgalema Motlanthe is now the
Deputy President of the Republic, after a seamless transition, making us a
unique country in many respects. [Applause.]

Fellow South Africans, as you would be aware, the fight against poverty
remains the cornerstone of our government’s focus. On 9 May, during the
Presidential Inauguration, we made a commitment to our people and the world
that:

  For as long as there are South Africans who die from preventable disease;
  for as long as there are workers who struggle to feed their families ...


    ... and who battle to find work ...


  For as long as there are communities without clean water, decent shelter
  or proper sanitation; for as long as there are rural dwellers unable to
  make a decent living from the land on which they live; for as long as
  there are women who are subjected to discrimination, exploitation or
  abuse; for as long as there are children who do not have the means nor the
  opportunity to receive a decent education; we shall not rest, and we dare
  not falter ...


...in our drive to eradicate poverty.

[Applause.]

In pursuit of these goals, our government has identified 10 priority areas,
which form part of our Medium-Term Strategic Framework for 2009 to 2014.
The programme is being introduced under difficult economic conditions. The
past year has seen the global economy enter a period of crisis
unprecedented in recent decades. While South Africa has not been affected
to the extent that a number of other countries have, its effects are now
being clearly seen in our economy. We have entered a recession. It is more
important now than ever that we work in partnership on a common programme
to respond to this crisis.

We take as our starting point the framework for South Africa's response to
the international economic crisis, concluded by government, labour and
business in February this year. We must act now to minimise the impact of
this downturn on those most vulnerable.

We have begun to act to reduce job losses. There is an agreement in
principle between government and social partners on the introduction of a
training layoff. Workers who would ordinarily be facing retrenchment due to
economic difficulty would be kept in employment for a period of time and re-
skilled.

Discussion on the practical detail is continuing between the social
partners and the institutions that would be affected by such an initiative,
including the Sector Education and Training Authorities.

We will support the work of the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and
Arbitration to assist employers and workers to find alternatives to
retrenchments through the relevant legal process. To date, CCMA
commissioners have saved over 4 000 jobs through facilitation processes ...
[Applause.] ... and provided ongoing advice and support to retrenched
workers.
The Industrial Development Corporation has developed a programme to fund
companies in distress. We will also ensure that government buys more goods
and services locally, without undermining our global competitiveness or
pushing up costs beyond acceptable levels. [Applause.]

Building on the successes of our industrial policy interventions, a scaled-
up Industrial Policy Action Plan will be developed. The lead sectors
already identified are automobile, chemicals, metal fabrication, tourism,
clothing and textiles, as well as forestry. In addition, attention will
also be paid to services, light manufacturing and construction, amongst
others, in the quest to create decent jobs.

As part of Phase 2 of the Expanded Public Works Programme, the Community
Work Programme will be fast-tracked. It offers a minimum level of regular
work to those who need it, while improving the quality of life in
communities.

The economic downturn will affect the pace at which our country is able to
address the social and economic challenges it faces. But it will not alter
the direction of our development. [Applause.] The policy priorities that we
have identified, and the plans that we placed before the electorate, remain
at the core of the programme of this government. [Applause.]

Laat ons mekaar se hande vat ... [Applous.] ... en saam oplossings vind in
die gees van ’n Suid-Afrikaanse gemeenskap. [Applous.] Die tyd het gekom om
harder te werk. [Applous.] Ons regering gaan vorentoe kyk, nie agtertoe
nie! [Applous.](Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Let us take one another’s hands ... [Applause.] ...  and together find
solutions in the spirit of a South African community. [Applause.] The time
has come to work harder. Our government is going to look forward, not
backward! [Applause.]]


The steps outlined in our Medium-Term Strategic Framework had to take into
account the constraints posed by the economic crisis. The downturn should
not cause us to change these plans. Instead, it should urge us to implement
these with speed and determination.

The framework focuses on 10 priorities. We make a commitment that, working
together, we will speed up economic growth and transform the economy to
create decent work and sustainable livelihoods. We will introduce a massive
programme to build economic and social infrastructure. We will develop and
implement a comprehensive rural development strategy linked to land and
agrarian reform and food security.

We will strengthen the skills and human resource base. We will improve the
health profile of all South Africans. Working together with all South
Africans, we will intensify the fight against crime and corruption. We will
build cohesive, caring and sustainable communities.

Working with Africa and the rest of the world, we will pursue African
advancement and enhanced international co-operation. We will ensure
sustainable resource management and use. And, working with the people and
supported by our public servants, we will build a developmental state,
improve public services and strengthen democratic institutions.

It is my pleasure and honour to highlight the key elements of our programme
of action. The creation of decent work will be at the centre of our
economic policies and will influence our investment attraction and job-
creation initiatives. [Applause.]

In line with our undertakings, we have to forge ahead to promote a more
inclusive economy. In this regard, we will utilise state levers such as
procurement, licensing and financial support to assist small and medium
enterprises, as well as to promote the implementation of broad-based black
economic empowerment and affirmative action policies. [Applause.]

The implementation will be done in recognition of the need to correct the
imbalances of the past. The transformation will be undertaken in support of
women, youth and people with disabilities.

We will reduce the regulatory burden on small businesses. The matter of
being stifled by regulations has been raised by the sector several times.
[Applause.]

In another intervention to create an enabling environment for investment,
government will move towards a single integrated business registration
system. This will improve customer service and reduce the cost of doing
business in South Africa. [Applause.]

Another important element of our drive to create job opportunities is the
Expanded Public Works Programme. The initial target of one million jobs has
been achieved. The second phase of the programme aims to create about four
million job opportunities by 2014. [Applause.] Between now and December
2009, we plan to create about 500 000 job opportunities.

While creating an environment for jobs and business opportunities,
government recognises that some citizens will continue to require state
social assistance. Social grants remain the most effective form of poverty
alleviation. As of 31 March 2009, more than 13 million people receive
social grants, more than 8 million of whom are children.

We are mindful of the need to link the social grants to jobs or economic
activity in order to encourage self-reliance amongst the able-bodied.
[Applause.] Most importantly, during this period, neighbours should assist
each other.

Jwale ke nako ya kopano. [Mahofi.] A re thusaneng jwaloka baahisane. A re
dumellaneng hore ho se be le ngwana ya tla robala ka tlala ... [Mahofi.]
... hobane batswadi ba hae ba feletswe ke mosebetsi. Ha re ka kopana, ra
sebetsa kaofela, re ka etsa ho feta moo re leng teng kajeno. A re
tshwaraneng re kopane. E. [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraph
follows.)

[Now is the time for unity. [Applause.] Let us help one another like
neighbours. Let us agree that no child will go to bed hungry ...
[Applause.] ... because the parents are unemployed. If we unite and all
work together, we can do more than we are doing now. [Applause.]]

Distinguished guests, as part of the second strategic priority, we will
continue with our programme to build economic and social infrastructure.
The newly formed Infrastructure Development Cluster of government will
ensure that the planned R787 billion on infrastructure expenditure, as
provided for in the Budget earlier this year, is properly planned for and
executed. This funding includes allocations for the school-building
programme; public transport, including the Bus Rapid Transit system;
housing; water; and sanitation. [Applause.]

One of the biggest infrastructure investment projects is the 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup. We have, as government and the nation at large, pledged
that the World Cup will leave a proud legacy from which our children and
our communities will benefit for many years to come. We are on track to
meet all our obligations and are determined to give the world the best
World Cup ever. [Applause.] We are putting all systems in place to make the
Confederations Cup, which kicks off on 14 June, a huge success. [Applause.]

In April this year, I gave an undertaking to the taxi industry leadership
to defer negotiations relating to the operation of the bus integrated rapid
transit system until after the elections. We undertook to allow more time
to deal properly with the concerns of the industry.  On 11 June the
Minister of Transport will resume discussions with the industry.
[Applause.] The meeting will kick-start a series of engagements with the
stakeholders affected by the BRT system. We are confident that unresolved
issues will be dealt with to the satisfaction of all parties. This will
include the important issue of how all stakeholders will benefit from the
initiative.

Hon members, another development which should boost the World Cup is the
roll-out of the digital broadcasting infrastructure and signal distribution
transmitters all over the country. Overall, we will ensure that the cost of
telecommunications is reduced through the projects under way to expand
broadband capacity.

We have to ensure that we do not leave rural areas behind in these exciting
developments. [Applause.] When it comes to those who cannot use the digital
system, people must determine what can be improvised. This is because they
must also participate in these exciting times.

As part of social infrastructure development, we will provide suitably
located and affordable housing and decent human settlements. We will
proceed from the understanding that human settlement is not just about
building houses. It is about transforming our cities and towns, and about
building cohesive, sustainable and caring communities with closer access to
work and social amenities, including sporting and recreational facilities.
[Applause.] In this spirit, we will work with Parliament to speed up the
processing of the Land Use Management Bill.

Working together with our people in the rural areas, we will ensure a
comprehensive rural development strategy, linked to land and agrarian
reform and food security, as our third priority.

I would like to use this opportunity to extend our condolences to the
family of the former Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Dirk du Toit, who
passed away this week. His contribution will be sorely missed.

Abantu basemakhaya nabo banelungelo lokuba nogesi namanzi, izindlu
zangasese ezigijima amanzi, imigwaqo, izindawo zokuqeda isizungu
nezemidlalo kanye nezindawo zokuthenga eziphucukile njengezasemadolobheni.

Nabo banelungelo lokusizwa kwezolimo ukuze bazitshalele imifino nokunye,
bafuye nemfuyo bakwazi ukuziphilisa.

Sizimisele ukuwuqala lomkhankaso wokwakha izingqalasizinda ezindaweni
zasemakhaya. Uma sibambisene nezakhamizi, amakhosi, amakhansela nezinduna
siyokwazi ukuwusheshisa lo msebenzi. [Ihlombe.]

Sicela abahlala ezindaweni zasemakhaya baqale balungiselele ukutshela
uhulumeni ukuthi yiziphi izinto abazidinga ngokushesha. Uma sisebenza
ngokubambisana sizokwenza okuningi okulezi nhlelo. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[People in the rural areas also have the right to have electricity and
water, sanitation, roads, entertainment and sporting facilities as well as
decent shopping centres like those in urban areas.

They also have the right to be assisted in agriculture so that they can
cultivate vegetables and other things, and keep livestock so that they can
provide for themselves.

We want to start this campaign of building infrastructure in the rural
areas. If we work together with the communities, chiefs, councillors and
headmen we will be able to speed up this task. [Applause.]

We are asking people living in the rural areas to start preparing
themselves to tell government what they need urgently. If we work together,
we can do more with regard to these programmes.]

Hon Speaker and Chairperson, while having drawn the necessary lessons from
earlier rural development initiatives, we have chosen the Greater Giyani
Local Municipality in Limpopo as the first of the pilot projects for the
campaign. [Applause.] Out of these projects will emerge lessons for the
whole country.

In addition, we will work on the targeted renewal of rural towns, through
grants such as the Neighbourhood Development Partnership Grant programme.
In this way, areas around the towns will benefit from the economic boost.
With all these interventions, we are poised to change the face of rural
areas in our country.

Compatriots, education will be a key priority for the next five years. We
want our teachers, learners and parents to work with government to turn our
schools into thriving centres of excellence. The Early Childhood
Development programme will be stepped up, with the aim of ensuring
universal access to Grade R and doubling the number of 0-to-4-year-old
children by 2014.

We reiterate our non-negotiables. Teachers should be in school, in class,
on time, teaching, with no neglect of duty and no abuse of pupils!
[Applause.] The children should be in class, on time, learning, being
respectful of their teachers and each other, and doing their homework.
[Applause.]

To improve school management, formal training will be a precondition for
promoting teachers to become principals or heads of department. I will meet
school principals to share our vision on the revival of our education
system. [Applause.]

Fellow South Africans, we will increase our efforts to encourage all pupils
to complete their secondary education. The target is to increase enrolment
rates in secondary schools to 95% by 2014. We are also looking at
innovative measures to bring back into the system pupils who dropped out of
school, and to provide support. [Applause.]

Hon members, we are very concerned about reports of teachers who sexually
harass and abuse children, particularly girls. We will ensure that the
Guidelines on Sexual Harassment and Violence in Public Schools are widely
disseminated, and that learners and teachers are familiar with and observe
them. We will take very serious, and very decisive, action against any
teachers who abuse their authority and power by entering into sexual
relationships with children. [Applause.]

To promote lifelong learning, the Adult Basic Education and Training Kha Ri
Gude programme will be intensified.

Compatriots, hon members, we have to ensure that training and skills
development initiatives in the country respond to the requirements of the
economy. The Further Education and Training sector with its 50 colleges and
160 campuses nationally will be the primary site for skills development
training. We will improve access to higher education for children from poor
families and ensure a sustainable funding structure for universities.

Fellow South Africans, we are seriously concerned about the deterioration
of the quality of health care, aggravated by the steady increase in the
burden of disease in the past decade and a half.

We have set ourselves the goals of further reducing inequalities in health
care provision, boosting human resource capacity, revitalising hospitals
and clinics and stepping up the fight against the scourge of HIV and Aids,
TB and other diseases.

We must work together to improve the implementation of the Operational Plan
for Comprehensive HIV and Aids Care, Management and Treatment so as to
reduce the rate of new HIV infections by 50% by the year 2011. We also want
to reach 80% of those in need of ARV treatment also by 2011. [Applause.]

We will introduce a National Health Insurance, NHI, scheme in a phased and
incremental manner. In order to initiate the NHI, the urgent rehabilitation
of public hospitals will be undertaken through public-private partnerships.

We are also paying urgent attention to the issues of remuneration of health
professionals to remove uncertainty in our health services. [Applause.]
Working together, let us do more to promote quality health care, in line
with the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, to halve poverty by
2014.

Fellow citizens, together we must do more to fight crime. Our aim is to
establish a transformed, integrated, modernised, properly resourced and
well-managed criminal justice system. [Applause.]

It is also critically important to improve the efficiency of the courts and
the performance of prosecutors, and to enhance detective, forensic and
intelligence services. This work has started in earnest, and it will be
undertaken with new energy and vigour.

One of the immediate tasks is to ensure that we increase the number of
prosecutors and Legal Aid Board personnel. We will do the same with police
detectives.

We changed the name of the relevant Ministry from “Safety and Security” to
“Police” to emphasise that we want real operational energy in police work.
[Applause.] This will contribute to the reduction of serious and violent
crimes by the set target of 7% to 10% per annum. The most serious attention
will also be given to combating organised crime, as well as crimes against
women and children.

Hon Speaker and Chairperson, while appreciating the investment of the
private sector in the security industry, we will improve the regulation of
this industry.

Amongst other key initiatives, we will start the process of setting up a
Border Management Agency; we shall intensify our efforts against cybercrime
and identity theft; and we shall improve systems in our jails to reduce
repeat offending.

Compatriots, I wish to underline our support for the continued
transformation of the judiciary. The transformation should address key
issues such as the enhancement of judicial independence, entrenching
internal systems of judicial accountability, as well as ensuring full
access to justice by all. [Applause.]

The success of the democratic system as a whole depends on good relations
with mutual respect and a spirit of partnership among the executive, the
legislature and the judiciary. This is very important for our
constitutional democracy.

Hon Speaker and Chairperson of the NCOP, we have repeatedly stated our
commitment to fighting corruption in the Public Service. We will pay
particular attention to combating corruption and fraud in procurement and
tender processes ... [Applause.] ... in applications for drivers’ licences,
social grants, IDs, and in regard to theft of police case dockets.

Let me emphasise that we all have a role to play in this war against crime,
all of us. We must actively participate in community policing forums. We
must stop buying stolen goods, which encourages crime. We must report crime
and assist the police with information to catch wrongdoers. In this way, we
will move forward towards a crime-free society.

Hon members, since 1994 we have sought to create a united, cohesive society
out of our fragmented past. We are called upon to continue this mission of
promoting unity in diversity and to develop a shared value system, based on
the spirit of community solidarity and a caring society.

Our shared value system should encourage us to become active citizens in
the renewal of our country. We must build a common national identity and
patriotism.

We must develop a common attachment to our country, our Constitution and
the national symbols. In this spirit, we will promote the national anthem
and our country’s flag and all other national symbols.

Our children, from an early age, must be taught to pay allegiance to the
Constitution and the national symbols, and know what it means to be South
African citizens. [Applause.]

We will ensure a common national approach to the changing of geographic and
place names. This must provide an opportunity to involve all South Africans
in forging an inclusive national identity, to deepen our understanding of
our history and heritage.

Sport is a powerful nation-building tool. Working together, we must support
all our national teams, from Bafana Bafana to the Proteas and the
Springboks; from Banyana Banyana to the Paralympians. Our teams can only do
well with our support.

Allow me to use this opportunity to congratulate our national teams on
their performances in the past week, indeed on pulling off a hat trick. The
country’s women’s netball team has done us proud by winning the Tri-Nations
Netball Challenge. [Applause.] Congratulations to the Sevens Springboks who
have become the IRB Sevens World Series champions ... [Applause.] ... and
not forgetting the Blue Bulls ... [Applause.] ... who have won the Super 14
finals in a convincing fashion! [Applause.] We take this opportunity to
wish the Springboks well in the upcoming series against the British and
Irish Lions.

It is clear that we need to invest on a large scale in sports development.
[Applause.] We will speed up the revival of school sport and ensure that it
forms part of the school curriculum. [Applause.] In addition, we will
ensure that the provision of sporting facilities in poorer communities
receives priority.

Hon Speaker and Chairperson, we have committed ourselves over the years to
contribute to building a better Africa and a better world.

The main goal of government for the medium term is to ensure that our
foreign relations contribute to the creation of an environment conducive to
sustainable economic growth and development. To this effect, we will
continue to prioritise the African continent by strengthening the African
Union and its structures, and give special focus to the implementation of
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development.

Equally important, and closer to home, is the strengthening of regional
integration, with particular emphasis on improving the political and
economic integration of SADC, towards the AU goal of a Union government. We
will establish a South African Development Partnership Agency to promote
developmental partnerships with other countries on the continent.

South Africa will continue to assist in the reconstruction and development
of the African continent, especially in post-conflict situations. We will
continue to encourage a peaceful and sustainable settlement to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict based on the two- state solution. [Applause.]

We will support the peace efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations on the African continent, including in the Saharawi Arab Republic
and Darfur in Sudan.

As the Chairperson of SADC and as facilitator, we will participate in
promoting inclusive government until free and fair elections are held in
Zimbabwe. [Applause.] The plight of the Zimbabwean people has had a
negative impact on the SADC region, especially South Africa. We call upon
all peace-loving countries in the world to support the inclusive government
to achieve economic recovery.

We will support efforts of the SADC region to resolve the situation in
Madagascar.

Allow me, distinguished guests, to pay tribute to the SA National Defence
Force for their sterling role in peace-building on the continent.

Through continental and regional bodies, we will work towards the
entrenchment of democracy and respect for human rights on the African
continent.

We will contribute to the strengthening of South-South relations and pursue
mutually beneficial agreements with key countries of the South. We will
continue to enhance relations with the developed North, including the G8,
and our strategic partnership with the European Union. We will continue to
play an active role in ensuring the conclusion of the WTO Doha Development
Round of Negotiations.

Hon Speaker and Chairperson, South Africa, being a dry country, requires
urgent action to mitigate adverse environmental changes and to ensure the
provision of water to citizens. Amongst various programmes, we will
implement the Water for Growth and Development strategy, which will
strengthen water management. We will continue to improve our energy
efficiency and reliance on renewable energy.

Hon members, a developmental state requires the improvement of public
services and strengthening of democratic institutions. We have established
two Ministries in The Presidency to strengthen strategic planning as well
as performance monitoring and evaluation.

To ensure delivery on our commitments, we will hold Cabinet Ministers
accountable through performance instruments, using established targets and
output measures, starting in July. [Applause.]

We will also involve state-owned enterprises and development finance
institutions in the government planning processes and improve the
monitoring and evaluation of their performance.

Hon members, fellow South Africans, to ensure that all three spheres -
local, provincial and national - improve service delivery, we will speed up
the establishment of a single Public Service. [Applause.] This
administration will insist on putting people first in service delivery. We
will ensure courteous and efficient service from front-counter staff in the
provision of services in all government departments.

In this era of renewal, we will move towards a more interactive government.
To lead by example, work has begun on the establishment of a public liaison
capacity in The Presidency. In addition to receiving letters and e-mails
from the public, we will also establish a hotline for easier access.
[Applause.] Staff will handle each public enquiry as if it were the only
one ... [Applause.] ... following it through all the channels until it
receives the attention it deserves.

Hon Speaker and Chairperson, the National Youth Development Agency, formed
through the merger of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth
Commission, will be launched on June 16 in Ekurhuleni. [Applause.] These
institutions are being merged to enhance service and development
opportunities provided to the youth.

The agency will link up unemployed young graduates with economic
opportunities, strengthen efforts to expand the National Youth Service
Programme and support young entrepreneurs.

Speaker and Chairperson, distinguished guests, next month our beloved
Madiba will turn 91. [Applause.] People all over the world still continue
to clamour for his presence and for him to address their crises. His values
and his dedication to the service of humanity are shining examples in
today’s troubled world. [Applause.]

An international campaign has been initiated by the Nelson Mandela
Foundation and related organisations, called Mandela Day, which sums up
what Tata stands for. Mandela Day will be celebrated on 18 July each year.
[Applause.] It will give people in South Africa and all over the world the
opportunity to do something good to help others. [Applause.]

Madiba was politically active for 67 years, and on Mandela Day people all
over the world, in the workplace, at home and in schools, will be called
upon to spend at least 67 minutes of their time doing something useful
within their communities ... [Applause.] ... especially among the less
fortunate. Let us wholeheartedly support Mandela Day and encourage the
world to join us in this wonderful campaign.

Hon Speaker and Chairperson, fellow South Africans, we have presented to
the nation our programme for the next five years. Attached to each
commitment we make is a detailed project plan, with targets and critical
milestones.

This information will, in due course, be made public. Indeed, as citizens,
we should at the same time ask ourselves what it is that we can do on our
own to help promote this national programme. To be a citizen is not only
about rights, it is also about responsibility ... [Applause.] ... making a
contribution to make ours a better country.

We also expect to work well with opposition parties in Parliament, in the
spirit of putting the country first. [Applause.]

In addition, Madiba taught us well that this country belongs to all, black
and white. Working for reconciliation and unity will remain important as we
move forward.

Since the implementation of our programme will take place in the face of
the economic downturn, we will have to act prudently - no wastage, no
rolling over of funds ... [Applause.] ... every cent must be spent wisely
and fruitfully. We must cut our coat according to our cloth.

Fellow South Africans, working together we can do more to realise our
common vision of a better and more prosperous nation! This is the
partnership we are calling for. I thank you. [Applause.]

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces adjourned the Joint
Sitting at 12:10.


