---
title: 'National Assembly - 26 August 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-08-26
---

                          WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT:

     Government plans to improve quality of schooling, having regard to
              prerequisites for effective learning and teaching

1.    Ms F I Chohan (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      (a) With reference to his statement at the recent Presidential imbizo
      (details furnished), what are the pre-requisites for effective
      learning and teaching and (b) how is the Government planning to effect
      the changes necessary to improve the quality of schooling?
                                        NO960E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, the achievement of quality
education for all requires a renewed purpose and action from the Education
department officials, school principals, teachers, learners, parents and
communities. Government launched the Quality Learning and Teaching Campaign
in October 2008. Each of the role players – government, communities, civil
society, business, media and other sectors – are called upon to make a
commitment to a code for quality education, which describes the
responsibilities required of them.

On 7 August, I met with the two Education Ministers, Premiers, MECs and
more than 1 500 school principals from all provinces to share our vision
and hear their views on how we can revitalise education and improve
results. We agreed on certain non-negotiables.

Departmental officials are required to support schools and ensure that all
teaching resources are provided on time. They should improve their own
skills base to better assist schools and regularly monitor teacher and
learner attendance and facilitate teacher development.

Teachers are required to be on time, be well prepared for all their
lessons, teach for at least seven hours every school day and improve their
own skills and knowledge. Learners are required to attend school regularly,
work hard in school, respect their teachers and adhere to the rules of
their school. Parents are required to support schools and educators and
also create a conducive home environment for their children to study.

The community is required to ensure that every school-going child is in
school and that schools are not vandalised. They are also supposed to
report problems in schools to relevant authorities. They must also ensure
that all role players carry out their responsibilities and that co-
ordinating structures are being set up at national, provincial and regional
levels.

We recognise that the improvement of learning and teaching has to be
accompanied by strong support mechanisms and performance monitoring with
clearly stipulated outcomes. The Ministry in the Presidency responsible for
performance monitoring and evaluation, together with the Department of
Basic Education, is developing a set of performance measures. These will
form the basis of performance agreements between the President, the
Minister of Basic Education and the respective MECs.

The performance agreement will ensure that non-negotiables relating to the
department are catered for. For example, the department will develop an
integrated plan to ensure that all schools have the necessary resources.
Government will intensify efforts to ensure that all schools have safe and
supportive environments for all children. We urge all hon members to
support us in this campaign to make education an apex priority for our
country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Thank you very much for your detailed reply, hon President.
I think it is very apt that the first time you respond to questions in this
House as President it is about education.

Much has been said about our schooling system, particularly in the last few
weeks. People have used the word “failure”. This country has some
outstanding schools and some dismal schools; it has outstanding teachers
who are very committed and those who are underperforming. We have serious
backlogs in terms of infrastructure in our rural schools and in some of our
township schools - there is overcrowding – and some provinces suffer from
bureaucratic problems.

These are all issues that the principals raised with you in the imbizo a
few Fridays ago. Do you therefore agree that our collective challenge is to
rectify these fundamental inequalities, and that it is unhelpful to assert
- as some do - that our schooling system is a failure, particularly because
every year we churn out numbers of students who are very successful despite
the dysfunctionalities in some of our schools?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Certainly. I agree. I think the issues I
have raised do cover the areas I believe need to be addressed - the joint
effort that we must put in. There are serious issues with regard to
education and challenges that we need to deal with. I think all of us need
to commit ourselves to addressing these issues. They are not hidden, they
are there. They need us to commit ourselves. I think the question of
education must be taken by us, collectively, as one of the national
challenges that we should agree upon because it is about educating our
nation.

When I spoke to the principals, I said that I would also be seeing and
meeting with other sectors like the unions. One of the issues we raised,
for example, was that research indicates that there are schools where
teaching is 3,5 hours only on a daily basis while  there are others where
schooling is 6,5 hours on a daily basis. Just look at this gap. If we do
not correct this, no matter who we are, we will actually be perpetuating
inequalities on a daily basis without realising it.

So, this is a matter that all of us need to be serious about. So,
certainly, as I talked about stakeholders, all of us ought to pull
together. This is an essential challenge and task that all of us need to
deal with. So, I totally agree. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr D C SMILES: Speaker, agb President, by die onlangse imbizo met
skoolhoofde het u baie mooi aan die onderwysers gesê wat u van hulle verwag
ten opsigte van ... [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die PRESIDENT VAN DIE REPUBLIEK: Wag ’n bietjie. Wag. [Gelag.]

Mnr D C SMILES: Goed, baie dankie. Kan ek maar voortgaan?

Die PRESIDENT VAN DIE REPUBLIEK: Ja, jy kan maar aangaan.

Mnr D C SMILES: Baie dankie vir die lekker Afrikaans ook, agb President.

By die onlangse imbizo met skoolhoofde het u baie mooi aan die onderwysers
gesê wat van hulle verwag word ten opsigte van die uitvoering van hulle
pligte teenoor die leerders wat aan hulle toevertrou is. Agb President, u
het ook baie mooi verduidelik en aan die skoolhoofde gesê wat van hulle
verwag word om goeie skoolbestuur uit te voer.

My vraag aan u is, agb President, wat sê u vandag aan die leerders en
onderwysers van 4 820 skole waar daardie skoolhoofposte vakant is? Van
hierdie gevalle van skoolhoofposte wat vakant is, is 1 783 in die Oos-Kaap
en die ander groot groep is in Limpopo en KwaZulu-Natal.

Ek wil dan vra, agb President, wat gaan u doen aangesien onderwys die
nommer een prioriteit van die land is? Wat gaan u doen om hierdie totaal
onaanvaarbare situasie reg te stel om sodoende die dissipline by skole reg
te kry, maar ook om substansie te gee aan wat u gesê het? Baie dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D C SMILES: Speaker, hon President, at the recent imbizo with school
principals you clearly told the teachers what you expect of them with
regard to ... [Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Wait a minute. Wait. [Laughter.]

Mr D C SMILES: Fine, thank you. May I continue now?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, you may continue.

Mr D C SMILES: Thank you very much also for the lovely Afrikaans spoken,
hon President.

At the recent imbizo with school principals you clearly told the teachers
what is expected of them with regard to fulfilling their obligations
towards the learners who are entrusted to them. Hon President, you also
clearly explained and informed the school principals what is expected of
them in order to implement proper school management.
My question to you is, hon President, what do you tell the learners and
teachers of 4 820 schools where those posts for school principals are
vacant? These cases where posts for school principals are vacant include 1
783 in the Eastern Cape and other large groups in Limpopo and KwaZulu-
Natal.

I would then like to ask, hon President, what action are you going to take
in the light of the fact that education is the country’s top priority? What
are you going to do to rectify this completely unacceptable situation in
order to improve the discipline in schools, and also to give substance to
what you have said? Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, the meeting with the principals was
the first thing we thought we needed to do so that the principals were
firstly clear on what we believe needs to be done in terms of education. I
think we did that because we knew there were a lot of difficulties, which
include, among others, vacant posts, a high percentage of teachers who are
not trained as teachers and need to be trained and our attitude and that of
the principals and teachers towards education.

This was an indication that if we wanted to correct things, we needed to
deal with those who manage education at the lower or basic levels. I think
this was very important. We have to deliver this message and also indicate
the commitment of government to ensuring that we change the manner in which
education has been conducted so far, as well as the environment.

I think government has something to do from now onwards. This discussion is
being held with the department, which includes creating a good environment
at school level. The environment in some schools is not good at all,
especially in the rural areas. But we also need to train the other teachers
who are currently teaching but are not qualified teachers so that we can
make them teachers.

So, there are many things we need to do, which will involve the discussion.
At this point, we are saying, we firstly need to agree on the things we
need to do - all of us. We couldn’t just force things before people
understood what it is that we are trying to do.

As you know, the three provinces that you mentioned are the ones that are
identified as the most poverty-stricken provinces. This means we need to
focus more on those provinces, particularly the rural schools. So, this is
what we will be doing together with the department. We are saying it should
not just be the government only. The community, parents and everybody must
participate. I don’t think we can do anything differently from what I have
just said when I was answering the question. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr President, section 29(2) of the Constitution states
that everyone has the right to receive education in the official language
or languages of their choice in public education institutions, where that
education is practicable. Government has emphasised the importance of
mother-tongue education in various statements. But, in practice, little so
far has come of that.

To learn English and other languages is very important – that is why I am
speaking the language at the moment. But does the President agree that
mother-tongue education to the highest possible level is one of the
measures that will help us to improve the quality of schooling?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: That is absolutely correct. That is what the
Constitution says. I don’t think we are saying something different from
what the Constitution says. I think the challenge we are faced with is how
to develop the languages - the Constitution refers to all of them - so that
they are able to develop up to the level that the hon member is talking
about.

I think our concern should be: What do we do with our languages – all of
them? I don’t think we should pick and choose in terms of languages. I mean
there is a debate, for example, that kids that start learning in their own
languages understand better so that they can then be introduced to other
languages at a certain level. So, this is correct. I think what all of us
should be saying is what can be done to ensure that this happens.

The problem is that some languages are highly developed while others are
not that developed. So, we need to state what can be done to develop all
languages so that when you get to any school, you can have a child who can
perform to the maximum. I think that is exactly what all of us need to do,
particularly the House her, which does oversight. It should be stating what
should be done with the languages that are not taught at all and those that
are not even looked at as one goes up the ladder in terms of education. I
think we will agree on this one. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Mr President, I am still here. It is good to see you again.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I can see you. [Laughter.]

Ms C DUDLEY: What is your view with regard to helping teachers to restore
discipline in our schools, which is a prerequisite for effective learning
and teaching, particularly when one takes into account that there is an
absence of corporal punishment in our schools? There is a serious situation
in KwaZulu-Natal right now in Kenmont Junior Primary School, where a 13-
year-old boy allegedly exhibiting violent and abusive behaviour has been
put back in the school by the department against the wishes of the
governing body and the parents. This has left the children in that school -
right here today - extremely vulnerable. So, are we going to need to look
at policy and legislation changes in this regard? This is because we cannot
have our children being this vulnerable. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, I think once again this issue does not
differ from the other issues we have just talked about. We need the effort
of everyone to work together to ensure that we bring about discipline. I
think if all sectors can work together – with no sector lagging behind – we
can bring back discipline in schools.

Children need to be brought up within an environment of discipline. I think
parents in particular have to play a role in terms of ensuring that their
children are disciplined. Once the teachers themselves - led by the
principal of course - stick to discipline in schools in every respect, it
is going to be very difficult for kids to misbehave all the time.

So, I think we have to work together to ensure that discipline becomes the
rule of every school. We have to state what we should do collectively if
kids do not adhere to discipline so that we can help the children
themselves, as well as the teachers.

We need to create an environment that lives within the discipline in
schools. I think there are times when it is difficult to do so. There are
anecdotes that people would give, where there would be no collective effort
to deal with a matter. I was once at a school where kids were misbehaving
and fighting, and the parents were divided on the issue. Some wanted to
side with their kids and others did not. When I asked the principal about
this he said the fact that the parents were divided on the issue was
basically the problem, and that he did not know what to do.

So, I am saying that we need a collective effort – all of us – to create
the non-negotiable with the kids. Therefore, everybody should understand
that we must do something about a child who does not behave at school. In
the past, as you say, teachers would ask you to open your hand, and they
would do something to the hand. That is no longer done. Then we need to
state what needs to be done in order to ensure that discipline comes back.
I think if children do not find any favours anywhere, they will be in a
position to behave. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, may I remind you that if you wish to ask a
supplementary question, please press the talk button in front of you, then
your name will pop up on the screen in front of me.

         Reasons for requesting advice regarding next Chief Justice

2.    The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the President of the
      Republic:

      With reference to his statement at the National Press Club on 6 August
      2009 regarding the next Chief Justice (details furnished), what are
      the reasons for stating that he had requested advice from leaders of
      political parties of the National Assembly?
                  NO870E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, in my address to the National
Press Club on 6 August 2009, I announced my decision to nominate Justice
Sandile Ngcobo as the new Chief Justice. I further said that the nomination
was subject to advice from the Judicial Service Commission, JSC, and
leaders of parties represented in the National Assembly.

Section 174(3) of the Constitution requires the President as head of the
national executive, after consulting the JSC and the leaders of parties
represented in the National Assembly, to appoint the Chief Justice.

The statement made to the National Press Club was based on the
understanding that letters addressed to leaders of parties, which I signed
on 5 August, had been dispatched, as was the case with the letter to the
JSC.

The constitutional provisions regarding the appointment process do not
preclude the President from proposing a name, and thereafter soliciting the
opinions of leaders of the parties represented in the National Assembly. In
fact, the practice as followed in the past has generally been for the
President to ask the parties to state their views on a particular name.

Let me reiterate that I have not appointed a new Chief Justice. I have
merely nominated Justice Ngcobo for the position and reiterate that he
remains my preferred candidate. In making my final decision, I will of
course take into account the views of the JSC and the leaders of parties
regarding whether or not Justice Ngcobo is fit and proper for the position.
I thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon President, your explanation that you
delivered your speech on 6 August to the Pretoria Press Club, under the
assumption that your correspondence had gone to leaders of opposition
parties informing them of your nomination of Adv Ngcobo, dated 5 August, is
acceptable. However, the opposition parties only received this letter on 7
August after you had publicly announced that you had consulted opposition
parties and the JSC.

The failure of your office and the Presidency to forward this letter to
opposition parties on 5 August has resulted in the President’s office
undermining the constitutional requirement of the consultation process, has
caused great embarrassment to the Office of the President has highly
offended and opposition parties the lack of consultation.

Notwithstanding your personal explanation to me and to the media about your
slip of the tongue and your response today, I would like to ask who in your
office was responsible for compiling and sending the correspondence to
opposition parties which, incidentally, also referred to an appointment and
not a nomination. Secondly, I would like to ask whether any action has been
taken against this person or persons for failing to send the appropriate
correspondence at the appropriate time to opposition parties before you
made the announcement about nominating Judge Ngcobo. Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. Firstly, a
communication that is sent after having being written depends on how it
goes. [Interjections.] It does. While I was growing up we used to receive
post written by hand. After you have written a letter, you don’t know when
it will arrive, really. [Laughter.] [Applause.] You can’t say that if you
were to act in the manner in which I did, you would then wait until you had
a response to then say that indeed the letter had arrived. Once you have
written a letter and it has been posted, you have written a letter.
[Laughter.]

Now, I think if we said that we cannot move until a letter has been
responded to, then it would be a new way of corresponding among ourselves.
You write a letter and once you have posted it, you then act on matters
that you need to act on, unless you are writing a note like here in
Parliament which can be sent by a messenger who can see it being given and
responded to, or you can see that, yes, it has been handed over to hon
member so-and-so.

I am in Pretoria; you are in Cape Town. I write a letter and leave it in
the office, and I don’t necessarily follow who the particular person in the
office is who deals with it. I think, again, that would be a new thing. If
you are talking about the Office of the President, there are quite a number
of people there. I have never followed each and every letter – who they
were written by – and I don’t see why I should conduct an enquiry now as to
who actually dealt with it.

The fact of the matter is that the letters arrived; not so? [Applause.] And
they arrived not over a week later but in a matter of three days, not so?
The post was quick enough. I don’t think we should pick up on the issue. I
could appreciate the issue if I had spoken when the opposition parties had
not received the letter. But once an explanation was given, the matter to
me, really, was not a matter to be pursued – because I had given an
explanation publicly on what happened, and the letters were dated.

By the time I spoke to the Pretoria Press Club, the letters had been
written. For example, I had already sent the letter to the JSC. I had met
with the chairperson of the JSC and had had the letter hand-delivered. So,
really, I don’t see why this should be a big issue. That is the
explanation. I don’t think I can explain it in another way. I also do not
think that it needs some enquiry. I don’t think so. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: We thank the hon President.

I have on my list the following hon members who will be asking
supplementary questions: the hon Meshoe, the hon L H Adams and the hon
Gungubele. Will you please move closer to the nearest microphone hon
Meshoe.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: He’s still around. I left him here; I still
find him here. [Laughter.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Still around, sir.

I must be honest, Mr President, that I am disappointed by your response ...
[Interjections.] [Applause.] ... because your office needs to be efficient.
Your office must be efficient, Mr President. There will be important
correspondence that will be expected wherever in the world. If that
correspondence does not arrive in time, you cannot come up with an excuse
like that, that “I know a letter was written”. Those who work in your
office must ensure that when you say a letter should be written and sent to
opposition leaders, then it must be done on time.

Having said that, it appears from relevant legislation that should the
President’s nominee be appointed Chief Justice, he would only serve for a
period of two years given that he has already been a judge for 13 years and
that Constitutional Court judges normally serve for a maximum of 15 years.
In view of this, we want to know why the President chose as Chief Justice
someone who is so close to retirement. We also want to know what the
President’s response is to media speculation that Judge Sandile Ngcobo’s
appointment as Chief Justice is a ploy to hand over the post to Judge
Hlophe in two years’ time. Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Meshoe, I think
that this is absolutely unfair. You received the letter in three days – in
three days – and not in three weeks or after a week. Really, unless there
is a political motive, why should this be an issue? As I said, if on the
day that I spoke to the press club you hadn’t received the letter but
received it a day thereafter, then it ought not to be a big issue. I made
that clarification that it ought not to be a big issue. If you had said to
me that you still had not received the letter after a week or after five
days, I would understand.

I’m not saying that the Office of the President must not send out letters
on time. But really where is the cutoff time here, and in what way was the
letter sent? Now, the point is that you are sticking to a point which I
don’t think is a point to be stuck on because I have said that I gave an
explanation. Absolutely. If you said to me, “Look, for a whole month we
didn’t receive any letter” - maybe we backdated these letters – there could
be some room for speculation. The matter is straightforward, I think. I am
even answering those who are still going to ask follow-up questions, so
that they don’t come back to this question. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

With regard to the time, the fact of the matter is that Judge Ngcobo is
still a member of that institution. There’s nothing in the Constitution
that says that you cannot appoint a judge if a certain amount of years are
left before his retirement. There is nothing out of order there.
[Applause.]

Also, with regard to Judge Hlophe, I don’t know where that comes from. I
don’t think I want to respond to speculation by the media. They speculate
about everything under the sun. If I were to chase after those
speculations, I am sure I would be speaking the whole day. So, that is not
a matter of reality that needs my attention at this point in time.
[Applause.]

Ms L H ADAMS: Hon President, seeing that seniority within the judiciary and
appointments in accordance thereof form part of the concept of the rule of
law, do you hereby set the precedent that appointments for a Chief Justice
and a Deputy Chief Justice would be at random according to your
preferences?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I don’t really understand the
question. I don’t understand because I have followed the Constitution and
the law. There is nothing that has been random here. So, I don’t understand
the question. What should I answer? [Applause.]

Mr M GUNGUBELE: Hon President, as the ANC’s historic mission has always
been to build from the ruins of the apartheid dictatorship a truly
tolerant, diverse, democratic and united South Africa and nation and that
this vision of our glorious movement lives in the spirit of our
Constitution, also affirmed by your state of the nation address with the
commitment made to work with the opposition, also with the engagements with
all key stakeholders in our country and on several occasions your
commitment to ensuring the independence of the judiciary, noting the
aspersions cast on this commitment by various statements and noting also
that nomination is an intended appointment, how does the President intend
and plan to entrench these ANC-stated values, both in the ANC and the
Constitution, going forward, regarding unity and ensuring tolerance and
diversity in our country?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, as the speaker has just indicated,
there are matters that are guided by the Constitution and the law, and we
will certainly continue to ensure that those are entrenched and that they
are followed. There is also the question of the principle of working
together for the same country even if we are in different parties. We will
continue to do that because we believe that for the good of the country,
that should happen. So we will continue to ensure that those principles are
followed and work for them as much as we have said in statements and in
actual practice, and meet with colleagues to discuss things that we believe
are national interests for all of us.

Some of us believe that even if we belong to different parties, we are one
with one objective - we all want a prosperous and successful South Africa.
We might differ about how we reach that. Those are the matters that I think
we need to be talking about all the time. Therefore, even when we argue or
disagree, to what extent do we do that on some of the issues that may be
issues of common interest? So, we will continue to follow those principles.
Thank you. [Applause.]

 Government policy regarding public servants having businesses that transact
         with the State, and prosecution of corrupt public officials

3.    Rev H M Dandala (Cope) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether the Government intends introducing policy with regard to
            public servants who have businesses that transact with the
            State; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether he will instruct Ministers to co-operate with the
            prosecuting authority in bringing corrupt public officials to
            book; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   NO952E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, let me state that this
administration will not condone or tolerate any conduct by public officials
that breaks the law or regulations that govern the Public Service. We view
the report of the Auditor-General on public servants that do business with
government without following proper procedures in a very serious light. I
have instructed the Ministers in whose departments such officials are
employed to investigate the alleged misconduct. I have made it clear that
where wrongdoing is found to have been committed, they must take the
necessary corrective steps, including taking disciplinary measures against
the officials concerned.

I have also asked the Minister for the Public Service and Administration,
hon Richard Baloyi, to expedite the development of the conflict of interest
framework and to send it to Cabinet in the next few weeks. The conflict of
interest framework is meant to plug existing holes in Public Service
regulations. Among other things, this should ensure that some of the
problems raised by the Auditor-General can be prevented in future. The new
framework will not, on its own, solve the problems. Most of the wrongdoing
occurs when public officials do not comply with existing regulations.

I have requested Ministers to ensure that public officials comply with the
relevant regulations and laws. We will not tolerate or condone the abuse of
public trust and public resources by any public official. Our
administration will co-operate with any institution of state that is
legitimately enforcing the laws and regulations of the country. Thank you,
hon Speaker. [Applause.]

Rev H M DANDALA: Mr President, I want to thank you for your response which,
in a sense, is in line with your declared intention to fight corruption in
this country. We would like to encourage you. I would like, though, to know
further, in relation to the disciplinary measures that you have requested
the various relevant people to take, how far the President would go? For
instance, would you, Mr President, support harsher measures for
noncompliance, such as criminal procedures, for instance, demand that the
people pay back the embezzled funds and maybe even periodic bans on those
public servants who have been found guilty of these practices?

There have also been suggestions from the SA Communist Party that conflict
of interest in itself is wrong. I really am very interested to hear how the
President will respond to this. This is because I think we would want to
agree with you that this is important, but I would like to hear what you
would say to this. Finally, would you, Mr President, permit anyone working
in your office to have business dealings? Thank you, sir.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Firstly, I have just outlined this matter in
my answer and in what I have already done in my communication with the
Ministers. We do things according to the law and the rules. What is
required, for example, is that whoever is employed in government - this
does not separate or exclude other offices - should declare their interest.
If they have done so, they have then complied with the requirements of the
law.

Have you ever heard that whilst a citizen had complied with the law, the
President went further to say that because the citizen had now told him
about their business deals, he was then sacking them? I am sure this
country would be up in arms. In other words, the President himself would
not be complying with the law. So, I don’t think I can say that if there is
somebody who has declared their interest while working in my office, this
should therefore serve as a reason for them not to get employment, etc. We
have to keep it within the rules.

With regard to whether we support that harsher measures be taken if a
person is found not to have complied, I can say yes, absolutely. This will
depend on the degree of the infringement or on what was or wasn’t done by
that person. We cannot pre-empt whatever judgment would be given, because
it would be according to specific cases, for the cases are going to differ.


Procedures must be followed according to rules and the law. Once a harsher
decision has been made, it is absolutely to be supported. I publicly said
that we do not want to be tolerant to people who are doing wrong things.
Whatever decision is taken will be supported. What will not be supported is
the lack of a serious decision on wrongdoers. That will not be accepted
because that would be condoning wrongdoing. So, we are saying if you do
wrong things, you will receive punishment for it, in whatever way, as
prescribed by the law and the rules. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Mr President, in response to an earlier question, you did say
the challenge is to get the basics right. The basics with regard to
officials doing business with government is for them, senior managers in
particular, to disclose their financial interests. Unfortunately, the
report of the Public Service Commission suggests that not all senior
managers have declared their financial interests. I am glad, Mr President,
that you have indicated that Ministers have been directed to ensure that
their directors-general monitor the simple task of making sure that all
senior managers disclose their financial interests.

Further to that, hon President, when the Auditor-General’s report was
discussed at the Select Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa, we found that
Ministers were notorious for their absence or conspicuous by their absence,
except for the hon Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries who was
present at one of the briefings. None of the other Ministers have attended
Scopa briefings and hearings. I would like to know, Mr President, if you
would direct the hon Ministers that whenever there is a briefing by the
Office of the Auditor-General or hearings that are conducted with regard to
any department, they have to, as a matter of course, attend those meetings
and hearings so that they can have a hands-on approach. Thank you, Mr
President. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Generally, Ministers are encouraged to
attend. But I don’t know, in terms of their diaries and what they do, how
the communication is between them and the committee. Certainly, it would be
much appreciated if they were generally there in the meetings so that they
could participate and be able to engage the kind of queries that come when
that happens. It should either be them or their deputies. I think that is
in order insofar as I am concerned. Of course, people who are always there
are directors-general, who are basically the accounting officers. I think
we should encourage that, if possible, they should be there at all times. I
don’t think there is any problem with that.

Ms A M DREYER: The Western Cape provincial government is implementing
measures to better regulate the conduct of public servants and to prevent
corruption. Some of these measures are stopping the practice of
transferring public servants who face disciplinary action to other
departments to avoid such action, forbidding public servants from receiving
gifts from outside parties for performing their official duties and
amending legislation to prevent public servants from also serving as
councillors. The question to the President is: What amendments to the
Public Service handbook for public servants, at national level, will the
President consider to enhance clean administration?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: We are interacting at the intergovernmental
level. If there are very good practices that are emerging in the Western
Cape, we will certainly hear and talk about those in the process of
interaction. If they are indeed good, I don’t think there will be any
problem in adopting such measures simply because one is saying this is what
the Western Cape is doing. It is not as if there has been a directive that
all provinces must change things. It is the manner in which the provincial
government in the Western Cape is doing things. If it is a good practice,
we will look at it. I am sure our colleague will also raise the matter. We
are always together in the joint meetings. I am sure we will certainly
engage on that and see how it goes.

Mr S N SWART: Hon President, arising from your response, whistle-blowers
are key in exposing fraud and corruption in the Public Service. However, we
read time and again of whistle-blowers who are victimised by fellow workers
or employees and even killed in certain circumstances. These whistle-
blowers, in certain circumstances, are obliged by the law to report corrupt
activities and are then victimised. In view of this, would you not agree
that we need to strengthen the provisions that protect whistle-blowers or
at the very least ensure that the present legislation is properly
implemented to protect such whistle-blowers? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Certainly we need to strengthen the
weaknesses that are there in the law, if there are any, and ensure that
whistle-blowers are protected. So, I am sure that if the hon member has
very good suggestions, he can make those suggestions so that they can be
considered. We cannot say that we cannot strengthen the provisions that
protect whistle-blowers. We do not want those kinds of action by
wrongdoers. Otherwise we will discourage people who wish to report matters
from coming forward. If there are any suggestions you can make that will
strengthen the law, they will be considered. I don’t think there is any
problem.

 Character of, and South Africa’s role in, new economic international order

4.    Ms J L Fubbs (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      (a) What are the principles, pillars and character of a new economic
      international order that is the framework of South Africa’s response
      to the international economic crisis and (b) what will South Africa’s
      role be in such a new order?      NO961E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, it is premature to speak of a
new economic international order. The current global crisis has exposed the
deficiencies and imbalances of the prevailing economic dispensation and
international corporate governance. It should urge us to pursue with
greater urgency a stable, sustainable and more equitable global economic
order.

We have noted before in this House that although it is not of our making,
the crisis is having a profound effect on our economy and people. As a
country, we have responded to this crisis with urgency and energy. There
are two main elements to our response. The first is to undertake a series
of measures within the framework agreed upon with our social partners to
mitigate the effects of this.

Through this framework agreement, we have managed to mobilise all sectors
of the economy. These measures include a training layoff scheme as an
alternative to retrenchment, which ensures that we develop the skills of
our workforce while maintaining the capacity of business to respond when
the economy recovers. It also includes provision by our development finance
institutions working with the banking sector for financial support to
qualifying companies in distress.

The second element of our response is to actively engage in international
forums to promote global solutions. While this crisis is likely to reverse
some of the gains made by developing countries in recent years, it does
provide an unprecedented opportunity for greater co-operation between the
developed and developing world in finding solutions. This includes the
building of requisite infrastructure and systems for intra-Africa trade and
South Africa’s trade. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Mr President, we welcome the emphasis in your response on the
retention of jobs through the training schemes, as well as the emphasis on
international forums getting together and reaching a collective response in
this matter. Even more welcome is the pointing out to us of the opportunity
to develop regional infrastructure in Africa and so encourage investments,
identify resources and encourage investment in that way.

My question, hon President, as I am sure you appreciate as well because it
comes out here implicitly, is that the greatest victim in this economic
crisis has been jobs. Indeed the current trading environment and challenges
we are faced with have had a very big negative impact on this for all
countries. What would be very useful perhaps is to hear from you, Mr
President, how you would encourage our business parties within South Africa
or within our social compact, if you like, as well as encourage our
investors and indeed the other partners and members in the World Trade
Organisation, WTO, to actually come to the party in a collective response?
Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, we have certainly been
encouraging business, that is why we have the framework agreement which has
been discussed and agreed on - and I think we are in agreement on this. I
think South Africa has been acknowledged as having taken leadership on how
to respond to the crisis, and this is being discussed by the global
community. Therefore, we are certainly engaging with them on our
experiences.

It has been reported that South Africa is actually number one of a few
other countries that have been able to do so in terms of absorbing the
impact, which speaks very highly of our economic policies and the manner in
which we have been handling ourselves. Everybody is learning from this
because this example was not even made by us. It was made by a global
institution that actually said that South Africa is number one. Besides our
engagement with them, they are also learning from the reports that are
coming from South Africa that it has in fact fared very well. Even though
we are affected, we have been able to absorb the impact quite reasonably
compared to other countries.

Dr D T GEORGE: Speaker, on 15 September 2009, it will be a year since
Lehman Brothers collapsed and over two years since the international
financial crisis began. The ANC government is only now working on
implementing a response. This delay has already resulted in massive job
losses.

During the debate on South Africa’s response to the economic crisis last
week, the DA pointed out the need to focus on liquidity, which news reports
indicate that Minister Patel is now doing. Mr President, why did government
not respond sooner to this crisis? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I don’t know whether the hon
member has been following developments on this matter. In early 2008,
economies were saying that this was not going to affect the world that much
and that it was going to be contained within the United States. There have
been different views of the economies, as you said – it deepened. Other
than South Africa, I don’t think there could have been any other country
where economies would have said anything to anybody and started responding
then. What would we be responding to when economies and those who are able
to focus on this matter were not able to say how much damage this crisis
would cause?

Then, at the end of 2008-09, everybody began to accept that this is a
problem that is deepening. I think it was during the time when the hon
Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe was the President of this country that
the country then responded. I cannot say it was too late; I cannot say we
could be accused of having responded too late. This crisis emanated from
the developed world. Therefore, even their own response to it would not be
like that of the developing countries.

We have responded timeously in as far as we are concerned, very clearly and
decisively. That is why I have been saying in the response that even other
countries have learnt from what South Africa is doing and are appreciating
what South Africa has done. I don’t think the question that suggests that
we took a long time before responding is actually justified. I think you
should be joining your country in saying, “well done”! [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr President, a new economic order is being
formed. It is clear to all of us that in this process there are going to be
winners and losers. The response provided by government thus far has been
one of preserving the status quo waiting for the recession to go by, and it
is based on a three month perspective. The question is, where is the
leadership? We heard about the government’s response for the first time
last week in a debate of about 40 minutes. We are now engaging in this
debate for a few minutes in an reply to a parliamentary question. There is
a need to consider the long-term implications of this recession.

We heard that there is a process of redrafting the trade policy and
industrial policy from Minister Patel the other day. How is Parliament
going to be involved, and why doesn’t the country receive stronger
leadership from the commander in chief, the President himself, announcing
how we are going to go long-term because this is not going to last three
months. At least we should make contingency arrangements in the eventuality
that it does not only last three months. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I am not sure whether the hon
member said there is a new economic order. Did I hear him correctly?
[Interjections.] Is there a new economic order? [Interjections.] Oh! Is
that so? We haven’t seen it.

I don’t know. If the hon speaker only heard about this last week, it is
unfortunate. We made an announcement many, many weeks ago about the
response. It was not just its formulation, but also its announcement
because it was formulated before the elections. That’s when it was
formulated, and it was announced. Many, many weeks ago we announced its
implementation, and as a matter of fact, we had mobilised funds as social
partners to deal with it. If the hon member did not hear that, it is
unfortunate. Therefore, the question as to where the leadership is would
not be arising, for the leadership has been there. Sorry that you didn’t
follow what happened then. The leadership has been there. [Applause.]

Ms C M P KOTSI: Mr President, in the statement made by the hon Minister
last week on the recovery plan, he mentioned in part that there is going to
be retraining of workers. He mentioned the Setas, and, as we know, the
Setas have failed dismally in terms of responding to our people’s needs.
[Applause.] Indeed, we all know this problem with the Setas. How then do we
rely on the Setas in actually helping in the recovery of the economy of
this country when we all know that they have failed? What plans and other
programmes do we have that will really be doing what you, the President,
and the Minister have told the nation about? All we want is to keep jobs
and possibly create even more jobs for South Africans. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Setas are not the only element that is going
to be working on this. They are part of many mechanisms that are going to
be put in place. Of course Setas have been there. I don’t think it is
correct to say that they have been a dismal failure. I think there has been
a contribution made by Setas. There may be criticism of some aspects. But
to say there has been a dismal failure does not present a correct picture.
In so far as this very specific programme is concerned, they will also play
a part. We did not think that we only needed to create other mechanisms and
not deal with the Setas that are there already. It can then be detailed as
to what needs to be done. Thank you, hon Speaker.

   Government’s intentions regarding constitutional amendments to improve
                      authority of traditional leaders

5.    Mr P F Smith (IFP) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether the Government intends introducing constitutional
            amendments to Chapters 7 and 12 of the Constitution to improve
            the authority of traditional leaders enabling them to play a
            meaningful role in the administration and deployment of services
            in the areas under their administration; if not, why not; if so,
            (a) when and (b) what are the further relevant details;

      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         NO964E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, government remains committed to
strengthening the institution of traditional leadership and appreciates the
role it plays in our society. The reconfiguration of the former Department
of Provincial and Local Government into the current Department of Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs signifies the importance that
this administration places on the role and place of traditional leaders in
the lives of our people, especially in rural areas.

Our administration regards traditional leaders as partners in the
implementation of the programmes of government. The success of the
Department of Rural Development and Land Reform depends, to a large extent,
on the partnership that government fosters with traditional leaders.

A number of departments have put in place legislation that clearly defines
the role of traditional leaders in the areas of justice, in the
establishment of traditional courts and the administration of tribal land.
This is a demonstration of government’s willingness to put into effect the
power and recognition of traditional authorities and leadership.

We have also sought to demonstrate our commitment in a variety of ways. For
example, we have passed numerous pieces of legislation and implemented a
variety of programmes to ensure that the institution does not only lives
and thrives, but that it also makes an important contribution to the
development of our society.

Changes that are suggested should not necessarily follow the route of
amendments to the Constitution. We should rather explore other ways of
effecting the role and powers of traditional leaders in the system of local
government and communicating these to all stakeholders.

There are currently amendments to two principal laws on traditional
leadership before Parliament. These are the Traditional Leadership and
Governance Framework Amendment Bill and the National House of Traditional
Leaders Bill. The amendments are based on lessons learnt during the
implementation, which indicated a need for further emphasis.

We will do our best to ensure that the institution of traditional
leadership is accorded the respect, dignity and role that it justifiably
deserves. Thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Mr Speaker, I’d like to thank Mr President for his response,
but I must say that I’m very disappointed in it. The issue has such a long
history. I’d like to remind the House that this issue has been on our
agenda since the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, Codesa, and
culminated in negotiations between traditional leaders and the executive
just before the 2000 local government elections. In terms of these
negotiations, agreements were reached with the executive, but they have not
been implemented yet.

To remind you, for example, your predecessor, President Mbeki, agreed that
should the powers and functions of traditional leaders be diminished as a
result of the municipal system being implemented, then the Constitution
would be amended. And he repeated that statement in the NCOP.

There were negotiations with Minister Mufamadi, which failed. I remind the
President that in his capacity as Deputy President in the past, he served
on a Cabinet committee that had actually concluded an agreement with
traditional leaders to the effect that the Constitution would be amended.

The problem we have is that nothing has happened since then. I hear the
President’s response in terms of today’s reply, and all those things are
commendable. We agree with all of them, they are great. But the questions
that I’m asking are: Is government going to stick to the agreement that it
has reached already? Is it prepared to accept that there was an agreement
reached that needs to be implemented? All the other things are peripheral
for now; the real issue is that an agreement was reached. When is it going
to be implemented?

I would also like to ask the President whether he is prepared to reconsider
his position on this matter. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, well, I’m sure if there are
agreements that were reached, they must be implemented. However, hon Smith,
I’d just like to correct you on one aspect of the issue where you correctly
say that I participated in the Cabinet committee. The subcommittee had
recommended an amendment to the Constitution, but the government did not
agree with it. So, that was not an agreement, because we had recommended an
amendment to the Constitution. And I led that grouping, which included
traditional leaders. However, that recommendation was not accepted. So,
there was no agreement in that regard. I just wanted to correct you on that
point.

Regarding any other agreement that may have been reached, I see no reason
why it should not be implemented. I think we should commit ourselves that
where there have been agreements, they should be implemented.

I take it that the Bills before Parliament, together with what I’m saying
we are trying to do, will partly meet the necessary requirements and
address the concerns that are there.

I think we should move forward with the agreements that have been reached.
If there are specific agreements that have not been implemented, I think we
need to be reminded about those so that we can look at them. [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Hon President, the DA’s viewpoint with regard to this matter
is that the Constitution and its principles must be upheld. Furthermore,
the democratically elected public office-bearers, in this case the
councillors, must be respected and allowed to do their duty in the rural
areas where traditional leaders operate.

We have a problem that sometimes some of these councillors abandon their
duties, leaving them to be performed by traditional leaders. Traditional
leaders are not democratically elected to do municipal work at ward level.

So, Mr President, we just want to ask you: Will the government ensure that
councillors are still held accountable to fulfil their constitutional role
at the municipal level?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I’m sure the councillors have
not been asked not to do their work. As far as I know, they continue to do
their work. The question, as the hon member indicated earlier, has been:
How do you co-ordinate the work that is done by traditional leaders and
their structures?

The argument has been that you cannot have the councillors working as if
you do not have traditional leaders and their authorities, who are also
recognised by the Constitution. The debate has been about how we get
councillors and traditional leaders to work together. I think that’s what
we should be looking at. You should not come here and say: “Look, I’m
elected. So, whoever you are, I’m not worried about you; I’m doing what I’m
doing”, and therefore not recognise other people and their authority even
if they are recognised by the Constitution despite the fact that they are
not elected.

Really, the debate should be about how you get councillors and traditional
leaders to work together. Nobody disputes the fact that traditional leaders
and their system do exist, are recognised and operate in a particular
manner. Equally, there are councillors who are elected representatives. How
do you get these two to work together?
I don’t think traditional leaders, for example, should operate in their
areas as if there are no councillors that are legitimately elected. I also
do not think that councillors should operate in such a way that they don’t
care whether there are traditional authorities around. I think that this
House should be helping in creating harmony in this system so that
councillors are able to exercise their democratic rights and we are in a
position to allow traditional leaders to do their work.

How do we describe this system? That is the reason why the hon Smith said
that there are agreements. His statement in this regard went to the core of
the following questions: How will councillors and traditional leaders
complement each other? Are they able to work in such a way that the people
they are meant to assist are assisted rather than experiencing tensions and
fights? I think that is what we are trying to deal with here.

There have been difficulties in some areas, and in others no difficulties
at all. Areas differ in the way councillors and traditional leaders work
together. I’ve crisscrossed the country and have come across numerous areas
where there are no problems. However, there are areas where there are
problems. It may be related to the question: What have we learnt after 15
years of working together and co-ordination?

So, this is a matter that we need to look at from an angle that appreciates
the fact that we have councillors and traditional leaders existing in the
manner that they do. Thank you. [Applause.]

Nkosi S P HOLOMISA: Nokwindla, ndiyabulela kuNxamalala ngempendulo yakhe
ecacisa ukuzibophelela kukarhulumente wakho ekuhlonipheni ubukhosi. Loo nto
iza kunceda kakhulu kuba, sele i-ANC ide igqibe kwelokuba kufuneka
kuphuhliswe amaphandle nje, kungenxa yokuba kule minyaka ili-15 igqithileyo
abantu basemaphandleni khange basiwe so ngokufanelekileyo. Ukuze nayiphi na
inkqubo iphumelele, kufuneka urhulumente okhoyo asebenzisane neenkosi.
Siyayibulela ke loo nto.

Umbuzo nje omfutshane endinawo ngothi: Njengokuba ooMongameli
abebengaphambi kwakho bebexelele ilizwe ukuba kukho isebe eliza kusekwa
ukuze lijongane nemicimbi yobukhosi, ngaba lo wakho urhulumente
uyazibophelela kuloo nto?

Okokugqibela, phambi kokuba ndihlale phantsi, iinkosi zithe zakuva ukuba
ndiza kukhe ndithethe nawe ngolu hlobo, Nxamalala, zathi ze ndikhe
ndikuxelele ukuba ziyakukhumbula. [Kwahlekwa.]

UMONGAMELI WERIPHABLIKI: Somlomo, ndiyabulela ukufumana lo mbuliso ovela
ezinkosini zam, ngomlomo kaNkosi Holomisa. Ze azixelele ukuba nam
ndiyazithanda. [Kwahlekwa.]

Ndiyacinga ukuba ngokubhekiselele koko bekutshiwo ngooMongameli
bangaphambili, ukuba kuya kubakho isebe elinjalo, xa ndinaba kwimpendulo
yam, ndikungqinile oko. Nangoku, isebe eli libizwa ngokuba liSebe
loRhulumente ngoBambiswano neMicimbi yezeMveli. Belikade lingabizwa ngolo
hlobo ngaphambili. Loo nto ithetha ukuba siyangcambaza ukulandela esa
sithembiso esenziwa ngooMongameli bangaphambili.

Njengokuba besisebenzisana kakuhle lonke eli xesha, makhe sijonge ukuba
izinto zihamba njani na. Ndiyaqonda ukuba iza kulunga le nto; soze
ingalungi singabantu nje. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Chief S P HOLOMISA: Nokwindla, I thank Nxamalala for his reply which
explains the government’s commitment to respect and honour the traditional
leaders. That would be a great help, and the reason why the ANC has decided
that there is a need for rural development is because rural communities
have been neglected for the past 15 years. In order for any programme to
succeed, the ruling party must work together with traditional leaders. We
are grateful for that.

The only short question I have is as follows: the former presidents
declared to the country that there would be a ministry dedicated to the
affairs of traditional leadership, is your government committing itself to
that declaration?

Lastly, before I sit down, when the traditional leaders heard that I would
be speaking to you in this manner, Nxamalala, they asked me to tell you
that they miss you. [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I am grateful for this greeting
from my traditional leaders, through Nkosi Holomisa. He must tell them that
I also love them. [Laughter.]

With regard to what was said by the former presidents, that there would be
such a ministry, I think when I was elaborating on my reply, I conceded to
that. That ministry is currently known as the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs. In the past it was known by another
name. That means we are slowly fulfilling the promise made by the former
presidents.

Since we have been efficiently working together all this time, let us wait
and see how things progress. I know this will work out, and I am very
certain that it will. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Speaker, His Excellency the President, His
Excellency the Deputy President, hon Ministers, hon members, my comment is
just about a moral issue; I’m not going to quiz the President. In fact, the
President, whilst Deputy President of this country, was requested by the
President and all of us in the Cabinet – when I was in the Cabinet – to
head this committee that Mr Smith referred to and to see to it that there
was not obliteration of the powers and functions of traditional leaders as
a result of the implementation of the Local Government: Municipal
Structures Act and other related legislation.

Our former President, President Mbeki, promised that if there was any such
obliteration, he would amend the Constitution. On 30 November 2000, this
committee, which was headed by His Excellency the Deputy President of this
country who is now our President, and which included Ministers and some
legal experts, addressed this question of preventing the obliteration of
the powers and functions of traditional leaders. They came to the
conclusion that in order to prevent that from happening, there needed to be
amendments to Chapters 7 and 12.

Now, His Excellency our President has replied that this was merely a
recommendation. In fact, just a day before the local government elections,
some of the traditional leaders threatened that they would discourage their
subjects from voting the following day.

The recommendation that was made by the committee that was headed by none
other than the current President, who was then the Deputy President of the
country, was conveyed to us as traditional leaders. To say that that was
not an agreement but a recommendation that was rejected is something else.
I was in the Cabinet too. I don’t remember any meeting of the Cabinet where
a recommendation was rejected by the same Cabinet that had made the
recommendation. So, I say this is a moral issue. I’m not quizzing you, Your
Excellency, but I feel that as a member of this House and also as a
traditional leader – and also as an elder ... [Laughter.] ... I would not
want my country to be governed by deception. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, my recollection is that the
committee made a recommendation very formally, and it was not accepted –
that’s my recollection. Otherwise, if it was accepted, it would have been
implemented. And I’m sure there are other Ministers who were there at the
time who could also attest to what I’m saying.

I remember very well because I headed that commitee and I was one of those
who gave a report on this matter. I think long thereafter, quite a number
of people complained about the fact that that recommendation was not
accepted. That is my recollection, and we can go to the records. In fact, I
couldn’t understand why the traditional leaders complained about the fact
that government did not accept our recommendation. There are quite a few
Ministers who were there, who could attest to that.

Nantsi impandla ka ... [Here is the bald head of...]

The SPEAKER: No, not today, hon President.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I’m just saying, ngelinye ilanga, [on
another day]. The point I’m making is that on record, the recommendation of
that subcommittee was not accepted. That I remember very well. Thank you,
hon Speaker.

               Signing into law of Competition Amendment Bill

6.    Mrs P de Lille (ID) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   When does he intend signing the Competition Amendment Bill [B31D
            – 2008] into law;

      (2)   what has prevented him from signing the Bill into law;


      (3)   whether these obstacles will soon be resolved; if not, why not;
            if so, when?                                       NO820E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The amendment Bill was introduced to
Parliament in 2008. The Presidency has received submissions from interested
and affected parties citing the perceived unconstitutionality of certain
provisions of the Bill. I am still considering the submissions and will
make a decision soon thereafter. We are aware of the importance of the
matter and will move with the necessary speed to finalise it. I thank you,
hon Speaker.

Ms P DE LILLE: Thank you for your response, Mr President. I am sure that
the submissions you have received from interested and affected parties do
not include the poor. The same people were here before Parliament in public
hearings and made the same points and they didn’t want to listen to us.

I am also glad that you said that there are perceived constitutional
differences. The fact of the matter is, Mr President, that there are two
legal opinions - one for and one against. It is best to leave the
adjudication of these matters to the courts – deciding which opinion is
correct. We only want you to sign that legislation now.

The hon Minister of Economic Development made a statement a week ago in
this Parliament in which he said that the Competition Commission has been
helped and measures have been stepped up to deal with the people in the
food chain, and all the collusion taking place there.

Once you sign that Act, Mr President, it will become a criminal offence for
company directors to continue fleecing the poor. That is what we are asking
for. I think you will agree with me – this is my question – that, if you
don’t sign the Act now, and the Competition Commission proceeds with their
investigations to prosecute, these company directors will get off scot-free
because you can’t apply the law retrospectively. That is why I feel that
this is important because fines are not a proper deterrent to these
directors. Therefore, it is vitally important that we need to get this Act
as soon as possible in order to safeguard the poor against these
unscrupulous, greedy companies that are fleecing the poor. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I really appreciate the question
and understand it all too well. But as a government, we are faced with some
realities. We said that we want to maintain a position of being a
responsive government. I don’t think we could discriminate against other
citizens if they have concerns regarding the status they occupy. I think it
is important that if people have concerns, you should respond to those
concerns and deal with the matter.

I just said that we are going to try and move as quickly as possible to
ensure that we consider and respond to those who have issues. But we can’t
just stand in one place forever, particularly regarding the legal opinion
of whether this is constitutional or not. It is very strong to say it is
constitutional. But I think it would be unfair for the President not to
consider what citizens say if they are unhappy with it, respond to that and
then proceed. This is what we are trying to do at this point in time.

We made the point that we cannot waste time on this matter. To some it is
about running a business, but to others it is about poverty that they are
faced with. We take that into account.

Mnr S J F MARAIS: Speaker, meneer die President, ek gaan in Afrikaans vra,
as u u gehoorstuk wil insit.

Die PRESIDENT VAN DIE REPUBLIEK: Wag so bietjie. [Gelag.] Goed, jy kan maar
voortgaan.

Mnr S J F MARAIS: Baie dankie, meneer die President, soos u bewus is, ly
gewone verbruikers baie swaar onder die huidige ekonomiese toestande.
Vertroue is op ’n laagtepunt en soveel moontlik koste word na hulle
afgewentel sodat winste geoptimaliseer kan word en belasting aan die staat
betaal kan word.

Die huidige vertraging in die tekening van die wysigingswetsontwerp
veroorsaak dat ekonomiese ontwikkeling en groei nie gestimuleer kan word
nie. Voorbeelde van waar verbruikers daagliks swaarkry, is byvoorbeeld die
prysvasstelling van brood, die hoë en relatief onmededingende
selfoontariewe, die 100% korrelasie by al die banke en die vasstelling van
byvoorbeeld prima koerse sodra die Reserwebank die tekokoers aangepas
het.(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S J F MARAIS: Speaker, Mr President, I will be posing the question in
Afrikaans, if you would like to use your listening device.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Wait a minute. [Laughter.] Okay, you may
proceed.
Mr S J F MARAIS: Thank you very much, Mr President, as you are aware, the
average consumer is suffering a great deal under the current economic
conditions. Confidence is low and as large a proportion of costs as
possible are being passed on to consumers in order to be able to optimise
profits and pay tax to the state.

The current delay in the signing of the amending Bill is preventing
economic development and growth from being stimulated. Some examples of
consumers suffering on a daily basis are the fixing of bread prices, the
high and relatively uncompetitive cell phone tariffs, the 100% correlation
of banking cost and the determining of the prime rate as soon as the
Reserve Bank adjusts the repo rate.]

Mr President, delays in the signing of this Bill have exacerbated the agony
and perceptions amongst consumers that government has a hidden agenda or
hidden interest in certain implicated sectors. Sir, are you prepared to
institute investigations into implicated businesses and sectors? Failing
that, are you then admitting that there are some sectors and/or
organisations that are either too sensitive or too strategic for you to do
so? What is your message to the suffering consumers who are crying out for
decisive action? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I think I have just answered the
hon member De Lille on the matter. There are citizens in this country who
have raised issues about the Bill. If we were doing things in that way -
that once we are convinced we don’t care what other people are saying and
we just proceed - there would be chaos in the country and unfairness to
other citizens. I think it is important for every citizen who believes,
whether as a result of their greediness or whatever, that what we are doing
as government is not in line with the Constitution. You need to satisfy
that.

It is not that we are unsympathetic to the poor, but just that we have to
do things in a constitutional manner and according to the law. If we were
to work on our gut feeling, I am sure we would have fixed many things. But
those things would certainly have been found to be unconstitutional. Let us
allow the constitutional process to take its course.

As I have said, we are making considerations and moving quicker so that we
can reach the point of signing the law. If we didn’t do that and they took
us to court, you would be the first to say: “What type of a government is
this? When people say something is unconstitutional, they just move ahead
without realising that they can be sued”. It is important to satisfy
everyone. But more than anything else, we need to satisfy ourselves that
there are no new issues raised from the issues already raised, and then
proceed. We will move quickly to sign the law. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr President, you are seized with an issue of
constitutionality and you need to apply your mind to a constitutional
issue. Somehow this debate is an unfortunate occurrence as you apply your
mind, not a policy issue, but a legal issue. One respects the limitations
of the exercise you are involved in.

Nonetheless, we need to express a general concern throughout the
discussions that have been held as parliamentarians – at least in the Trade
and Industry committee. It has emerged how strongly South Africa as a
country is ruled and governed by monopolies, and this curtails an agreement
in restriction on trade. This is a small step in the right direction. One
would hope that private enforcement would follow, because without private
enforcement it is very difficult to bring about the liberalisation of the
market.

The question beyond the issue you are considering is whether you will
provide your personal leadership to ensure that the present system will
become more effective. We were flabbergasted to learn that the Competition
Commission is still withholding a report on the anticompetitive activities
of the banking system for fear of stepping on the banks’ toes. The banking
system is one that exercises enormous power and influence ...
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I am not sure whether the hon
member wants me to engage in theoretical economic issues. At the moment, we
are responding to a very specific issue. He is extending this debate beyond
that in so far as what my views are and the type of leadership I will give
on these economic issues. I think that would be going beyond the
requirements of the question at hand. We could debate those issues at a
different time. I don’t think I would really want to respond to an issue
raised outside of the question asked. [Applause.]

Mr P D DEXTER: Hon President, it is heartening to hear your commitment to
the Constitution in this regard. We really hope that you will take the same
approach when it comes to the appointment of the Chief Justice.

Secondly, we know that you are very familiar with our legal system. The
Constitutional Court is there for those who feel that the law has treated
them unfairly. There are two opinions on this matter. Our question is: Why
the delay? The longer the delay, the more opportunity there is for company
directors to cover their tracks. So, can you give us a categorical
assurance that the delay in the promulgation of this Act is not in any way
as a result of further representations from the private sector or any
organisations with vested interests and/or donors who may have possibly
funded the ruling party at any time, particularly in this election year?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I have always adhered to the
Constitution. I have never deviated, even under extreme provocation.
[Applause.] I can categorically state that there is no hidden agenda. The
truth of the matter is that I am considering the submissions. In the
submissions that I am considering, I have no consideration for which
company is which. I look at the submissions, as made, and look for one
thing only - whether they have a point on the unconstitutionality of the
Bill and nothing else. I just look at that issue. So, be certain that I do
apply my mind according to what the Constitution says. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                MLINDI KULASHE RECEIVES A BALLET SCHOLARSHIP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that the 17-year-old Cape Junior Ballet School’s Mlindi
         Kulashe from Nyanga has received a full scholarship to represent
         South Africa at the prestigious Genée International Ballet
         competition in Singapore next week;
   (2)      further notes that the Genée International Ballet Competition,
         which is held yearly, is one of the leading ballet competitions in
         the world;

   (3)      extends to him our sincerest congratulations on this exceptional
         achievement;

   (4)      wishes him the best of luck in this competition; and

   (5)      trusts that he will do us proud.

Agreed to.

                        DEATH OF SENATOR TED KENNEDY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon President, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers
and hon members, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes with sadness that Senator Ted Kennedy has passed away;

   (2)      further notes that Senator Kennedy, who many in this House were
         proud to call a friend, cared deeply for this country and took up
         the liberation cause with aplomb and distinction in the American
         corridors of power and across the free world;

   (3)      further notes that Senator Kennedy gave expression to the
         liberal democratic credo, which transcends any political party,
         that all humans are made in the image of God, and that a ‘tolerance
         of others’, a ‘generosity of spirit’ and a ‘love of freedom’ are
         the cornerstones of civilised society;

   (4)      recognises that because he knew, to borrow the elegant words of
         his late brother President John F Kennedy, ‘the midnight as well as
         the high noon, ‘because he understood’ the ordeal as well as the
         triumph of the human spirit’, he gave people in South Africa, as
         well as the people of the United States, and many others across the
         world, strength with which to overcome despair; and


   (5)      holds true that, as the last journey of this faithful pilgrim
         took him beyond the sunset, and as heaven’s morning broke, Senator
         Kennedy has left us a legacy of social justice to guide us as we
         continue to toil in the twilight.

Agreed to.


                         PANDEMIC INFLUENZA A: H1N1


                    (Statement by the Minister of Health)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy
President, Cabinet Ministers, hon Members of Parliament, ladies and
gentlemen, as the Minister of Health, I would like to address you on the
current situation faced by the country and the world at large because of
the outbreak of influenza A: H1N1.

It is necessary for me to take this step because I believe we are all
concerned by the recent rise in deaths in the country, particularly the
deaths of pregnant women. The death of any individual is extremely painful
and particularly regrettable, more so if that individual is a mother to be,
who forms part of the foundation of any family and society as a whole.

As I’ve indicated in my personal letters to all of you, which I hope you
have received, I wish to reiterate my message of my intention to use this
opportunity to give you information that will assist you personally to deal
with this disease and to request your assistance and personal involvement
in effectively communicating the messages of influenza A: H1N1 2009 to our
communities.

This is particularly important because whenever new diseases strike,
rumours abound and take over the thinking process of citizens. These
rumours will then inform the activities of the populace, which will usually
be wrong activities. I’m happy that the letters I’ve written have reached
all of you and hundreds of other people in all corners of this country.
This is shown by the feedback we have been receiving on the letters.

Among those who have responded to the letters very positively, I wish to
acknowledge the response of Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Shenge. Thank you
for your kind words indeed. I also wish to acknowledge the response
received from Dr Wilmot James of the DA. I want to assure him that I will
follow up on the proposals that he made in his response. Of course the
continuous feedback and encouragement I received from comrades in the ANC
and my colleagues in the Cabinet have also been extremely helpful in
shaping our response to this pandemic. I also wish to thank Minister Manuel
for responding on our behalf during yesterday’s statements.

It is true that we have sent letters, not only to you, but to all members
of the provincial legislatures, councillors, community development workers,
principals of 30 000 schools, rectors of universities, ministers of
religion, traditional healers and everybody who is a leader, including
editors of newspapers, in trying to communicate this matter. What these
responses and reactions indicate is the willingness and readiness of South
Africans to hold hands in confronting common challenges.

Developments around this pandemic have been changing every week. So, since
last week when I sent your letters, statistics have changed, and I wish to
update them. At the moment the disease has spread to 170 countries globally
and to 25 countries on the African continent. Today as I’m standing here in
front of you, the virus has affected 182 166 people. These are laboratory
confirmed cases. Globally we have 1 799 confirmed deaths, and in South
Africa to date we have 5 118 infections with 20 deaths. As health officials
globally and locally, we are worried by these deaths that have so far
occurred, calculated globally as 0,9% of those affected, and as 0,3% of
those people who are affected in South Africa.

It is worth noting that this virus affects people in the younger age
groups, particularly between the ages of 10 and 29 years. Most of these
individuals are in schools and institutions of higher learning. This is a
very serious departure from what influenzas generally do. As you know,
seasonal influenza typically attacks the elderly and kills between 250 000
to 500 000 people every year. But the H1N1 influenza, while it has killed
very few people so far, has only affected 3% of people over the age of 65
years. This has never happened in the history of influenzas; it’s a new
phenomenon.

The World Health Organisation, WHO, has advised that countries must
concentrate on mitigating the impact of the disease on their communities
because containing it seems not to have happened. So, in mitigating,
communication is the key. We have taken all the necessary steps to ensure
that we are doing that. However, I want to mention to this House that more
still needs to be done in the area of communication. That’s why we are
appealing for your assistance because you have constituencies and that is
where communities are.

It is generally believed by experts, unfortunately, all over the world,
including even those in the WHO, that at the end of this pandemic, 45% of
humanity is definitely going to be affected. However, we wish to emphasise
that while that is so, an overwhelming majority of people worldwide have
mild symptoms and don’t need any specialised attention and care.

The figures we are quoting here are for those who have been tested. We
still believe that there are thousands and thousands out there who were not
even aware that they had caught this influenza because it was very mild.
So, people with very mild symptoms must just be treated as if they have any
other common influenza which occurs on an annual basis, like I had last
year and every other year in winter.

However, we are worried particularly about four categories of people:
people with chronic heart or lung diseases seem to be succumbing; pregnant
women, specifically; people living with HIV and Aids; and lastly, people
with diabetes mellitus. We are particularly worried about these four groups
of people.

We are emphasising once more that people who experience moderate and severe
symptoms, which I’ve outlined in the letters and need not repeat here, must
immediately seek medical attention. We are also saying that those who have
mild symptoms, but fall within the categories that I’ve mentioned - chronic
heart and lung diseases, pregnant women, HIV/Aids, and people with diabetes
- must seek urgent attention, even if the symptoms are mild and seem like
ordinary influenza

The distribution of letters in the provinces has changed since last week
when I wrote you the letters. It indicates the following: the hardest hit
province is Gauteng, with 49% of infected people; the Western Cape, with
21%; KwaZulu-Natal, with 12%; the Eastern Cape, with 6,4%; Limpopo, with
3,5%; Mpumalanga, with 2,5%; the North West with 2,3%; the Free State, with
2%; and the Northern Cape, with 1%.

I wish to warn members that this has nothing to do with the way the disease
is spreading. It has a lot to do with where the testing facilities are.
People are testing every day, even those who are not sick. The majority of
laboratories are in Johannesburg. That is why 49% of the cases that are
reported are there. That is followed by the Western Cape for the same
reason. The death rate up to now is nine in the Western Cape, six in
Gauteng, two in the Eastern Cape, two in KwaZulu-Natal and one in the Free
State.

We will thoroughly investigate each death. However, present information
shows that nine of the dead people were pregnant women, four had chronic
heart diseases,one had diabetes and two had renal transplants. That is in
keeping with all the risk areas that we have mentioned up to now. We are
still trying our best to get more information on the other four.

Official testing is done by the National Institute of Communicable
Diseases. In other words, you can test in a private laboratory, but if they
reveal a death we will not communicate it until it has been confirmed by
the National Institute of Communicable Diseases. This is because it is the
only laboratory in Africa that has been accredited by the WHO. The fact
that many countries on the continent don’t seem to have the disease is
simply because they don’t have testing facilities. Most of them depend on
South Africa for testing.

We want to appeal again to people that waking up at your home in the
morning and rushing to the nearest private laboratory demanding to be
tested simply because you can afford to do so financially does not help
anyone. In fact, what it does is to clog up the health system as is the
case now. This practice has disadvantaged people who really deserved to be
tested.

Initially, when the pandemic started, laboratories could produce results
within 24 hours. Now it takes up to seven days to produce results because
people are just queuing up not because they have any symptoms, but simply
because they just feel the need to be on the safe side. We do not know how
testing puts you on the safe side anyway. Really, as one caller to SAFM
said, there doesn’t seem to be a breakdown of disease but a breakdown of
testing, and we should not allow that.

The treatment of choice is Tamiflu, and we are only using it for moderate
symptoms, severe symptoms and the categories of people that I’ve mentioned.
Mass treatment with Tamiflu will lead to mass resistance. I want to warn
members here today to be aware. We are not trying to hide treatment from
them.

If you are attacked, hon Speaker, you defend yourself. Don’t ever think
viruses will also be attacked without defending themselves. They do so and
in a cruel way. If you attack them continuously, even when it’s
unnecessary, they mutate. When they mutate, they become more dangerous.
That’s why we don’t want to give every South African Tamiflu. If we start
doing so, we’ll be destroying ourselves. It’s like that all over the world.


In line with the department’s commitment to reducing maternal mortality, we
have given instructions and directives to all doctors and health workers
that whenever they come across a pregnant woman who shows any symptoms,
they must give her Tamiflu immediately. They must not wait or try to do any
testing, it’s not necessary. They must just give her the treatment.

It is saddening to see pregnant women, in particular, who are dying because
of this influenza. Unfortunately this phenomenon of pregnant women dying is
a global one. I wish to announce to this House that because of this, the
department is busy increasing the stock of Tamiflu by R30 million so that
as we get very busy we can be prepared.

The closure of institutions of learning, workplaces, shopping complexes and
malls has not proved to be helpful in the countries that have practiced
that. We advise that if there are more people - learners or educators or
even workers - absent from work or from school, institutions must consult
the Department of Health and the Department of Education and we will take a
joint decision on the correct course of action.

I wish to assure you and members of this House that everything is being
done by scientists the world over, working together with the WHO, to try
and produce a vaccine for this disease, because that is the only thing that
will save humanity. If things go well, such a vaccine might be available
within a few months. Over the last weekend I attended an international
conference on this pandemic influenza in Beijing, China. Most of the
Ministers from the heavily affected countries were at that conference.

The WHO briefed us that at the moment, 13 candidate vaccines have been
collated and distributed to all vaccine manufacturers all over the world
who must start the process of trials and production. However, producing a
vaccine as it is going will not be completed in less than six months; that
is not possible. So, it is estimated that if we are very lucky, the first
acceptable vaccine from these candidates might be available by November
2009. If we are not very lucky, we might have to wait until April 2010.

Unfortunately, there is no capacity in developing countries to produce
their own vaccines. At the moment, all vaccine production is being
processed in Europe and America, with China also in the process of doing
so. They are busy doing tests on 13 000 people within China.

However, the disturbing feature about today’s world and the manner in which
the world is arranged has been expressed by the Minister of Health for
Cambodia in the conference, who noted that the developed world, after
producing the vaccine, may prefer to cover their own population first
before thinking about the developing world. China made it very clear in the
conference that if they can produce a vaccine, they will first start with
the 67 million people who are pregnant in that country.

I’ve spoken to my colleague, the Minister of Science and Technology, and we
both think that ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: ... 67 million people is only 4% of China’s
population. [Laughter.] There’s nothing funny about that, it is a fact. But
for us it is obviously a very tall order.

I’ve spoken to my colleague the Minister of Science and Technology, hon
Minister Naledi Pandor, and we both think that South Africa has arrived at
a situation where we have no option but to start developing our own vaccine
capacity, not only for H1N1, but generally and for other diseases.
[Applause.] I just want to disclose that the statement from Dr Wilmot is
also about that. It’s very important, that’s why I want to follow it up.

A special word of gratitude to the hon Speaker of the National Assembly,
hon M V Sisulu, for acceding to our request to address the House this
afternoon. Thank you very much, hon Speaker. We take advantage of your kind
advice to keep on informing this House about this matter because it is a
very important matter. I wish to thank you and all South Africans in
anticipation of your active involvement in communicating and helping to
mitigate the effects of this disease. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Deputy Speaker, hon President, Minister, may I, on behalf of
the DA, convey our deepest sympathy to the families who have lost loved
ones due to the H1N1 virus.

While the DA realises that we have seasonal flu and that there are
unfortunately casualties every year, we still believe more could and should
have been done to educate the public about H1N1 as well as the ways of
reducing the spread of the virus.

We welcome the Minister’s statement here today. The Minister knows that I
have great respect for him, but honestly, Minister, it is a few months too
late. Since 28 April 2009, that is four months ago, the DA has been calling
on you to do what you have just done today; make a public announcement and
take the public into your confidence. We have also been calling for an
educational ... [Interjections.] We have, Minister.

We have been calling for an educational programme to educate the general
public on how best we can reduce the spread of the virus. This is because
we wanted to prevent a huge spike at our health facilities which we are
experiencing currently, and we cannot cope. By educating the public, you
not only reduce the spread of the virus, but you also spread it out over a
longer period and thus enable the health facilities to cope in a better
manner.

It does seem, to some degree, that we are now closing the stable gate after
the horse has actually bolted. But we do appreciate, Minister, the actions
you are taking today and the public education programme that you have
embarked on recently.

The purpose of educating the public on basic hygiene, as I have said, was
to slow down the spread of H1N1. There are some questions, hon Minister,
that we would have liked you to have elaborated on; maybe one of the ANC’s
speakers can elaborate on them. Are the staff at hospitals using N95
respirator masks as opposed to common surgical masks in order to reduce the
risk of being infected with the virus? The N95 respirator masks are the
only ones that have been shown to reduce or alter the infection ability by
95% in order to help medical staff not to contract the virus.

Minister, you also mentioned that you would like vulnerable groups to
receive Tamiflu at the first signs of flu or H1N1 infection. But on our
recent trip to the Eastern Cape - and the portfolio committee members can
attest to this - we saw queues at public health institutions where people
couldn’t even access ARVs. ARVs were at the dispensary, but people couldn’t
even get to the front of the queue in order to get that medication. In fact
our bus driver’s wife had been waiting for a week for her ARVs and was sent
to hospital because she fell ill. What steps are in place to ensure that
vulnerable groups will receive Tamiflu timeously and not have to wait in
long queues?

We would also like to know what strategies the government has for infection
control at public health facilities. A sure way of ensuring the fast spread
of H1N1 is to have people with those symptoms waiting in waiting rooms for
hours on end, infecting everybody around them. So, what strategies do we
have in place for people we suspect have the virus to receive medication
other than them waiting in waiting rooms all the time?

We commend you for your comments with regard to creating our own capacity
for vaccines. But what have we done in order to place orders, hon Minister?
While we appreciate that Europe and America want to look after their own
people first, have you taken any steps to order the vaccine and how do you
envisage ensuring that vulnerable groups get the vaccine? [Interjections.]
[Time expired.]

Mr D A KGANARE: Deputy Speaker, while we welcome the belated interventions
with regard to the H1N1 virus, the strategy – assuming that there was a
strategy – appeared to be to simply pull down the shutters and hope that it
would go away; just like an ostrich that hides its head in the sand
believing that danger will pass.

At first, the country was told not to panic, that everything was under
control and that this epidemic was something happening far, far away.
Furthermore, the country was told that this must just be treated as normal
influenza and that people must stay at home and it would go away. Then
people began to die. Suddenly the department began to issue warnings to
vulnerable people, the HIV positive, pregnant women, etc. The department
admitted insufficient laboratory capacity and medicinal resources to
protect the citizens of the country against this potentially lethal virus.
Given the dynamics of the very mobile population, it should have been
expected that no country could escape the spread of this virus and others.
It is therefore incumbent on a responsive government to ensure the timeous
and efficient implementation of strategies to minimise the impact of such
eventualities, and have transparent communication and education at the
earliest possible opportunity.

We extend our sincerest condolences to the loved ones and the dependants of
those who have succumbed to this dangerous virus. We wish all those who are
currently fighting the virus a speedy recuperation and call on the
Department of Health to take all steps necessary to prevent further
spreading of the virus and ensure sufficient availability of personnel,
laboratory capacity and vaccines. I thank you.

Ms H S MSWELI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon members, the IFP
has been made aware of the promotion of the rapid testing kits for the H1N1
virus, which are not endorsed by the National Institute for Communicable
Diseases, the national Department of Health and the WHO. The IFP wishes to
caution against reliance on non-laboratory- based tests with low levels of
sensitivity to test for the H1N1 virus.

We call on doctors who have high-risk patients to continue treatment for
flu while they are waiting for the outcome of results. We support the hon
Minister in his call for doctors to prescribe Tamiflu to high risk groups,
including pregnant women. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M H HOOSEN: Deputy Speaker, I would like to start by thanking the hon
Minister for his honesty when he said that we have not done enough to deal
with effective communication on this matter. When I raised it in the House
yesterday, hon Minister Manuel stood up and defended it. Obviously, today
the hon Minister of Health has confirmed that we have not done enough.

I want to share with hon Minister Manuel, in his absence, some advice late
that my dad gave to me: “You must learn to shut your mouth when you don’t
know what you are talking about.” So, I hope he takes that message with
him.

Deputy Speaker, I still believe that we are not effectively communicating
the fact that symptoms differ slightly from adults to children and to
pregnant women, the fact that HIV positive patients are more susceptible to
contracting the virus because of low immune levels and that this has the
potential for disaster in our country.

The Minister called for the urgent administration of Tamiflu to pregnant
women yesterday, but the manufactures of the product state on their website
that this medication is not recommended for pregnant women as the effects
on the unborn child are unknown.

Discouraging people from visiting their doctors or undergoing routine lab
tests will only serve to further exacerbate the problem. [Interjections.]
[Time expired.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Deputy Speaker, I prepared this statement first, but I feel
it has been overtaken by events after the hon Minister presented his
statement.

The Minister’s statement today reiterates a message that should perhaps
have been spoken sooner or more loudly. However, the UDM appreciates the
statement by the Minister as it has allayed the fears that the UDM had.

The fears are as follows: avoiding the unnecessary cause of panic and
potential detrimental rush for treatment; the balance that needs to be
struck between general public awareness on the one hand and targeted
treatment for those who actually need special medication and treatment on
the other hand; and the identification of high risk potential patients by
medical professionals, particularly pregnant women and HIV infected people
and providing them with the relevant medication. These have really been
addressed by the Minister. That is why I say the Minister has allayed the
fears that the UDM had. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

Ms C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP extends their deepest sympathy to the
families and friends who have lost their loved ones due to this virus. The
ACDP has also been calling on Minister Motsoaledi for some time now to
address the nation regarding the increasing numbers of people being
infected with the H1N1 virus and to detail measures put in place to ensure
that public hospitals and clinics are on alert and prepared to handle
patients as serious cases increase.

The public needs this reassurance as a lack of communication increases
speculation and a panic reaction. So, we appreciate the Minister’s efforts
to address Parliament and the nation and to communicate broadly.

The need to sensitise the population regarding this virus and the need to
treat all flu symptoms seriously has been and still is important. This is
not just because H1N1 flu poses a threat, but also because all kinds of flu
are becoming increasingly problematic and that simple health and hygiene
education significantly reduces our vulnerability.

South Africa’s susceptibility, due to the vast numbers of people living
with HIV and Aids, has been of particular concern. The fact that pregnant
women, children and young adults appear to be vulnerable adds to this
concern. [Interjections.] Okay. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms M N MATLADI: Re le UCDP, re isa matshidiso go malapa a ba ba
latlhegetsweng ka ntlha ya bolwetse jo. [We, as the UCDP, would like to
convey our condolences to the families who have lost their loved ones due
to this disease.]

As colleagues have already maintained, the virus is deadly. Precautions
have to be taken through advocacy campaigns to register its symptoms, what
to do when one has symptoms, when to seek emergency care, the medication
available for the disease and who is at risk.

The UCDP supports the fact that should a significant number of learners or
students or residents of an institution be affected by the spread of the
influenza, an outbreak investigation should be made and decision-making
should take place on how to asses and address the situation.

The number of death cases was reported as 20 this morning, and the Minister
has already confirmed this. We are saying, as hon members and public
representatives, let’s join our hands together with the Department of
Health and fight the virus. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M B GOQWANA: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Mr Deputy President,
Ministers present, Members of Parliament, I am not going to take very long,
but I want to start by making a positive statement. I don’t think we can be
defeated by a unicellular organism whilst we are multicellular organisms,
including our brains. [Applause.]

Before I touch on the H1N1, let me digress a little. If someone confides in
me about something, and I do investigations to find out what is actually
going on, that person and I have a contract. If I go and blurt it out to
the media, then I would be breaching the confidentiality. This is with
reference to our young lady, Caster Semenya, where health professionals did
something that should not be done.

I was looking at most of our laws - I am not sure if I’ve missed it -
trying to find a law on genetics. We need to look at whether we can’t have
a law on genetics in South Africa so that we can try and handle some of
these things. Those health professionals need to explain why they breached
the confidentiality. I was just digressing.

Let me come back to the H1N1. This is a virus, and it is unicellular. It is
not only unicellular, it is a nucleus. It could be RNA or DNA. Because
viruses are small and unicellular, they can mutate. All I’m trying to say
is, let’s not think this is the last of them. Next year we might get a new
one that is going to mutate. All we need to do is to ensure that our
researchers are on their toes searching for solutions to diseases that
mutate and cause problems.
Most of us who are well and do not have any particular disease need not
worry much. I am not saying that this does not cause death. People do not
die as a result of viruses, but from other conditions associated with the
viruses. If a person suspects that they have H1N1, they must protect
themselves because there are opportunistic infections that can kill more
than the virus itself. The only viruses that kill are those that affect the
heart and cause it to stop suddenly. This happens when someone has cardiac
arrest. That is where the problem lies.

The Minister said very clearly that people who are vulnerable to this
disease must be considered. For the 20 patients who have died, I wish I
could get their postmortems so that we could know what caused their deaths.
There might have been something that was underlying that might have caused
the deaths over and above the virus. I am trying to allay some of the
anxiety. I am not saying this is not a serious topic, but we must know that
it might be around for some time and that we might even get new viruses.
This won’t be killing everybody but only those who particularly have
problems.

With regard to emergency institutions like hospitals, if somebody goes
there displaying lethal symptoms, they must be attended to before other
patients. For example, if you are pregnant or have cardiac problems or lung
problems, then you must be treated before other patients because you might
have this virus. You must be admitted before it causes problems. These are
some of the things we need to do, and the department is capable of handling
these things.

We must remember that our country has poor people. Poverty goes with
malnutrition, and malnutrition goes with low immunity. Low immunity might
cause problems in the rural areas. The department is aware of this and it
is going to handle it.

This virus is transmitted through touching. It does not jump from person to
person, but it is transmitted through touching or getting close to another
person. The closeness does not involve sexual intercourse. It is just
closeness to a particular person.

When we talk of a low immune system, we must remember that stress and
depression can lower your immunity. If you have stress from your
parliamentary work, you must be aware that the H1N1 virus might attack you.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we all need to get Tamiflu. I know
that the department has it, but we must remember that if we use it before
being infected, the virus is going to develop resistance because it mutates
easily. Like I said, it is unicellular and mutates easily. In fact we might
not have another drug that could be used on this.

As the ANC, we are confident that we cannot be defeated by a unicellular
organism. In fact, the ANC, being a uniparty, defeated all multiparties
since 1994 until today. So, we cannot be defeated by this virus. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the presence in the gallery of His Royal Highness Prince Guduza
Dlamini, the chairperson of the SADC Parliamentary Forum and his
delegation. You’re welcome to the National Assembly, even though it’s at
the tail end. [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I am sorry
that the hon doctor has finished. I wanted to ask him why he looked at the
President and at me when he talked about vulnerable people. [Laughter.]

Mr M B GOQWANA: I looked at you and not at the President. [Laughter.]

There are two reasons why I looked at you and the President. I looked at
the President because as the President of the country, he carries all the
stress of the country. That might lower his immune system. The reason I
looked at you is because you said you are an elderly person. [Laughter.]
The elderly might have problems. [Laughter.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing, Engineering
        and related Services Education and Training Authority (MER-Seta)
        for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP
        99-2009].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education and
        Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 85-2009].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
        Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2008-2009, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 86-2009].
     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
        Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education
        and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 95-2009].
     e) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
        Education and Training Authority (Agri-Seta) for 2008-2009,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 84-2009].

     f) Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
        Manufacturing Industry Sector Education and Training Authority
        (Foodbev-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 92-2009}.


     g) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Training and
        Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority (ETDP-
        Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
        [RP 89-2009].

National Assembly

1. The Speaker


    (1)     Letters from the Minister of Finance dated 4 August 2009 and 13
        August 2009, requesting the relevant parliamentary committees, in
        terms of section 4(2) of the Land and Agricultural Development Bank
        Act (No 15 of 2002), to nominate by 28 August 2009, or as soon as
        possible thereafter, candidates for appointment to the board of the
        Land Bank.

        Referred also to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for
        consideration (also see ATC 21 August 2009, p 571.)

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the filling of
   a vacancy on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority of
   South Africa, dated 25 August 2009:



    The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
    request by the National Assembly to submit a shortlist of candidates to
    the Minister of Communications for appointment to the Council of the
    Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa), referred
    to it on 18 June 2009, reports as follows:


    The Committee invited the public to nominate persons for consideration
    and recommendation to the Minister. The Committee received 86
    nominations. One candidate withdrew his application.


    The Committee considered the nominations and agreed to shortlist nine
    candidates. Of the nine candidates, Mr L S Mkumatela and Mr M M Zokwe
    subsequently withdrew their applications. The following seven
    candidates were interviewed on 18 August 2009:


       1. Ms Josephine Kwena Mabotja
       2. Mr David Vannucci
       3. Ms Dillo Lehlokoe
       4. Ms Zandile Mxaku
       5. Mr Edmund Mihloti Baloyi
       6. Mr William Stucke
       7. Mr Khulile Boqwana


    After having interviewed the candidates, the Committee recommends, in
    order of preference, that the House, in terms of section 7 of the
    Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Act (Act No 13 of
    2000 – as amended) submits to the Minister a list of suitable
    candidates at least one and a half times the number of councillors to
    be appointed, namely:


       1. Mr Khulile Boqwana
       2. Mr William Stucke.


Report to be considered.




