---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 June 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-06-10
---

                           WEDNESDAY, 10 JUNE 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14.01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

 READOPTION OF THE RULES AND ORDERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AT THE START OF
           A NEW PARLIAMENT WITHOUT A FORMAL PROCESS OF REAPPROVAL

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr. Speaker, on a point of order: We have given
notice of this point of order both in the Rules Committee and directly to
yourself, Mr Speaker, and we feel that a formal ruling from the Chair is
now required.

The past National Assemblies have, as a new Parliament begins, followed the
practice of adopting the Rules tacitly and implicitly, without any formal
process of reapproval. In terms of the Constitution, each new Parliament is
not bound by the Rules of the previous one, which lapse at each election.
After each election, the NCOP explicitly readopts its Rules, and so do many
other parliaments.

We have given notice that we are not willing to lend our consensus to the
process of implicit and tacit reapproval of the Rules, and have requested
that an open question be put to the House in order for the Rules to be
readopted. We have specifically pointed out the unconstitutional and
undemocratic nature of the Rules which expropriate all members of this
House of their constitutional right to introduce legislation directly in
the Assembly, and its committees, without prior approval from the private
member’s committee and from the majority controlling it.

Therefore, I submit that this House now has no Rules. Because this House
must have Rules in terms of section 57(2) of the Constitution, we submit
that it is incumbent upon you, Mr Speaker, to put to this House the
question of whether this House intends to readopt the Rules which were in
force at the end of the Third Parliament.

 READOPTION OF THE RULES AND ORDERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AT THE START OF
           A NEW PARLIAMENT WITHOUT A FORMAL PROCESS OF REAPPROVAL

                                  (Ruling)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Dr Oriani-Ambrosini of the IFP has, in several
forums and on various occasions, put forward the argument that it is a
constitutional requirement for the National Assembly to readopt its Rules
and Orders with or without amendments at the start of each new Parliament
before it can proceed to conduct its business.

The Standing Rules are not safeguarded by any special procedure against
amendment, repeal or suspension, whether explicitly or by any order
contrary to their purport. Each House has full authority over its
proceedings, except insofar as such procedure is prescribed by statute.
There is, however, no specific constitutional requirement that enjoins the
House to readopt its Rules and Orders at the start of each new Parliament.
Rules which the House or its predecessor adopted, bind it, subject to its
own power to suspend, amend, replace or repeal them.

In other words, the existence of a new Parliament does not invalidate the
decisions and resolutions of previous Parliaments; they remain valid until
such time as they are amended or rescinded by a new Parliament. The same
argument applies to the Rules of the Assembly. They were adopted by the
House and remain valid until amended or adjusted by a new decision of the
House.

Also, should the House be required to readopt its Rules at the first
Sitting of each new Parliament, newly elected members who are not familiar
with the complexities and details of the Rules will be at a definite
disadvantage. It would, of course, amount to best practice if proposed Rule
amendments were first properly discussed, debated and considered by the
Rules Committee, a forum in which all parties are represented.

For the reasons stated above, I am therefore ruling that the House is not
required to readopt its Rules at the start of a new Parliament. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr P D DEXTER: I give notice that on the next sitting day of the House I
will, on behalf of the Congress of the People, move:

   That the House –

      1) notes the ongoing harassment and victimisation of some public
         servants and local government officials because of their political
         association with COPE;

      2) further notes the statement by the President of the Republic that
         the Public Service belongs to all South Africans;


      3) calls on the Minister for the Public Service and Administration
         and the Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional
         Affairs to investigate these and any other instances of
         victimisation and harassment and take steps to ensure that workers
         in the Public Service and local government be protected from such
         harassment and victimisation. [Applause.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: I hereby give notice that I intend moving the following
motion:


   That this House debates Eskom’s proposed tariff hikes, its management of
   the electricity crisis and the long-term solutions to ensure a
   sustainable and affordable energy supply.

Thank you.

Mr P VAN DALEN: I hereby give notice that I on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move the following motion:


   That the House debates the continuous underperformance of a number of
   state-owned enterprises and the merits of selling off unprofitable state-
   owned enterprises to the private sector.

Mr M WATERS: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move the following motion on behalf of the DA:

   That the House      debates the current problems surrounding the
   country’s human resources for health care that has resulted in large
   numbers of South African medical practitioners leaving the country to
   work abroad, and the possible solutions to these problems.

Thank you.

Mr M H STEELE: I hereby give notice on behalf of the DA that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move the following motion:

  That this House –


  (1) notes the ruling in the Pietermaritzburg High Court on 12 September
       2008 supporting the establishment of a commission of inquiry into
       allegations concerning corruption relating to the arms deal; and

  (2) resolves to call on the President of the Republic to appoint an
       independent commission of inquiry, headed by a retired judge, to
       investigate whether any abuse of power, and/or corruption and/or any
       other irregularities occurred during the arms deal.

Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates the devastating impact of prostitution, sex
  tourism, trafficking in women, and other such practices on women in
  developing countries and oppressed groups in developed countries.

Thank you.

           BAFANA BAFANA’S PREPARATION FOR THE CONFEDERATIONS CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –

  (1) notes that Bafana Bafana beat Poland 1 – 0 in their final warm-up
        match for the Confederations Cup on Saturday, 6 June 2009;


  (2) further notes that they beat Mauritius 2 – 0 in a friendly match on
        Saturday, 30 May 2009;


  (3) acknowledges that both these wins are a great boost not only for
        Bafana Bafana but for all South Africans ahead of the Confederations
        Cup;
  (4) recognises that around 20 000 spectators came to watch Bafana Bafana
        play against Poland at the Orlando stadium, highlighting the great
        excitement felt by the country for the upcoming Confederations Cup
        and the 2010 Fifa World Cup; and


  (5) congratulates the team and coach Joel Santana on their victories and
        wishes them well for their opening Confederations Cup Group A match
        against Iraq on Sunday, 14 June 2009.


Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                    (The late Prof Dirk Cornelis Du Toit)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move:

  That the House –

  (1) notes with profound sadness the untimely death of hon Dirk Cornelis du
        Toit on Monday, 1 June 2009;


  (2) further notes that Dirk du Toit matriculated from Hoërskool Boshof
        with the best results in the then Orange Free State and received a
        bursary from the Department of Defence to study Chemical Engineering
        and that he gave this up in order to read law at the then University
        of the Orange Free State;


  (3) recognises that in 1994 he was among the first representatives of our
        people dispatched by the African National Congress to serve in the
        first ever democratic Parliament and that he was considered an
        expert in Legal Hermeneutics, Constitutional Law and Administrative
        Law and hence was intimately involved in the drafting of the
        Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (1996);


  (4) recalls that long before he became a Member of Parliament representing
        the African National Congress, Dirk was strongly motivated by a
        desire to establish the rights of farmworkers, who under apartheid
        were entirely at the mercy of farmers, and that he believed this was
        a necessary precondition for the development and upliftment of the
        rural areas;


  (5) remembers that he had a gentle personality, was a lucid thinker,
        deeply committed to the cause of justice and social progress;


  (6) acknowledges that his untimely death has robbed South Africa of one of
        its exceptional academics and politicians who contributed immensely
        to the liberation of South Africa;


  (7) believes that he discharged his responsibilities with dedication,
        discipline, diligence and humility and that the life of this great
        leader epitomises heroism and commitment to the cause of the poor;
        and


     8) conveys its condolences to the Du Toit family, the African National
        Congress and the trade union movement in general, and assures them
        that the loss sustained by them is not theirs alone but equally felt
        by Parliament.


Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I rise in support of the motion proposed by the
Chief Whip of the ANC.

There are not many members of the first democratically elected Parliament -
perhaps we can call it the class of 1994 - left in this House. For those of
us who were here in 1994, remember the excitement and the sense of
anticipation that surrounded the formation of that new Parliament.

One of the new boys in that Parliament was a Free Stater with a very strong
Afrikaans accent sitting in the ANC benches. In many ways he seemed to be
out of place at first. His background seemed to suggest that he should have
been anywhere but here as a member of the liberation struggle. As the
Sunday Times dated 7 June 2009 reported, his father was rumoured to be a
member of the Broederbond and after matriculating he received a bursary
from the Department of Defence to study Chemical Engineering.

Dirk du Toit was a very proud Afrikaner and was, in fact, a very staunch
opponent of apartheid. He had been a member of the Progressive Federal
Party – a party which I was also a proud member of – and from there he
moved easily into the ANC, where he had an illustrious career.

As the Chief Whip of the ANC has pointed out, Prof du Toit clearly was an
excellent academic. He did not complete his degree in Chemical Engineering
but gave up his studies to study law. He was – as we know – an advocate of
the Supreme Court but, more importantly, after completing a Doctorate in
Law in the Netherlands, he returned to the University of the Free State in
1975 and became the Head of Department of Philosophy and Law, in fact, a
professor of law at that university.

It was from this position that he became a Member of Parliament in 1994 and
one can recall the gravelly voice of Dirk du Toit making his point as a new
member of this Parliament. His commitment to his ideals and to his party
was never in doubt and he spoke with passion about matters close to his
heart. It was well known that his particular area of concern was about the
rights of farmworkers who were very much at the mercy of the farmers during
the years of apartheid.
What was interesting about Dirk is that he was never a farmer himself and
had no background in farming. Certainly, this raised the ire of some in
this country when he was appointed as a Deputy Minister of Agriculture in
1999. But Dirk did not allow that to stop him from doing his job and he
ensured that his position gave him a platform to do what he could to end
the exploitation of farmworkers and to stop the unfair evictions. He was
also heavily committed to the Land Reform Programme and to the development
of emerging farmers.

I must say, Mr Speaker, that as a party we did not necessarily agree with
everything he said or did. We sometimes believed that the way in which he
approached things was incorrect, but we never ever doubted his deep
commitment to his job as the Deputy Minister and his party, the ANC.

We have all observed that Dirk looked frail in his last years at Parliament
and it was not a surprise to us that he decided to retire in 2009.
Nevertheless, we were saddened to hear of his sudden passing away at the
beginning of the month. His memory is etched into the Constitution of this
country because of the prominent role he played in the writing of it. Those
of us who remember him will certainly remember that new boy of 1994 and
never forget him.

To conclude, we do offer our sincere condolences to his wife, his family,
and his party, the ANC, which certainly has lost a deeply committed member.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Hon Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, Members of
Parliament, I also wish to rise to support the motion of the Chief Whip of
the ruling party. The passing away of Dirk du Toit has robbed the South
African community of one of the brains, architects and practitioners of
social transformation. Having known and worked with him as a colleague in
the last Cabinet, Dirk at all times presented himself as a man of reason
and principle. His organisation, the agricultural community at large and
indeed the people of South Africa surely must draw inspiration from the
work of this man of exceptional commitment.

Dirk, as a warm and welcoming person, did not shy away from confronting
problems directly. He applied his mind to all discussions at Cabinet level
and presented his ideas without fear or favour. Dirk passes away at the
time when our country is in dire need of leaders of his calibre. As Cope,
we mourn and grieve with his family, his organisation, the ANC, and the
South African people. In this regard, we want to thank his family for
lending him to us. We celebrate his life and contributions in making South
Africa a better place to live in. The people of South Africa will always
remember him as one of them. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the IFP and its president, Prince
Mangosuthu Buthelezi, I stand to express our deep and sincere condolences:
Firstly, to the family and close relatives of the late Deputy Minister Dirk
du Toit, who was an MP, for their loss; and secondly, to the ANC for the
loss of a dedicated cadre and comrade. Indeed, the national organised
agriculture and farmworkers in particular must feel robbed of the
compassion that he brought into his portfolio as a Deputy Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs.

Much has been said and written since the departure of Prof Du Toit about
his history, his family and his achievements. I will therefore not repeat
this today. It is, however, important at this juncture to mention that in
my contact with Prof Du Toit while in the executive, I found him to be a
man of good character, with immense intellect. He always made insightful
contributions, be it in the constitutional negotiating processes that
brought about this democratic dispensation, or in the Cabinet where he
served as the Deputy Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs. He will
surely be missed, and may his soul rest in peace. [Applause.]

Ms P DE LILLE: Hon Speaker, on behalf of the ID, we bring our condolences
to the family and friends of the late Prof Dirk du Toit and to the ANC.
Prof Du Toit was a man of principles. He refused to sacrifice his
principles when he came under attack for his association with the ANC and
oppressed people.

In 2007, I approached Prof Dirk du Toit with a number of outstanding land
claims in the Free State, the Western Cape and the Northern Cape. He worked
together with us to solve many of those land claims. That is the kind of
person he was – accessible. I used to write him a note many times here in
Parliament, and the next day I would get a response to the query I had
raised with him. We are certainly going to miss him.

He has made his contribution. He fought in the struggle against apartheid.
When he came here in 1994, while we were busy writing the final
Constitution, he also made his contribution.

Lastly, I will always remember him because he was the first chairperson of
the disciplinary committee established by Parliament to discipline me when
the ANC wanted to throw me out of Parliament. So, I will always remember
that. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Mr Speaker, Ministers and Deputy Ministers and Members of
Parliament, ...

... dit was regtig vir ons almal ’n groot skok om van adv Dirk du Toit, die
voormalige Adjunkminister van Landbou en Grondsake, se afsterwe te verneem.
Hy is, soos ons almal weet, verlede Vrydag ter aarde bestel. Al was ons ten
volle bewus daarvan dat sy gesondheid die afgelope tyd veel te wense
oorgelaat het, het geeneen van ons so ’n skielike wending verwag nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[... it really was a great shock to all of us to learn of the passing away
of Adv Dirk du Toit, the former Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Land
Affairs. He was, as we all know, laid to rest last Friday. Although we were
fully aware that his health left much to be desired in recent times, none
of us expected such a sudden turn of events.]

Realising to the fullest extent the heavy loss sustained by those nearest
and dearest to him, the UDM tenderly condoles the family and friends of our
deceased brother and colleague in the period of trial and affliction, and
commends them to the keeping of Him who looks with compassion upon those
who mourn.

Sy skielike heengaan word deur ons almal betreur. [We all mourn his sudden
passing.]

Re re robala ka khutšo, Moafrika. [We say rest in peace, citizen of South
Africa.]

Dankie. [Thank you.]

Dr C P MULDER: Agbare mnr die Speaker, agb kollegas, die skielike dood van
ons kollega adv Du Toit het ons almal herinner aan die kosbaarheid, maar
ook die tydelikheid van die lewe.

Ek het adv Du Toit leer ken na 1994, spesifiek met die
grondwetonderhandelingsproses. Ek en hy was betrokke by die formulering van
artikel 185 wat tans in die Grondwet is. Ek onthou sy insette en die
gestoei wat ons gehad het onder mekaar oor die bewoording daar. Die van u
wat vir Dirk goed geken het, sal hom onthou as ’n persoon wat sterk gestaan
het by sy standpunt, wat graag gedebateer het en wat nie bang was vir ’n
argument nie. Hy was altyd deel van ’n groter gesprek waar hy met
oortuiging sy party en die saak waarin hy geglo het, gedien het op ’n
waardige en ’n respekvolle manier.

Ek wil graag namens die VF Plus ons medelye oordra aan sy party, wat ’n
kollega verloor het, maar ook veral aan sy gesin, wat ’n pa en ’n eggenoot
verloor het. Dit is tragies en jammer dat ’n kollega wat maar so pas 65
jaar oud geword het en op die vooraand was om sy aftrede en sy oudag te
geniet, skielik weggeruk is en sy gesin alleen agterbly. Ons dra graag ons
simpatie en hulde oor aan sy party en familie. Baie dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Mr Speaker, hon colleagues, the sudden passing away of our
colleague Adv Du Toit has reminded us all of how precious, but also how
temporary, life is.

I got to know Adv Du Toit after 1994, in fact during the constitutional
negotiation process. He and I were involved with the formulation of section
185, which is now enshrined in the Constitution. I remember his input and
how we tussled with each other regarding its wording. Those of you who knew
Dirk well will remember him as a person who stood his ground, who liked to
debate and who was not afraid of an argument. He was always part of a
larger discussion where he served his party and the cause in which he
believed with conviction and in a dignified and respectful manner.

On behalf of the FF Plus I want to convey our condolences to his party, who
have lost a colleague, but in particular also to his family, who have lost
a father and a husband. It is tragic and a pity that a colleague who had
only just turned 65 years of age and was on the eve of stepping down and
enjoying his retirement, should be suddenly snatched away, leaving his
family behind by themselves.

We would like to pay homage and convey our sympathy to his party and
family. Thank you.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Hon Speaker, the ACDP is saddened by the death of Mr Dirk du
Toit, former Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs from June 1999
to May 2009.

During my time as a member of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and
Land Affairs, I knew Mr Dirk du Toit to be a man who took his work very
seriously. We also acknowledge and commend Mr Du Toit for his contribution
to drafting and finalising the country’s Constitution in 1996.

The ACDP sends heartfelt condolences to Mr Du Toit’s family and friends and
we pray you will experience the comfort and peace that comes from knowing
our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ.

The great responsibility on the shoulders of Ministers and the enormous
work to be done by both Ministers and Members of Parliament can place a
tremendous strain on the physical bodies of mere human men and women. Dirk
du Toit’s untimely passing is a reminder to us all that in the midst of the
enormous demands, a healthy balance must be found if we are to continue to
be able to give of our best. Thank you.

Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Speaker, ... mokgapa o mogolo o wele, dithakga tša lla
botsororo. E ile tšweu e kgolo ya go hloka kgethollo ka mmala. [... a great
hero has fallen and the followers are so deeply hurt and confused. A great
man who did not discriminate on the basis of colour has passed on.]

The PAC sends its deepest sympathy to the family of Prof Dirk du Toit and
also to his political family, the ANC. Those who walked this path before us
have constantly admonished us that in days like these, it helps to recall
that there have always been days like these.

Hamba kahle qhawe lamaqhawe. [Go well, hero of heroes.]

Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Mr Speaker, there are many sorrows in life, and one of the
greatest sorrows that nobody would like to experience is the sorrow of
death. On behalf of the MF we extend our heartfelt condolences to the
family, friends and loved ones of the beloved Prof Dirk du Toit.

At the age of 65, we are certain that Prof Dirk du Toit had experienced
South Africa through the difficulties of apartheid to the liberation of a
democracy. We are each given this life for a reason, purpose and meaning.
We convey our condolences to the ANC on the loss of this great comrade and
pray that his work and influence will be carried through.

Prof Dirk du Toit is also reported to have been a great academic and active
in politics, where he has shown tremendous passion and desire to establish
the rights of farmworkers.

The MF prays that others who have emulated him will hopefully continue to
live in his spirit. We pray that the deceased may rest in peace in high
heavens through the grace of God Almighty. Thank you.

Mr M A MANGENA: Mr Speaker, hon Members, Azapo joins the family of Adv Dirk
du Toit and his organisation, the ANC, in their sorrow over his untimely
passing; untimely because at 65 Dirk could still have made a lot of
contributions to his country and his family.

I spent eight years in the executive with him and I always had the
impression that Dirk du Toit read most of the more difficult legal
documents a lot more thoroughly than most of us.

He shared his considerable knowledge in constitutional law and land issues
generously, in the process helping many of us with our own legislation. He
did all this with humility, grace and a genuine smile.

Dirk du Toit was a great human being, a gentleman and a great patriot. May
his soul rest in peace. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Speaker, hon members, I
read this on behalf of the Departments of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries and Rural Development and Land Reform. These are the two
departments for which the late hon du Toit was Deputy Minister.

Today we celebrate a life well led and dedicated to our movement and to the
service of our people. We have been blessed to have had within our ranks a
true cadre, a man of the people and a man for all seasons, Comrade Dirk du
Toit.

Comrade du Toit was a brave and honourable man, who was willing to
sacrifice his own privileges under apartheid for the greater good of all
our people. In his own way, and through a different route, he too
understood that it was no easy walk to freedom.

He chose a journey that took him not on a separate path, but on a common
road along which all freedom-loving people travelled fighting for an end to
injustice, to arrive at a shared destiny of freedom and sustainable
development.

He led an exemplary life, because he believed with all his heart and mind
that it was not right for one human being to oppress another and that the
system that entrenched racism and apartheid needed to be brought to an end.
He did not vacillate, but stood by his beliefs and over the years has
strengthened his resolve and sharpened his determination.

He knew that an idea emerging from an Afrikaner community could only
flourish if it also became an African idea; that our different languages
and cultural manifestations, together, would make us a great nation and
enrich our contribution to the world knowledge and culture.

Here was a man who understood that at the heart of our quest for equality
is the desire for all humankind to be free. He believed in the attainment
of nonracialism, nonsexism and democracy. He embraced the struggle, not for
selfish reasons, but as an act of selflessness and a bold statement of
conviction to strive towards an egalitarian society.

When he joined the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs as Deputy
Minister, his various roles came together and crystallised. His legal
insights and understanding of agriculture and land reform served us as a
nation extremely well in the 10 years that he held this post.

He recognised that freedom should not be only for the farmer, but also for
the farmworker and that the sons and daughters of farmworkers should also
be able to emerge as farmers, entrepreneurs, as those at the forefront of
our development and at the vanguard of change. He championed the cause of
the poorest of the poor, knowing that our biggest challenge is to fight
poverty and to restore productivity, pride and creativity of our people’s
labour.

I think that it should be said that he truly loved this land, that he
identified deeply with our history and that the South African soil gave him
the roots of his devotion to freedom. It is because of people like him that
bridges are built between different people, conversations are started and
debate and dialogue become affinity and empathy and result in “toenadering”
[rapprochement.] and togetherness. He was truly collegial, comradely,
generous, compassionate and honest to the core; qualities befitting a
parliamentarian.

Let us console ourselves that after the dark days of apartheid he lived to
see the results of our struggle, he lived to see our people come out in
their millions to vote in the fourth national democratic elections that
were conducted in peace and harmony. He lived to see the decisive electoral
mandate given by our people to the ANC.

Let us be grateful that we had the opportunity to be in the trenches with
him. Now he has joined the ranks of all our departed warriors, heroes and
heroines. Today he walks tall in the company of O R Tambo and all those who
fought for freedom.

It is said that each generation should fulfil its mission and I believe
that Prof Du Toit fulfilled his mission as a champion of our freedom, a
promoter of human rights and a leading light of transformation.

He leaves us a living legacy to build on his work in fighting racism and
inequality; in working towards national unity and reconciliation; in
stepping up the struggle for human development and a better life for all
and in transforming Africa and the world into a more caring society. That
we have lost our comrade so suddenly is tragic.

May you, the family of Comrade Du Toit, continue to draw strength and
inspiration from his words and actions. May you take comfort in the love he
felt for each one.

We join the entire democratic movement in expressing our heartfelt thanks
to the family for having given him to our struggle for freedom and justice
and we pledge to continue his work to strengthen our democracy and to do so
with the same passion, energy and love that he had for our land and for our
people.

We pledge to build a strong administration, to cultivate solid institutions
and to make ourselves a caring and prosperous nation and people.

Lala ngoxolo, Qabane. [Rest in peace, Comrade.] I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to, members standing.

                                SITTING HOURS

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that,
notwithstanding the hours of sitting the House as provided for in Rule
23(2), the Extended Public Committees may sit as agreed to by the National
Assembly Programme Committee.

Agreed to.

                      CELEBRATING A VIBRANT YOUTH VOICE

                            (Debate on Youth Day)

Nksz S T NDABENI: Somlomo obekekileyo, maLungu abekekileyo ale Ndlu
ngokubanzi, Lutsha lomZantsi Afrika jikelele, zidwesha ezihloniphekileyo,
maqabane omzabalazo nabahlobo, egameni loonyana neentombi,egameni loxolo,
kwintando yesininzi nenkululeko echulumancisayo eyankcenkceshelwa ngegazi
lamaqhawe omzabalazo eli lizwe, ndiyanibhotisa. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)
[Ms S T NDABENI: Hon Speaker, hon members of this House at large, the youth
of South Africa, distinguished guests, comrades and friends, on behalf of
the sons and daughters, in the name of peace, democracy and exciting
freedom that has been watered by the blood of the heroes of the struggle of
this country, I greet you.]

I might not be categorised as a youth of 1976; however, everything that
took place during that time is still vivid in my mind, as if it happened
just yesterday and, furthermore, it’s a legacy that can never vanish.

Hon members, allow me to begin by looking back at the role which was played
by the youth of 1976 in liberating our country. The class of 1976 bravely
took to the streets of Soweto, and challenged the apartheid regime. They
did not have any munitions. Their weapons were stones, but sadly, their
opponents had guns. Their victory created a legacy as it meaningfully
contributed towards the liberation of black people in South Africa. The
Soweto uprisings and the 1976 massacre clearly indicate that the youth
represents a leading motive force in the liberation struggle.

The month of June - which is dedicated to youth in our country - marks a
very important event that contributed immensely to the democratic
dispensation that we are celebrating and benefiting from as a society and
people living in South Africa.

The dawn of democracy in 1994 became a qualitative breakthrough as the
youth stood at the forefront of political engagement against apartheid. In
April 1994 the youth as the motive force achieved a voice in the state.
This House will agree with me when I say that, for the first time in the
long and bloody history of our country, the voice of the youth could be
heard, and their needs and interests were placed at the centre of
government policy.

Subsequently, the aspirations of the democratic South Africa championed the
interests of the majority who had been disadvantaged by the then apartheid
government.

The primary task for us now is to work towards the emancipation of the
black majority, the working people, the urban, the rural poor, the women,
the youth and the disabled.

Consistent and reliable programmes that articulate youth interests were
developed and implemented. Relevant structures such as the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund and the Youth Commission were put in place. Policy frameworks were
developed to give clear guidance to those institutions. The government
introduced the policy of black economic empowerment, not only as a moral
initiative to redress the wrongs of the past, but also as a growth strategy
that aimed to realise the country’s full economic potential, promoting
active participation of the youth in our country.

In 2006, our democratic Parliament established the Youth Parliament as a
national discussion forum to encourage the youth to debate, and have their
voices heard in a purely democratic manner. Through this initiative our
Parliament continues to encourage the youth to play a critical role in the
transformation, reconstruction and development of our country.

Youth Parliament is a global phenomenon that serves as the consultative
forum between policy makers and the youth. Serious challenges facing the
youth - such as unemployment, poverty and discrimination - are discussed.
Through this forum the youth is encouraged to take part in decision-making
and legislative processes which directly affect their lives. Young people
are enabled to articulate their views within Parliament, the provincial
legislatures and other relevant national youth structures.

We have realised that together we can do more; hence the merger of two
institutions that gave birth to the National Youth Development Agency whose
mandate is to create a platform for the massification of youth development
in general and of skills development in particular. This is an institution
by the youth for the youth and by an organised and vibrant youth voice,
that seeks to emancipate itself from poverty and underdevelopment. We, as
the youth, acknowledge the loopholes of the past youth development
institutions and we are going to capitalise on lessons learnt, and the new
opportunities that come from the successes gained from the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund and the National Youth Commission.

Without downplaying the constraints brought about by the economic downturn
that is affecting the world and our country in particular, we stand by the
words of that freedom fighter and stalwart of the struggle:

  A nation that does not invest in its youth does not deserve its future.

The youth will have a sense of belonging and feel the importance of being
active participants in the development of our country once their plea for
decent jobs, better education and others are well attended to and the
health system is in place.

A platform to showcase their talents as young people and also to have a say
in the operations of the country through youth izimbizo, dialogues and
effective participation in all structures, will definitely built
confidence, and a vibrant, active youth voice.

With the high mortality rate among adults, young people are forced to give
up their youth and become parents instead. This leads to an increase in the
number of child-headed homes. We are opportunistically referred to as the
lost generation because of a lack of a better understanding of what we
stand for.
We need to strengthen the notion of moral regeneration to bring back the
value system and morality of our youth through cultural and religious
activities. We further need to acknowledge the fact that, because of the
dawning of democracy in 1994, we became a cosmopolitan country, a rainbow
nation with different cultural values. In instances of this nature we need
to be tolerant of each other, and acknowledge the fact that respect is a
two-way street that applies equally to both the elderly and the youth.

Mr President, when you said in your presidential address:

  We must work together to improve the implementation of the comprehensive
  plan for the treatment, management and care of HIV and Aids, so as to
  reduce the rate of new infections by 50% by the year 2011 ...

... you posed a challenge to us as young people, as we are the ones mostly
affected by this scourge.

As we mark the start of Youth Month, a group of young people in KwaZulu-
Natal, led by Pastor Vusi Dube of Ethekwini Community Church and Centre of
Hope, are walking 250km this week in the Abstinence Walk. This event is
aimed at encouraging young people to abstain from premarital sex as the key
preventative measure in our society.

This, Mr President, is an indication that young people are taking charge of
their lives. On 16 June, the youth of Mvezo Traditional Authority, under
the leadership of Nkosi Zwelivelile Mandlesizwe Mandela, will kick off HIV
and Aids in the playground. This is our life, our future and our vision.

Therefore, Mr President, hand in hand, we will work with all sectors to
ensure that we make our contribution to achieve the target of the National
Strategic Plan for 2007 to 2011.

This will only leave a clear footprint when we strengthen Operation
Siyabangena, as we did KwaNongoma and Orania, and declare war on the
epidemic. [Applause.]

This can only be achieved through gatherings such as youth izimbizo, where
youth will share information and experiences. Memorial lectures in
commemoration of our legendary comrades, such as Steve Biko, Helen Joseph
and Beyers Naudé - who died while fighting in honesty and integrity for
equality, justice and liberation - provide a platform to conscientise the
youth about how far we have come in terms of fighting for liberation and
equality in South Africa. We are happy to see that all the above-mentioned
have been made part of the priorities of this current administration.

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the ruling party and
the President of the Republic of South Africa on winning the elections. I
would also like to congratulate all the Members of Parliament and
legislatures, most especially the young individuals, as they bring the
concept of generational mix, both in Cabinet and in legislatures, to life.
We trust that this act will be emulated throughout all sectors of the
economy and development centres of our country.

Hon members, the Confederations Cup is just the start of good things that
will show our vibrancy, as stadia will be filled mostly by young people.
Through this we will also be celebrating the fruits for which Tata Mandela
fought. The President declared July 18 Mandela Day. As young people, we
will engage the National Youth Service to mobilise young people to
participate in programmes related to home-based care visits, orphanages and
old age homes.

As the ANC Youth League representatives, we humbly appreciate all the
support that has been given by the youth of our country, as indicated
during the 2009 general elections. Our youth demonstrated patriotism and
pride for their country. This is a clear indication that the ANC will
obtain a 100% vote come the next election, as it is the people’s choice.
[Applause.]

This defines the role that the youth can play in the trajectory of this
democracy, just as much as the youth of 1976 played a role in this South
Africa that you are celebrating today. A nation that does not invest in its
youth is doomed. Therefore, let us all go and celebrate a vibrant youth
voice.

Elokuqwela lithi, Lutsha lomzi wakowethu, masibe yimbumba enyamanye
sitshatshele kwiinkqubo zophuhliso nokuba lilizwi elitsolileyo, sibe
negalelo elihle ekuncediseni urhulumente wethu ukuze sibe nekamva
eliqaqambileyo. Ngombulelo omkhulu. Ndiyayishiya indawo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Finally, youth of our country, let us unite and excel in developmental
programmes and become the audible voice, with a positive contribution
towards helping our government in order to have a brighter future. I am
grateful. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Ndabeni. That was hon Ndabeni’s maiden
speech. By the way, it will also be hon Ollis’s maiden speech.

Mr I M OLLIS: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members and guests, creating a
vibrant youth voice. South Africa belongs to the young! They are in the
process of inheriting this country from the generations that went before
them. They will ultimately take over the reins of power and face a daunting
task as they do.

Unemployment among youth is a scourge on our society. In 2008, the Centre
for Development and Enterprise wrote in their publication, South Africa’s
Door Knockers, regarding unemployment:

  Its most serious aspect is the staggering number of young jobless people.
  In 2005, four million young people between the ages of 15 and 24 were
  part of the South African labour force, which means they were available
  for a job. Of those, 65% - or 2,6 million – were unemployed.


  As a result of improved rates of economic growth during the past five
  years, the situation has improved slightly; however, youth unemployment
  will not be quickly reduced at current rates of economic growth. Until it
  is, South Africa will have to cope with threats to social stability,
  including high levels of crime, associated with endemic unemployment.


That was written before the economic crisis.

Young people are at risk. They often have bad role models and are exposed
to things that they never should be exposed to. We have seen the shocking
pictures of child-headed households where children raise each other because
their parents have died of HIV or TB, and they are left alone. Just a few
minutes from this parliamentary complex, teenagers are sniffing glue,
ingesting tik and mandrax, and caught in the crossfire of gang warfare. On
the streets of Johannesburg, some parents force their children out on the
streets to beg for money when those children should be at school. Others
suffer physical and emotional abandonment from alcoholic parents and are
regularly beaten and physically abused.

When you add up the statistics of the various forms of abuse young people
suffer, they are staggering. In one university class I attended when I was
young, we were asked after a psychology lecture how many of us had been
sexually abused as children. Over 50% of us raised our hands in that
university classroom as being people in silent protest of having suffered
abuse, 50% of the class!

Apart from the unemployment, drugs and abuse, young people are at risk
because of a defective education. So many drop out because they cannot
afford the tertiary studies at university or college. A friend of mine from
the Alexandra Township in Johannesburg completed her BA degree from one of
our Ivy League universities. After trying for nearly two years to get work,
she ended up doing washing and ironing for one of the madams in the
northern suburbs of Johannesburg, as her mother and grandmother had done
before her. Eventually she emigrated to the United States and found much
better work there.

We cannot allow these scenarios to be played out over and over again in the
lives of countless young people and feel nothing. We must do more to
provide bursaries for those who work hard and get good grades. We must
support companies that take on young people in apprenticeships and train
them. We must ensure that career guidance is received at the appropriate
time.

However, we must ask ourselves: What do young people need of us in this
House? Reminding young people on 16 June about the horrors of apartheid
year after year is simply not enough. Like those who return over and over
again to see the horrors of the Nazi concentration camps at Auschwitz, it
can become quite pathological for us to stare at the horrors of the past
over again. One of the survivors of those concentration camps, Viktor
Frankl, went on to become a world-renowned psychologist. He told the world
that it is not so much what we believe about our past that holds us back,
but what we believe about our future. It not the fact that we have suffered
that will prevent us from succeeding, but what we believe is that we can
make a difference tomorrow. It is my firm belief that it is not so much the
horrors of apartheid that will affect young people today, but the example
and inspiration of good leader who will sketch a realistic and positive
dream that we can all live and strive for. That is the genius of somebody
like Nelson Mandela.

Today, our young people are watching us as supposed leaders of this country
and they need to see real leadership from us. They need to see a leadership
that cares and understands their situation and that can inspire them and us
to do better. Wearing Armani suits, driving an SLK Mercedes Benz and paying
homage at Kliptown once a year will not inspire people. They need leaders
who will listen and who will take them seriously. They are not there to
provide the cannon fodder for our political agenda. We must help them to
become the best that they can be.
I close with a quote from one of those young people, a 20-year old called
John Harold Benn, who posted a letter on Facebook to President Zuma because
he didn’t know how to get to him:

  You do not know me, my family, my friends, my opinions, thoughts or
  emotions. You do not know how many times I have shed tears and been
  heartbroken and hope-filled when I have looked and pondered at the
  tragedy, beauty and potential that exists in our country. I do not know
  you, your story, your struggles, or how many times you have stepped back
  and looked at what South Africa is at this point in history.


  I am writing this letter because I have some things that I want others to
  know, things that I hope will get my fellow South Africans to stop and
  ponder and turn and face the imminent future with courage and hope and a
  desire to live with purpose and meaning. I live each day in a personal and
  dynamic and often difficult relationship with a God who I believe created
  the universe, each continent, the country we live in. The God that, since
  the beginning of time, knew that He would send His most precious and
  treasured Son, Jesus Christ, down to earth to live and die for the
  helpless and stubborn humans that He had created. And I believe that God
  has everything under His control, including our President.

I am sorry Mr President is not here to hear this –
  You are in the position to make South Africa a great nation, not for
  herself, but a great nation that will show what living with hope can do
  in the lives of everyday people. You are who God has placed to govern
  South Africa, and we need to give you an opportunity to show what God can
  do with and through any human being. I wish you all the best during your
  time in office and hope that you might be able to see and have the
  courage and strength to follow the right - not the easy, or self-serving,
  or popular path - in every situation you are led to deal with.
  Yours, John Harold Benn.

Young people, by the sound of that Facebook post, are very interested in
what we are doing here, in spite of what we might think. They want leaders
who are there for them. What kind of leaders are we? Let us not disappoint
them. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A MDA: Deputy Speaker, hon President of the Republic in absentia,
members of the executive present here today, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, guests in the gallery, as the Congress of the People, we believe
that South Africa belongs to all its youth across racial, gender and
cultural divides.

To us it is very clear that the relevance of youth today cannot be
something that we must all question. But the question that we must seek to
answer is the question that says: What is it that is relevant that the
youth of today do that was done by the youth of 1976? What are the issues
at hand that the youth of 1976 sought to address, and what are the issues
at hand that the youth of today should seek to address?

Young people are the future of this society. It is for this reason that all
societies should nurture young people to play a meaningful role in their
affairs and beyond. In turn, young people are expected to explore the
limits of their opportunities and responsibilities in society.

In other words, the youth grow into the society, becoming part of it, they
grow with it and eventually it grows them. This year marks the 33rd
anniversary of the Soweto youth uprisings, which were characterised by the
firing of bullets, spraying of teargas, killing and assault of young people
whose sin was to demand their freedom, democracy and their right to
education without being confined by language. The above explains how the
body of a 12-year-old, Hector Peterson, was riddled with bullets of the
agents of apartheid, dying in front of his comrades as they paved the way
for the coming generation to take the spear and advance further.

The commemoration this month is coincidentally also in the month in which
one of the greatest sons of this continent was born, one of the leaders
produced by this country, one of the intellectuals that has defined and
redefined the African Renaissance, our one and only, former President of
this country, Thabo Mbeki. [Applause.]

As the youth of this country, it is in that spirit that we must take this
opportunity to wish him an early happy birthday and thank you, Zizi, for
leaving a traceable legacy for us as the youth.

The current state of youth development of our country continues to be a
worrying factor as this celebration of the 33rd anniversary bears no
significance, in respect of a change in the situation, to us as young
people, but as young people it is rather celebrated with our heads bowed
down, shame written on our faces as we continue to witness democracy
contributing immensely to the misery. We call this misery because the level
of youth unemployment continues to escalate with young people being the
most affected group. This is witnessed in the statistics that show
unemployed young graduates who haven’t even yet gotten the opportunity of
ploughing back into their communities, despite the fact that as they were
studying they were the investments of their families, their parents and
their societies.

The Expanded Public Works Programme and the government internships have
become the most prominent measures of how government exploits young people,
especially at local government level. With regard to the Expanded Public
Works Programme, it should be mentioned that it would be by luck if you
found a young person having ascended to a foreman’s position, as if this is
the programme that the hon President was alluding to when talking about
500 000 jobs that will be created this year.

It means, then, that an end to the current youth joblessness is still a
dream perpetually to be deferred. We acknowledge, though, the good
intention that was envisaged by the programme itself, but our emphasis is
made in order to get the real sustainable job opportunities and also call
for more citizen-focused interventions that are less frustrating and that
give young people equal opportunities.

As a solution from Cope, we recommend that a youth cadet service, where
school leavers serve and support communities while they continue to be
empowered, should be offered and government should consider this. This will
help in alleviating the roaming of youth who are neither employed nor
attending school and the emphasis in this particular instance must be made
because young people continue to suffer from the unemployment that is out
there and the escalating statistics really indicate this.

The lack of universal access to qualitative education continues to subject
young people to the unintended misfortune of finding themselves drowning in
debts owed to sharks that pretend to be financial rescuing mechanisms for
them to access education, yet they eventually get to be listed in credit
bureaus before they are even employed.

To this effect, it must be mentioned that the NSFAS is amongst these giants
who continue to swallow up the dreams, aspirations and future of young
people. This scheme has left many casualties along the way. I must also
mention that government is accountable for all this mess and it has
continuously made promises it has never been able to keep. Young people
have continuously been told of and promised free education, but our parents
continue to suffer in giving us the education that our government is
providing for us, because the quality of education itself leaves a lot to
be desired.

Also, it must be emphasised that the state of our tertiary institutions is
an issue of concern where we are calling on our Minister of Higher
Education and Training to intervene, especially in making sure that these
institutions are not used for any means of political point scoring. We have
seen various institutions where various academics are under fire and some
of them, including the University of South Africa, where you find that the
SACP and its youth wing continue to draw young people to the streets for
things that are really not education-related. [Applause.]

Again, it is on this matter that we would want to see both the Ministers of
Education taking a firm stand against teachers in Soweto who have
continuously held the future of our brothers and sisters to ransom by
invading classes, jeopardising our learners by keeping them from writing
their exams during a critical time to which they are supposed to be
subjected in order to pass. [Applause.]

The aspirations of young people to become businessmen and women is often
hindered by the fact that institutions that government has created are such
that these services are accessed by certain spheres of society and not all
our youth. To this effect, I would like to make mention of the Umsobomvu
Youth Fund, Seda and ICD, who continue to shut out rural youth from the
system that is used to get financial assistance in order for one to become
a successful and sustainable entrepreneur. As a result of this, young
people end up subjecting themselves to unwanted tendencies of fronting for
the wealthy who seek to get wealthier, and the question that this must
elicit is: What kind of government enjoys seeing its future leaders being
prisoners of the haves?

The critical task of the National Youth Development Agency, among other
things, will be to make sure that all these bottlenecks are dealt with and
that economic freedom is enjoyed by the youth of this country across the
rural divide, regardless of race or gender. The lack of service delivery
that has been observed by the current government continues to be evident in
areas which even the recent Christmas food parcels could not reach.
[Applause.]

This is on the basis that roads have not been constructed and water,
sanitation and electricity are not by any means in the pipeline. In this
particular respect, I would like to make mention of a certain Xolobeni
administrative area in the area of Bizana, Transkei in the Eastern Cape,
where the previous Department of Minerals and Energy wanted to impose
mining in an area where ... Thank you very much. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am delighted to rise to the
podium today to once again remember and honour the commitment and example
of South Africa’s heroes of June 16, 1976.

The day June 16, 1976 is a day violently imprinted on South Africa’s
collective conscience. Commemorated over 33 years later as Youth Day, it is
a day that honours the deaths of hundreds of Soweto school youths. On that
day the apartheid regime and its police force were caught off guard when
the simmering bubble of anger of school-going youth finally burst,
releasing an intensity of emotion. On that day, voices of a generation of
inspired youth resonating through the valleys and hills of South Africa
were heard. Their vibrant youth voices cried: “This is our day.” On that
day, hundreds of youths lost their lives; but it was the day that
ultimately changed the future of our country forever.
I believe that this is the true living message conveyed to us by the heroes
of June 16, 1976 - the message of courage and hope. The vibrant youth
voices of 1976 taught us that there is no challenge too big to overcome.
The chief aspiration at that time was freedom from oppression. But today,
despite the fact that we have made great strides since achieving democracy,
unemployment - particularly among the youth - remains a major concern.

Madam Deputy Speaker, the reality is that after 14 years of democracy, we
still can’t boast that a better life for all youths has been achieved. In
some instances, we have even gone backwards. Food prices are skyrocketing;
electricity supply is unstable; fuel costs are exorbitant and rising very
fast; criminality is rampant; jobs are scarce; and, for many, houses are
still unaffordable. Education is not up to scratch. During the apartheid
era, school children were exposed to intimidation and violence by police.
Today, school children experience intimidation and violence in their own
classrooms from their own teachers and classmates. [Applause.]

Today, many youths still face the same problems as the generation of 1976.
The question is: How can we make this better? The answer is: Let us get
involved. The torch has been passed on to a new generation of South
Africans. It is now time for us, the young people of our country, to become
politically active and rally against the many challenges we face in all
their forms. Our generation must feel the same spirit of patriotism that
drove our peers to become politically active. We must become the vibrant
youth voices for change.

The relationship between society and the youth is extremely complex.
Nevertheless, it has been possible to describe a clear theme in this
relationship - the theme of the tension between belief in the strength of,
and the innovative changes and improvements by the youth, and the fear of
change and an arguably increased loss of norms. This paradox is not
particular to South Africa, nor to this generation of young people. It is a
paradox that has probably applied in every age and culture.

Youth development remains one of the complex challenges facing democratic
South Africa. Fifteen years after the transition to democracy, it is young
people who are severely affected by negative socioeconomic factors such as
HIV and Aids, high levels of unemployment, poverty and the lack of
participation in political and economic development processes.

The Presidency launched the National Youth Development Agency recently. It
is an open secret that this development was, among other things, due to the
IFP, which raised a number of concerns over a decade ago about the
incompetence of the erstwhile National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu
Youth Fund. Therefore, to the IFP and the millions of our citizens, the
launch of the new agency, though not perfect, presents all of us with a
rare window of opportunity to fix what is wrong with our youth sector.

Unlike before, government and youth formations have an opportunity to
address collectively challenges facing young people in our country. The IFP
believes that the importance and effectiveness of the agency ultimately
relies on youth formations themselves and government departments and their
willingness to enforce youth-centred policies and programmes.

The message to the new agency and its leadership is clear. To those young
people in the rural areas and slums, struggling to break the bonds of mass
misery, you should pledge your best efforts to help them help themselves -
not because you seek their votes, but because it is right to do so. This is
the hope and the faith that young people and citizens have in the new
agency and its leadership. So, they dare not fail. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M H HOOSEN: Deputy Speaker, as the recent elections have displayed, the
youth of South Africa are dynamic, opinionated and energetic. They have
claimed their space in our society and, in doing so, they have made a
significant contribution towards democracy in our country. This is why the
ID believes that we must use their inspiration, abilities and energy to
help us build South Africa’s tomorrow.

The ID welcomes the establishment of the National Youth Development Agency
to tackle economic issues and the establishment of the Department of Women,
Youth, Children and People with Disabilities. We call on government to
ensure that these initiatives are prevented from becoming as dysfunctional
as the National Youth Commission and extend a call on government to
investigate incentives for businesses which employ the youth as first-time
jobseekers. These interventions will go a long way in equipping our youth
with the necessary skills and experience which will make them more
employable for the future.

The daily challenges and barriers facing our youth must become the central
focus of our new government. The ID would also like to see the government
focus not only on the economic challenges that affect the youth, but also
on the social. The youth still have the highest infection rate of HIV and
Aids. Many are also affected by the death of family and the resulting
burden of heading households. We hope that the new government shall focus
on these challenges with the urgency and the importance they deserve.

The ID applauds the fact that greater attention has been focused on
admission to tertiary institutions in terms of transformation. The ID would
also like government to look at implementing more integration programmes to
bridge the many divides that exist within our tertiary institutions.

The ID is looking forward to participating in the first National Youth
Conference on Youth Day. We hope that this initiative will enable the youth
to make an even more significant contribution towards nation-building under
the fourth democratic government. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Deputy Speaker, hon members, the youth of today is well-
versed, well-informed and very competitive. All that it wants is assistance
from the government. In his reply to the President’s address, Gen Holomisa
said: “The cake we are all looking at is shrinking.” I am saying that the
cake shrank a long time ago, and the means of expanding it have to be
devised.

Creating jobs is welcomed. However, many of our youth have business acumen
but lack funds to start businesses. They are not creditworthy for financial
institutions to loan them money. My understanding is - I am actually
subject to correction on this one – that there are financial institutions
which are out there to assist in starting businesses but have problems,
among which is the requirement placed on applicants to contribute. This
contribution makes it very difficult for some applicants to afford starting
their own businesses. They consequently end up increasing the rate of
unemployment.

Our youth must be assisted in starting their own businesses, and government
must, at the inception of those businesses, nurture and incubate them until
they find their feet. By so doing, government will be indirectly creating
jobs because the youth in those businesses will definitely need to employ
more people to assist them.

In the same vein, for any business to succeed, perfect discipline is one of
the most important requirements. Having said that, I therefore submit that
it is also incumbent upon government, in the process of developing the
youth in entrepreneurship, to also bring back values and instil them. [Time
expired.] Thank you.

Mnu S E KHOLWANE: Sekela Somlomo, Tindvuna Nemasekela ato, malunga
lahloniphekile Esishayamtsetfo Savelonkhe, balingani, nebangani, nine
nonkhe bekunene, wena weluhlanga, wena lowacedza Lubombo ngekuhlehletela,
Ngwane, kwami kutaba kuhlahla indlela nje etintfweni umlingani wami
lasetawuchubeka akhulume ngato. Kodvwa ngifuna kusho kutsi etinyangeni
letimbalwa letendlulile sive sonkhana besiphishanekile siya enhla nentasi –
kuhle kwekuhlafuna kwentjwebe, sitilungiselela kuvota. Nangempela-ke
sigcine sivotile.

Balingani bami sebashito kutsi kuhambeke njani ngoba vele kuyakhanya kutsi
Khongolose walutsatsa ngemalengiso lolukhetfo. [Tandla.] Loko kwenteka
ngesikhatsi tonkhe tinhlangano letikhona kulelive tiye taba nesikhatsi
lesenele kutsi titjele sive kutsi titakwentani natingaluwina lolukhetfo.
Kodvwa-ke nakhona betishito njalo kutsi titakwentani, lolusha lwakulelive
letfu lubonise ngekwenta kutsi ngempela luyamtsandza Khongolose.

Angisho nje kutsi lokuphindze kujabulise kakhulu kutsi nawubuka inombolo
yelusha loluphumile lwahamba lwayawuvota kuyakhombisa kutsi noko
belumlalele Khongolose ngesikhatsi atsi abaphume babe njengesikhonyane
sitseleka emasimini, bayewuvota bavotele Khongolose. Ngaloko kufanele
sihalalisele labasha betfu ngekutsi bakhonile kuphuma bayewuvota njengobe
bentile nje.

Kubalulekile kutsi siyibonge lenhlangano yaKhongolose ngekutsi ichubeke
futsi ikhombise kutsi lusha lwetfu alusiwo emathulusi ekutsi luphume
luyewuvota nje kuphela. Nawubuka lapha Kulendlu Yesishayamtsetfo
Savelonkhe, utawubona kutsi ngalapha Kakhongolose lusha lunyenti kakhulu.
Loko kukhombisa kutsi lapha Kakhongolose lusha lutsatselwa etulu, hhayi
kutsi lube lithulusi lekuvota nje  kuphela emvakwaloko kubuye
bomhlatsucinile bodvwa batewuhlala kulesishayamtsetfo.

Angisho futsi kutsi, Babe wesive, Umhlonishwa longangaMengameli
lohlonishwako - kumbe lesingatsi nguMengameli wekucala, Babe Nelson Mandela
lohlonishwa emhlabeni wonkhe, buholi bakhe wabucala khona lapha elusheni
Lwakakhongolose. Wachubeka wahola wadzimate wagcina anguMengameli walelive.
Lengetama kukusho kutsi ngempela bacinisile laba labayihamba lendlela
embikwetfu nabatsi inkundzi itfolakala ematfoleni.
Ecinisweni, lenkhulumo yalamuhla ingikhumbuta ngesikhatsi siphishanekile
sehla senyuka sikhankhasa, singena emakhaya ngemakhaya sikhulume nelusha
... [Kuhlaba Lulwimi.] (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S E KHOLWANE: Deputy Speaker, Ministers and their Deputies, hon members
of the National Assembly, colleagues, friends and everybody, nine nonkhe
bekunene, wena weluhlanga, wena lowacedza Lubombo ngekuhlehletela
[Praises]. Hon members, mine is to pave the way for things which my
colleague will continue to speak about. I want to say that in the past few
months the whole nation was up and down - very busy, preparing to vote.
Certainly we ended up voting.

My colleagues have alluded to the outcome as it is quite clear that the
African National Congress has outstandingly won the elections. [Applause.]
That happened when all the political parties present in this country had
sufficient time to present their manifesto to the nation on things they
would do if they won the election. Even though they had mentioned what they
were going to do, the youth of our country has demonstrated that they truly
love the African National Congress.

Let me just say that what was also more exciting was that if you look at
the number of the youth that went out to vote, it shows that they listened
to the African National Congress when it said they had to go out in numbers
and vote for the ANC. We have to commend our youth for going to vote as
they did.

It is important that we thank the African National Congress for continually
demonstrating that our youth is not just a tool to be used for voting only.
When we look in the National Assembly, you will see that on the side of the
African National Congress there is a large representation of the youth.
That shows that here in the African National Congress the youth is taken
seriously, and not only as a voting tool and thereafter elderly people
become members in the National Assembly.

Let me also say that the father of the Nation, the honourable President –
maybe we can say our first president, Father Nelson Mandela, who is
respected globally- started his leadership in the youth of the African
National Congress.  He continued leading until he became the President of
this country. What I am trying to say is that those who came before us were
right when they said that a leader is amongst the youth.

Honestly, today’s discussion reminds me of the time when we were
campaigning, going door to door and talking to the youth… [Interjections.]]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Ukukhalima ophambukayo. [Mr Speaker, on a point of order.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Deputy Speaker, order! Ngicela ukubuza ukuthi kuwulimi
olwamukelekile la ePhalamende ukuthi abantu abadala “omhlathi qinile”? [I
would like to know if it is acceptable here in Parliament to call old
people “strong jaws”?] [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am trying to find the interpretation, hon member,
what does that mean?

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Yikho ngibuza kuwe Somlomo, ngoba nami angazi, akuzwakali
kahle. [That is why I am asking, hon Deputy Speaker, because I do not know;
it just does not sound right.] [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed, hon member.

Mnu S E KHOLWANE: Ngiyabonga kakhulu, Sekela Somlomo. Nangichubeka,
sikhulumi lebesikhuluma kucala kunami sike sasho sabuta umbuto ngendzima
leyake yadlalwa lusha lwangabo 1976. Sibuye sasho nekusho kutsi asati kahle
kutsi ingabe lusha lwanamuhla ludlala yiphi indzima? Kuloko, lengifuna
kukubuta kutsi, tsine njengelusha lwalamuhla, ngutiphi tifundvo
lesitifundzile kulendzima leyadlalwa ngulolusha lwangabo 1976?

Kungabe seloku lolo lusha lwangabo 1976 lusakhutsele yini kufaka sandla
ekutfutfukiseni bonkhe bantfu emimangweni yakitsi kuleli lanamuhla? Ngabe
sijula kangakanani ekwatini tinselele letibukene nemimango lamuhla?
Sikuvisisa kangakanani kwakhiwa kwesive lesibumbene nalesingabandlululi
ngekwebulili, ngekwebuhlanga kanye nekuba sive lesitfutfukako kuyo yonkhe
imikhakha? Sikuvisisa njani kulwa nebuphuya, kusweleka kwemisebenti,
kwemakhono ekutsi lusha lukhone kutiphilisa.

Lungagcugcuteleka njani lusha lwanamuhla kuze lukhone kutimela kungafani
nangesikhatsi lapho lusha lwalungafundziswa kutsi inyamatane itingelwa
njani, kodvwa lwalufundziswa kutsi lenyamatane ihlindvwa njani
naseyitingelwe yabanjwa. Loku lengifuna kukhosho kutsi lusha kufanle
lufundziswe kutsi itingelwa njani inyamatane ehlatsini bese uyabuya
uteyihlindza, hhayi kutsi lufundziswe kutsi ihlindvwa njani sebakutingelele
yona. [Tandla.]

Noko-ke liciniso lelikhanya bha, kutsi itolo besisive lesehlukaniswe
ngekwebunjinga kanye nangekwebuphuya betfu. Laba lababenelutfo kanye nalaba
babebomntjingozi ushaywa ngubani – bomntjingozi ushaywa ngubani-ke, Sekela
Lasomlomo, ngulabo lababeswele lababengenalutfo. Ngiko loko lokwabangela
kutsi kubete kulingana ekutfutfikisweni kwemnotfo etindzaweni lesasihlala
kuto ngekwehlukahlukana kwetfu. Lusha aluzange luphunyuke kuloko
kwehlukahlukana kanye nekungalingani kweminotfo etindzaweni tetfu.

Umbuso welubandlululo, njengobe besengishito kutsi awuzange usifundzise
kahle kutsi sitingela njani, wawusifundzisa kutsi siyihlindza njani
inyamatane leseyitingelwe.

Lokunye lakwentile Khongolose, ekuboneni kwakhe kutsi impela kubalulekile
kutsi sakhe sive lesibumbene nesive lesisinye, kwekutsi kuletinye
tinchubomgomo takhe atsatse inchubomgomo lebeyikhuluma ngekutsi: Khongolose
cobolwake kufanele kube nguye longumgijimi weluntjintjo kuze akhone
kugucula simo emimangweni yakitsi. Loko uyakubona ngisho nanyalo kutsi
injongo yahulumende Wakhongolose kutfutfukisa tenhlalakahle kanye
nekutfutfukisa bantfu labahlala kuyo yonkhe imimango.

Kungumsebenti wahulumende wentfutfuko kutsi adlale indzima lebalulekile
ekutfutfukiseni labasha. Kusungulwa kwalomtimba labebakhuluma ngawo laba
labakhulume ngembili kwami, baka-National Youth Development agency,
kusibonakaliso mbamba sekutsi Khongolose utimisele kutfutfukisa lusha.

Ngiyabeva nebalingani bami bayasho kutsi letinchubomgomo nome letinsitasive
besinato kucala, boMsobomvu nalokunye bekumancikancika kuphi. Kodvwa phela,
ngiko nje sicale le-National Youth Development agency, kuze sikhone
kulungisa lobuncikancika lobebukhona kucala.

Angisho nje eNdvuneni Yetemfundvo Sisekelo nakhona mine bengifuna Indvuna
Yetemfundvo Lephakeme Nekucecesha, kutsi njengobe nami ngingulomunye
welusha loluchamuka eMpumalanga ngitsi, njengobe besiphishanekile sehla
senyuka sikhankhasela lukhetfo nje, Ndvuna ngiyetsemba kutsi
nitawukhulumisana kuze umnikete lomlayeto wami. Umtjele kutsi lusha
lwaseMpumalanga belusikhumbuta lutsi; sesimehlwana, Ndvuna ngobe site tsine
sikhumulo setemfundvo lephakeme - inyuvese kulela lakitsi eMpumalanga.
[Tandla.]

Natsi siyabona kutsi mhlayimbe selitfuba lelikahle lekutsi natsi singabalwa
kanye nalmanye emaprovinsi lanemikhakha yetemfundvo lephakeme. Liciniso
kutsi ayikho Indvuna Yetemfundvo Lephakeme Nekucecesha, kodvwa ikhona
Indvuna Yetemfundvo Sisekelo itangiphatsela lomlayeto wami.

Angisho kutsi ngalesikhatsi siphishaneke ngelukhetfo, lusha lwasho kutsi
shangatsi lapha lapho kwakhiwe khona ema-FET, Further Education and
Training, kumbe lapho abekwe khona nyalo, lusha alukhoni kufikela kahle.
Lufisa shangatsi lamanye angasondzetwa etiswe etindzaweni letisedvutane
nalo lolusha lwaseMpumalanga. Kungadzingeki kutsi umuntfu lomusha adzimate
agibele ibhasi letawuhamba 50km nakaya etikolweni kuyawufuna imfundvo
lephakeme. Ngiyetsemba kutsi lesicelo selusha lwaseMpumalanga sitawuvakala
eNdvuneni lephetse lelitiko.

Umhlaba wonkhe ubukene nesimo sekushisa, nelutulu, kanye nekubandza
lokwengcile, loku labakubita ngekutsi yi-global warming laba labafundze
kakhulu. Singukhongolose sitsi lusha alusukume luhlome ekufundziseni
imiphakatsi yetfu kutsi kufanele yetame njani ekwenteni kutsi sincandze
lesimo se–global warming.

Lokunye lokutasisita kuloko kutsi sitsatse lamatfuba emabhizinisi ekutsi
sihole lemiklamo lefanana nekutjala tintfo letimilako, loku lokutsiwa ngema-
greening projects, nalokunye.

Mengameli Wakhongolose ushito watsi sekunjalo sive sakitsi, njengaloku
sishito kutsi kufanele sibambisane kuze sente lokunyenti. Ngaphandle
kwaloko ngeke sikhone kutfutfuka, nine bekunene. Ngiyabonga. [Tandla.]
(Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S E KHOLWANE: Thank you so much, Deputy Speaker. As I continue, the
previous speaker has asked a question about the role played by the 1976
youth. He continued to say that he is uncertain of the role played by
today’s youth. On that, what I want to ask is, as today’s youth, which
lessons have we learnt from the role played by the 1976 youth?

Is the 1976 youth still contributing in improving the lives of everyone in
our communities today? How involved are we in knowing the challenges that
face our communities today? How do we comprehend the formation of a united
nation that does not discriminate on the basis of gender or race and that
seeks to be a nation that is developing in all aspects? How do we
comprehend the fighting of poverty, unemployment, and the shortage of
skills that will help the youth to survive?

How can we encourage the youth of today to be independent, unlike in the
past when the youth was not taught how to hunt a wild animal, but were
taught how to slaughter it when it is caught? What I want to say is that
the youth must be taught how to hunt a wild animal in the bush and to come
back and slaughter it, and not only be taught how to slaughter it when
somebody has hunted it for you. [Applause.]

It is true that yesterday we were a nation that was divided according to
our riches and our poverty - those who had something and those who were
destitute. The destitute, Deputy Speaker, are those who had nothing. This
is what caused inequality in developing the economy in the different places
in which we lived. The youth was also affected by the separate development
and economic inequality in our living places.

The apartheid government, as I have said before, did not teach us well with
regard to how to hunt, but only taught us how to slaughter a wild animal
that has been caught.

One other thing that the African National Congress has done, having
realised that it is important to build one united nation, is that in its
policies, it adopted a policy which states that: The African National
Congress itself must be the agent of change so that it is able to change
the situation in our communities. That you can see even now, that the aim
of the government of the African National Congress is to improve the social
welfare and to develop people living in all the communities.

It is the duty of a developmental government to play an important role in
developing the youth. The initiation of the agency that the previous
speakers spoke about, which is the National Youth Development Agency, is a
true indication that the African National Congress is prepared to develop
the youth.

I heard my colleagues stating that these principles or the structures that
were meant to help the nation that we had before, the Umsobomvu Youth Fund
and others had some shortcomings. But then, this is why we have initiated
the National Youth Development Agency, so that we can correct the
shortcomings that were there before.

Let me say to the Minister of Basic Education, although I wanted the
Minister of Higher Education and Training, that, as one of the youth from
Mpumalanga, while we were going up and down, campaigning for the elections,
Minister I hope that you will talk so that you give him my message. The
Mpumalanga youth were reminding us that it has been waiting for a tertiary
institution for a long time because there is no university in Mpumalanga.
[Applause.]

And we also see that maybe it is the right opportunity that we be counted
amongst other provinces that have institutions of higher education. The
truth of the matter is that the Minister of Higher Education and Training
is not here, but the Minister of Basic Education will convey my message.

Let me say that when we were busy with the elections, the youth also
mentioned that where the FET colleges, the Further Education and Training
colleges, are built, or where they are currently located, they are not
accessible to the youth. They wish that others could be moved to places
which are closer to the youth of Mpumalanga. It should not be necessary for
a young person to commute on a bus that will go for 50km when going to
institutions of higher education. I trust that their request will be heard
by the Minister of the department.

Globally, we are faced with hot weather, rain, and extremely cold
temperatures; this is what is called global warming by the academics. As
the African National Congress, we urge the youth to educate our communities
about the means of mitigating global warming.

One other thing that will help us in this regard is to grab the business
opportunities so as to lead projects like planting plants, which are called
greening projects, and others.

The President of the African National Congress has said to the nation that
this is the time, as we have said, to work together so that we can do more.
If we do not do that we cannot progress, good people. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon Spies? How do you pronounce that?

HON MEMBERS: Spies! Spies!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Spies?

Mr W D SPIES: Hon Deputy Speaker, it is Spies. It’s the Afrikaans word for
``umkhonto’’ or assegai [spear], not the English word for ``impimpi’’
[spy]! [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: OK, that’s what I thought, thank you! [Interjections.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Adjunkspeaker, verlede week op 4 Junie was dit presies 20
jaar sedert studente van Beijing Universiteit en ander kampusse op
Tiananmen-plein in Beijing teen ’n ondemokratiese kommunistiese bevel in
opstand gekom het. Meer as 100 000 studente het op die plein bymekaargekom
en die tenks van die sogenaamde People’s Liberation Army openlik uitgedaag.

Die soldate van die People’s Liberation Army het op hulle losgebrand en tot
vandag toe weet ons nie presies hoeveel jong Chinese studente daardie dag
doodgeskiet is nie. Die syfer wissel van die amptelike Chinese een van 250
tot die 10 000 wat volgens die intelligensie-owerhede van die destydse
Sowjet-Unie bekendgemaak is.

Op 6 Junie vanjaar was dit presies 65 jaar sedert D-dag. Op dié dag in 1944
het 160 000 jong geallieerde soldate van 16 jaar en ouer in amfibiese
voertuie op die seestrand by Normandië geland en Duitse Nazi-
masjiengeweervuur trotseer om uiteindelik Europa te bevry van Nazi-
oorheersing. Vandag is die 110 000 grafte van jong soldate aan albei kante
die stille getuienis van hierdie bloedige slag.
Op 16 Junie word weer twee gebeure in Suid-Afrika herdenk. Ons ken almal
die gebeure in Soweto – hier’s baie gepraat daaroor – maar ook op 16 Junie,
109 jaar gelede, is ’n bevel uitgevaardig deur lord Roberts wat bepaal het
dat die plase van boere in daardie oorlogstyd afgebrand sou word en wat
sodoende die tafel gedek het vir die sogenaamde verskroeide aardebeleid
waarin 26 000 jong vroue en kinders gesterf het.

Die stemme van al hierdie geaffekteerdes het een ding in gemeen, of dit nou
die uitdagende jong student op Tiananmen-plein was of die dapper jong
soldaat in Normandië of die begeesterde aktivis in Soweto of die desperate
boerekind in die Britse konsentrasiekamp: al hierdie mense is in
omstandighede geplaas deur idealisme, deur ’n ideaal wat groter was as
hulle self. Dit is dikwels hierdie idealisme wat veroorsaak het dat hierdie
mense op ’n dikwels onkeerbare manier hulle stemme losgemaak het, hulle
stemme laat hoor het oor waarin hulle geglo het. Mag ons nooit hierdie
stemme stilmaak nie! Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Deputy Speaker, it was 20 years to the very day on 4 June
when students of Beijing University and other campuses on Tiananmen Square
in Beijing protested against an undemocratic communist rule. More than 100
000 students gathered on the square and openly defied the tanks of the so-
called People’s Liberation Army.

Soldiers of the People’s Liberation Army opened fire and to this day we are
still unsure precisely how many young Chinese students were killed. The
figure varies from the official Chinese one of 250 to that of 10 000
according to intelligence authorities of the Soviet Union at that time.

D-Day was on 6 June this year, 65 years to the day. On 6 June 1944, 160 000
troops of 16 years and older landed on the beach at Normandy in amphibious
vehicles and defied German Nazi machine-gun fire to eventually free Europe
from Nazi domination. One hundred and ten thousand graves of young soldiers
from both sides bear silent testimony to this bloody battle today.

Two events are once again being celebrated in South Africa on 16 June. We
are all familiar with events around Soweto, of which much has been spoken
about here today, but 109 years ago - also on 16 June- a decree was issued
by Lord Roberts which stipulated that farms belonging to the boers during
that period of war would be burnt down, thereby setting the scene for the
so-called scorched earth policy during which 26 000 young women and
children lost their lives.

The voices of all those affected have one thing in common, whether it’s the
defiant, young student on Tiananmen Square, the fearless soldier in
Normandy, the enthusiastic activist in Soweto or the desperate boer child
in a British concentration camp. All were placed in their circumstances on
account of idealism, an ideal that was greater than any of them. Generally
speaking, this very same idealism often results in people voicing their
beliefs incessantly in order to make their voices heard. May we never
silence their voices! I thank you.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon members, the ACDP wishes all South African
youth well as we prepare to celebrate national Youth Day next week. Let us
also celebrate the wonderful contribution made by the talents, resources
and ideas of our young men and women - young people who have acted as
drivers of change and have participated actively in the development of our
socially inclusive society, for which we can be very grateful.
We also, however, need to pause to remember those youth at risk, which
include youth living with HIV and Aids, youth-headed households, youth in
conflict with the law, youth abusing alcohol and drugs, and unemployed
youth living in, often, extreme poverty. Besides the vibrant voice that we
hear there is also a heartfelt cry for help, for guidance, for love and
acceptance.

The ACDP believes that the main reason why there are so many young people
at risk is the absence of fathers, and I will focus on this aspect as a
father. This is not to detract from the many mothers, particularly single
mothers, who are doing their very best to raise their children and who were
acknowledged during the International Day of the Family on 29 May by the
hon Minister of Social Development. She emphasised what the ACDP has
continuously promoted; that it is strong families that build and ensure a
better life for children and our country.

Let us then not forget the crucial role that fathers play. One of the key
elements in assisting youth at risk will be when the fathers take up their
rightful role to love, guide, protect and provide for their children. A
well-known Argentinian author, quoting from Malachi, has said that for true
transformation to take place in any society, the hearts of the fathers must
turn to the children and the children to the fathers. It begins with the
fathers.

As we prepare to celebrate Youth Day next week, let us as fathers take up
our God-given role to provide the exemplary role models that we need for
our children. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms I C DITSHETELO: Chairperson, hon members, sweet and fast-talking, clear
and energetic, powerful and demanding - that’s the vibrant voice of our
youth.

How many of us are giving them an ear? Are we really listening to give
help, or just criticising because they are young? It’s high time we adults
adopted the listening skills of our youth. Times have changed. Youths are
just not the same as in the 19th century.

Regarding them in the highest esteem and not just taking them for granted
would be fruitful for our country. This is not just their vibrant voice,
but their high-class actions, taste, art, sport and music compel us adults
to support their institutions so that they can be a force to be reckoned
with. Are we considering them in society communications? Do we share ideas
with them, mould them in their speech and actions, accept them and let them
belong to everything we do, tell and teach them beautiful things in life,
let them know what is wrong and right? Authority is an awesome word that
can be intimidating for young people as well as adults. However, without
authority the youth’s voice is a hollow cry in a loud argument.

Building the skills of our children and youth, and engaging them in
democracy, adults can provide practical steps toward empowerment instead of
just words. They must involve young people in activities that are actual,
powerful, purposeful and rewarding. Things have now changed. Our country is
at a stage of rebuilding from its ugly past. We are faced with so many
challenges that require participation of the youth. Their agenda for a
better life is even more pronounced than before. The youth are not only in
the majority, they are the ones most affected by the socioeconomic and
political ills of the past.

Youth unemployment, their underemployment and employability will remain a
primary policy challenge ... [Time expired.]

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Mr Chairman, hon members, following the first voter
registration drive for the recent 2009 general election, it was reported by
the IEC that out of the 1,6 million new voters it had registered for the
upcoming poll, over 1,2 million – that is 75% - were between the ages of 18
and 29. This was an encouraging signal that we could expect a substantial
youth voter turnout in the election.

This was very good news indeed, particularly since it came at a time when
concerns were growing about the apathy that many young South Africans
seemed to feel towards politics and government, and when questions were
being asked about how this situation could be remedied. The incongruence
was very clear for all to see: In a country in which young people had made
a defining contribution to the recent passage from oppression into
democracy; in a country in which young people had stunned South Africa and
the world with their extraordinary courage, who had faced the tanks and the
bullets of the apartheid machine and marched defiantly for their right to a
better education and a better life, it was absolutely astonishing that less
than 20 years after that freedom had been won, the youth of South Africa
could not muster up the interest to exercise their hard-won democratic
right to vote.

It was very unfortunate, then, that in the midst of this all-important
national debate about how to inspire young people into civic action, the
response of some political parties and of their youth organisations was
instead, in far too many cases, to take political engagement down to the
lowest common denominator.

In the pre-election buzz, when searching for contemporaries in the
political arena who might speak to the issues that touch them and were of
deep concern to them, such as high rates of unemployment and
underemployment, the crisis in our education system or the scourge of
HIV/Aids, young South Africans were more likely to hear youth leaders
declaring their intention to “take up arms and kill” for their political
benefactors, or to hear them argue that rape victims have usually “had a
nice time” with their alleged aggressors if they “requested breakfast and
taxi money”.
There hasn’t been much improvement in the wake of the election. Certain of
this country’s young political leaders, instead of offering proactive
solutions to the most pressing problems facing the youth of this country,
have instead spent their time pursuing political agendas against those whom
it is not in their mandate to wage battle against, launching libelous,
sexist attacks on democratically elected leaders and engaging in absurd
debates about the definition of “sleeping around”, whilst all the while
schoolchildren continue to be neglected by errant teachers, young girls
remain vulnerable to sexual predators and our youth remain trapped in a
cycle of unemployment, poverty and lack of access to opportunity.

I won’t go any further into the failings of well-known youth organisations,
Mr Chairman, since they are surely well known, both to you and to the hon
members present here today. The question, then, which has to stem from what
we know, speaks to the central premise of today’s debate: How do we
celebrate a more vibrant youth voice in South Africa? How do we do justice
to the memory of the brave, principled young people who came before us and
whose sacrifices we commemorate on Youth Day this month? How do we change
youth political engagement in this country from a sordid spectacle into an
honest discussion about how the youth of this country can increase their
civic participation and contribute to the drive to address the critical
issues facing them and their peers? [Interjections.]
Mr K B MANAMELA: Comrade Chair, on a point of order: The speaker is
breathing into the microphone and she is speaking softly. We can hardly
hear her. [Interjections.] The fact that she speaks softly doesn’t
necessarily increase the level of her intellect, so could she please speak
into the microphone? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member ... [Interjections.]
Order, please! Order! Hon member, I’m sure you were speaking for yourself
and I’m sure the hon member heard you. [Interjections.] Please proceed.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman ...

Mr P F SMITH: Sorry, just to assist the Chair, could we not suggest that
members on that side of the House get hearing aids? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): That’s not a point of order. Please
proceed, hon member.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: I will repeat the question: How do we change youth
political engagement in this country from a sordid spectacle into an honest
discussion about how the youth of this country can increase their civic
participation and contribute to the drive to address the critical issues
facing them and their peers?

I believe that the answer to these questions, or at least the beginnings of
the answer, lies here in this august House, which has recently seen the
entrance of a number of talented young public representatives, following
the elections of 22 April. It is amongst these young MPs that the debate
about the challenges facing our youth may take on a more dignified and
respectable tone, one which is in keeping with the gravity of the
challenges that lie ahead for South Africa’s youth and one which recognises
that although we may be young, it remains incumbent upon us to conduct
ourselves with dignity as the adults that we are. [Applause.]

This is the vibrant youth voice which must begin to supplant the shrill,
combative, irrelevant voices which have come to define youth political
engagement in South Africa ... [Applause.] ... a voice which speaks not
only to the fears, but also to the hopes, dreams and ambitions of all the
young people of this country.

Mr Chairman, I’m very pleased that we’ve all had the opportunity here today
to see the calibre of young MPs which this fourth Parliament now has within
its ranks, and I therefore issue a challenge to my fellow young hon members
here today, both from the incumbent party and from the opposition: Let us
begin to set in motion here today a youth discourse in South Africa which
will do justice to the hundreds of brave, principled young people who gave
their lives in 1976 so that we would be able to stand here today. I thank
you. [Applause.]
Nk B THOMSON: Sihlalo, abaphathiswa bonke abakhona, amalungu ahloniphekile
akhona onke eNdlini kanye nentsha. Angibonge ukuthola leli thuba lokuphonsa
esivivaneni kule nkulumompikiswano ekhetheke kangaka. Asiyibonge kakhulu
intsha yethu eyabona kufanele ukuthi ibambe iqhaza ekukhululeni izwe
lakithi.

Kukho konke lokho ukuzinikela kwayo, sithi entsheni yonke siyayithanda
futhi siyaziqhenya ngayo. Sithi-ke nayo ayizithande futhi iziqhenye. Ingani
naku simi kuyo impela iNdlukazi Yesishayamthetho Sezwe, sidingida ikusasa
layo intsha. Yithuba leli elakhiwe nguye lo hulumeni wentando yeningi,
uhulumeni kaKhongolose.

Ake sibuke isitha esibhekene naso namuhla: yisitha sendlala, ubuphofu,
izifo, izidakamizwa, izinselelo zemfundo nokunye okuningi. Mangidlule
ekutheni sinethemba elikhulu koNgqongqoshe bethu Bezemfundo umama uAngie
Motshekga kanye nobaba uBlade Nzimande. Impela sengathi inkomo siyidedele
nabakwazi ukuyisenga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms B THOMSON: Chairperson, provincial Ministers present here, all the hon
members present in this House, and the youth, I am grateful for this
opportunity to take part in this special debate. Let us be grateful to our
youth who deemed it fit to play a role in the liberation of our country.

For all the sacrifices they have made, we are saying to every youth, we
love you and are proud of you. We are therefore saying that they too should
love and be proud of themselves. Surely, today we are sitting in this
House, the National Assembly, discussing their future. This is one of the
opportunities created by this democratic government, the ANC-led
government.

Let us look at the enemy we are facing today: hunger, poverty, disease,
drugs, educational challenges, and many more. Let me mention that we have
great hope in our Education Ministers, namely hon Angie Motshekga and hon
Blade Nzimande. And it really looks like we have placed this task within
capable hands.]

It is encouraging to all of us to see some of our youth who have forgone
the luxury of this world to go and study at some of our institutions. In
this effort we hope that they do realise that they are doing nothing more
than to better our very beautiful country, South Africa, and also to better
the lives of all South Africans. During one of his manifesto addresses
Ubaba Madiba mentioned that the most powerful weapon is education,
education, and education.

Hon members, we are inspired by the goodwill of our youth and also proud of
what they shall become in the near future. We also hope that they shall
become good citizens of this country. We have all tried to build and shall
endeavour to continue to build ... [Interjections.] ... that will not
disturb me. We are all aware that as we congregate here, there are some of
our brothers and sisters who have not had the opportunity to study as some
of us have, then how do we bridge the huge gulf where we coexist as the
literate and the illiterate; where we all as a nation seek a path of
building and rebuilding the South Africa which we all aspire to enjoy?

It is common cause that our very families, churches, communities and
society at large nurture and guide us as we walk this long road. I have
said that we coexist in society as the privileged and underprivileged. The
youth I am referring to is the youth who have been privileged to get the
opportunity to study while others have not.

Our youth, unlike the masses of our people that have not had the
opportunity to study, have it right in their hands. How do we lift these
deprived masses, so that they too can enjoy the fruits of this liberation
that has brought us thus far? Some of our youth students will become social
scientists, accountants, medical practitioners, legal practitioners and the
list goes on. I think it is our duty to commend them and also humbly
request from them as learned people to lend a helping hand to our fellow
brothers and sisters.

We all know that there are so-called change agents; our very youth are
those very change agents. They will after completion of their studies
venture into the world of work; they must bear in mind that as they venture
into this world of work they will not only be sustaining themselves and
their families but they will be contributing to society and South Africa at
large. Their contribution will definitely filter into other institutions,
like churches and business, in society and will eventually make a mark on
the global world. As they progress in their achievements, let them not
leave their brothers and sisters behind.

Hon members, I therefore humbly place the great task before them in this
wonderful month of the youth, that they transmit their skills, knowledge
and experience to those who have not had the opportunity. There has been
much effort on the part of our government to accelerate the path of skills
development; theirs is to accelerate this more and more. I want to say to
them that in the midst of this road, they will encounter many, many
challenges and also gain unexpected experience too.

Out there in the world of work there is a vast store of knowledge. One will
be surprised by the vast knowledge that exists in our communities, despite
their deprivation of education. This is the so-called indigenous knowledge.
For example: you will go into a farming community, only to discover that
one’s academic career is supplemented by the indigenous knowledge that
exist out there; therefore to our youth, I do hope that they will realise
the experience of mutualism that they could enjoy.

This also brings me to the recognition of prior learning; prior learning is
gained as you travel the route of life and gain experience. Our government
has realised that such learning has to be recognised and as such it is
recognised by the SA Qualifications Authority.

In conclusion, having encouraged our youth, both black and white, to join
hands with their fellow brothers and sisters to transmit the academic
achievements, in that process they will reap the fruits of unselfishness
and development. They could also contribute to Adult Basic Education. Even
on a small scale it will make a vast difference. This will not only develop
their personal careers, but at the same time enhance a better life for all,
which our government has always pursued and continues to pursue.

Phambili ngenyanga yentsha, phambili! [Forward with Youth Month, forward!]

Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Chairperson, it should be on record that former PAC
president, Zephaniah Mothopeng, was the only leader of a then banned
political party to face charges related to the June 16 student uprising.
The PAC regrets the fact that people who contributed to June 16 are hardly
mentioned when the day is remembered. Government must recognise and
memorialise people such as Tsietsi Mashinini and Khotso Seatlholo. We
disapprove of the tendency by the ruling party to monopolise youth funds
and projects.
The PAC calls for justice and equality among all youth formations of our
land, nothing less. The youth should not be hindered from participating in
shaping the destiny of our country. By eliminating the scourge of alcohol
abuse, promiscuous sex, drugs, crime, disease, corruption and other ills,
the youth of today will be emulating their June 16 predecessors. They must
also cure themselves of a disease of the mind that manifests itself in
either an inferiority complex or a superiority complex. I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, on 16 June 1976, multitudes of South African
youths emerged from township schools to confront a brutal system of racial
oppression, universally condemned as a crime against humanity. We commend
our hon President, Mr Jacob Zuma, for highlighting the importance of youth,
especially in sports and other areas, and trust that we will continue to
engage our youth in extensive, supportive programmes that empower them as
future leaders.

What, then, are the challenges the present generation has to grapple with?
What kind of youth consciousness is needed today to address the kind of
issues thrown up by a free, nonracial society? Indeed, what are the
characteristics required for the present generation to measure up to the
challenges faced by the democratic order? Importantly, how does the current
generation ensure continued contribution to the systematic national effort
to undo the pervasive social realities spawned by apartheid?
These are the questions that must be answered during the process of
building a better society for all our people, black and white. This would
allow the youth to enjoy their lives in conditions of total freedom and
have them mark out a role for themselves, necessarily to help bring to
fruition the objectives of this free society set in motion by the 1976
youth.

The MF has a turnaround strategy that has placed much emphasis on the
empowerment of our youth. We have always maintained that by cultivating
young social minds through appropriate social support programmes, we will
see an emergence of youth that will mobilise our communities for a better
future. The MF has proposed that the National Youth Commission should
reflect the broader spectrum of the population of South Africa.

Furthermore, all ward committees and municipalities should have youth
commissions. The kick-off of the countdown to the 2010 soccer World Cup
means our youth should have positioned themselves to assist our country and
continue to engage various role-players in the opportunities arising from
hosting the 2010 soccer World Cup.

We also need to learn from the experiences and programmes of other youth
commissions in other countries such as India and Canada, where the motto
is: “Be the change you seek.”

Entrepreneurship is the power to change. Make entrepreneurship a credible
alternative to getting a good job or being a victim of the system. We also
need to engage young people by demonstrating that they have the power to
create change and that they have a voice through their participation in the
exchanges in markets that have a direct impact on their communities.

At the same time, all of us must understand that we cannot fulfil the
dreams of a better life for all when our communities are faced with serious
problems of young drug addicts and alcoholics, who face a bleak future and
who constitute a liability to society.

We live in a globalised world, shaped by powerful forces that impact on the
destinies of weak, poor and developing nations. Understanding globalisation
issues enables us to develop a critical consciousness about
responsibilities in the world. So, based on this knowledge, we can
correctly wage struggles for global justice, peace and equality. Thank you.
[Time expired.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Chairperson, hon members, on Sunday 14 June the
Confederations Cup kicks off in South Africa. Our youth will run onto the
field of soccer to compete against champions from all continents of the
world. Their counterparts in cricket are in England, mixing it up with the
best. The junior Boks are in Japan, where they are doing our country proud
by all accounts. The senior Boks are flexing their muscles in anticipation
of a royal battle against the visiting British and Irish Lions.

The June 1976 lot faced the might of the state with their bare chests to
ensure that we joined the ranks of free nations, to make it possible for
their younger brothers and sisters to mix and play with other youth of the
world.

We look up to our youth to pass mathematics so that they can fly the modern
fleet of aircraft at SAA; help build and maintain the power stations
required to ensure our security of electricity supply; and assist the
country in shifting to cleaner energy sources.

We look up to them to join their counterparts in Japan, Korea, Finland,
Egypt and other countries in mastering the intricacies of biotechnology, so
that they may exploit our rich biodiversity to defeat malaria, HIV and
tuberculosis. This country is there for them to serve, modernise and
bequeath to their own children. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M MNQASELA: Chairperson, hon Members of Parliament ... ndiye ndavuya xa
bekuthetha uSisi wokuqala apha, ilungu elihloniphekileyo uNdabeni, ngoba
uthe i-ANC iza kuthandaza ukuba ifumane ikhulu ekhulwini ngowama-2014.
Bendifuna ukuthi kuye - ntonje andimboni ukuba uhleli ndawoni na ngoku -
umthandazo lowo unga ungangowokuthandazela isibini kwisithathu, ngoba naso
sele iyinto yamandulo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... I was happy with the lady who spoke here earlier, the hon member
Ndabeni, because she said the ANC would pray for 100% in 2014. I wanted to
say to her – it’s just that I do not see where she is seated now – I wish
the prayer would be for two thirds because that is now a thing of the
past.]

I stand here today in memory of our fallen soldiers, the heroes and
heroines, young men and women of the 1976 era. It is indeed a fact that, as
we are sitting in this Assembly, we do not seem to take seriously the
issues affecting young people and the vulnerable groups.

Ndiyabona ukuba abamajelo eendaba bayanqaba xa kuza kuthethwa ngemicimbi
enje ngale. Amalungu nawo awabikho ngobuninzi bawo ngoba le micimbi ayisiwa
ngqalelo kakhulu. Kodwa ke ... [I see that the journalists are not keen on
attending when we discuss issues like these. Even members do not attend in
their numbers because these issues are not taken into consideration. But
then ...]

... I think there are a number of issues that we need to pay attention to:
Firstly, this House must redefine the true meaning of youth in this
country. Being a young person in this country takes more than what is being
said here. Maybe we need to ask ourselves what it is that propels
desperation and juvenile delinquency, despite prudent policies that exist
in this country. It is because of the two worlds that describe the youth of
today.

We have two worlds: the world of the poor, whose greater posterity is black
and underprivileged; the other is made up of the few elite, and in most
cases they belong on the other side. The latter consists of those people
that are connected to senior officials of the ANC, and they enjoy the gravy
train of this country. That must be something of the past. What is it that
the government is doing to correct the situation?

We need to be realistic here. We are talking about the masses of young
people in this country who live in remote places, far from public
transport. They are in places where there is a lack of educational
facilities and there aren’t any job opportunities or access to jobs. That
is the hard reality.

Abanye ke zange baya ezilalini, abayazi le nto ndithetha ngayo. Mna mntu
wakuTsolo, eQolombane, ndiyazi ukuba ndithetha ngantoni. [Some have never
been to the rural areas; they are not aware of what I am talking about. I
am from Tsolo, in Qolombane, and I know what I am talking about.]

An Arabic proverb says: “The enemy of my enemy is my friend.” My friends
are on this side. My enemies are those who continue to undermine the
silenced voices, and that is the government.

Abantu abatsha bafuna iinkokheli ezingumzekelo ukuze nabo bafunde, babe
ziinkokheli zangomso. Sinoxanduva ke lokwenza njalo, ukuqinisekisa ubomi
obungcono. [The youth need leaders who are exemplary so that they can also
learn and be the future leaders. We have the responsibility of doing just
that, to ensure a better life.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, could you just take
your seat, please. There is a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Is the hon member prepared to
take a question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, are you prepared to
take a question? [Interjections.] Please, let me hear from the hon member
himself.

Mr M MNQASELA: I see an attempt is made to delay me. If, by taking a
question, Chairperson, you will allocate me more time, I will take the
question. If not, then I’m unable to take the question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): It is clear that the hon member
won’t take a question. Could you proceed, then?

Mr M MNQASELA: I have much to talk about that affects the people of this
country. As I have said, the government of the day must begin to talk
openly about these challenges and bring about intervention methodologies,
given to the hard reality that we are talking about. The DA is an answer.
[Interjections.] The DA always has an answer.

Firstly, education remains the edifice to many, if not all these
challenges. If you educate our people, they will be free: Skills
development; access to finance; creation of jobs; entrepreneurship; HIV and
Aids; teenage pregnancy, to mention but a few; all of this can only be true
if it is founded on the premise of an open-opportunity society for all the
people of this country, as presented by the DA. This is the answer I am
talking about. [Applause.]

Young people from all walks of life remain marginalised owing to a lack of
access to resources. This does not preclude any of the parties present here
from standing firm and addressing these challenges.

Remember, “besigaya iivoti sonke” [we were all campaigning for votes], and
we all promised the people that we would improve their lot. When we
campaigned and put out in the public our glossy manifestos, we all said
that we would improve the lives of the people. Are we doing that? Women,
people with disabilities, children and the youth; all of them are
vulnerable groups and we need to help improve their lot.

Ndifuna ukugqibezela ngombuzo obalulekileyo kuMphathiswa ophethe eli sebe.
Ingaba siza kukwazi na ukuxoxa banzi ngeArhente yoPhuhliso loLutsha
yeSizwe? [I would like to conclude with a vital question to the Minister
responsible for the Ministry. Are we going to be able to discuss further
the National Agency for Youth Development?]

I think it is important to talk about that, especially where it affects
provinces and municipalities in this country. For some reason, provinces
seem to be left in the dark because the DA is running the Western Cape.
Thank you, Chairperson. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr D K MATABOGE: Chairperson, the recognition and appreciation of what
happened in the past and atrocities that were committed by one racial group
seeking to dominate the other, is an important cornerstone of national
reconciliation in South Africa. Therefore, it is a history and a past that
we cannot relegate to some textbook and not even talk about.

So, hon Ollis, 16 June in particular represents the day when young people
took to the streets and sacrificed their lives against the high and mighty
apartheid regime. It is something that we will continue to celebrate.
[Applause.]

Anele spoke about a youth dream deferred. As she said that phrase, it
reminded me of a book called The Dream Deferred written by Mervin Gumede
about Thabo Mbeki. It is important, when you plagiarise, to acknowledge
your sources.

The other point that was raised by hon Mda is that democracy is a misery.
It is unfortunate that a young South African woman of your age is able to
stand in the fourth democratic Parliament of South Africa and say that we
need to scrap the Expanded Public Works Programme and we need to scrap the
National Youth Service Programme and replace it with what is called the
Young Cadets, which is an old Bantustan and apartheid government form of
indoctrination. [Applause.] It used to be done and is called compulsory
military conscription. In the Bantustans they used to call them cadets. It
was a tool for indoctrination. I am surprised that a young woman of your
calibre is saying that we need to reintroduce those oppressive programmes.

On the day of his execution in 1979 when he was making his last statement
before the judge, Solomon Mahlangu said:


   Mama, tell my people I love them and they must continue to struggle. My
   blood will nourish the trees of liberty and freedom.
In exactly six days from today millions of people within and outside the
borders of our country will commemorate 16 June and the connected
uprisings. This historic moment in the history of our liberation struggle
marks the resilience of our youth who laid down their lives in defiance of
a regressive government whose order was to confine the majority to the
margins of the labour market through inferior education and ultimately
exclude them from the mainstream economy.

Chairperson, I would like to request to put my notes in front of me. As you
can see, I am a special type of white man. I did not eat enough carrots.
[Laughter.]

In the current political epoch we call on the youth of our country to draw
inspiration and emulate the 1976 generations and the likes of Solomon
Kalushi Mahlangu, who laid down their lives for democracy and the freedom
we have today. Indeed, some of these generations live amongst us today and
they resemble the battle cry for freedom in our lifetime, which the 44
generations of the Sisulus and Mandelas committed itself to.

The youth of this generation have demonstrated against all odds their
commitment to deepening democracy and defending the gains of our
revolution. Millions of ordinary South Africans from the length and breadth
of our country cast their votes on 22 April. However, there are two
interesting things about 22 April: Firstly, the majority of our people,
unlike what many spectators and speculators had wished, demonstrated an
overwhelming confidence in their glorious organisation, the ANC.

Secondly, this election became a true celebration of the youths’ voices, as
multitudes of young people made their mark in the polls and recorded an
unprecedented youth voter turnout since the inception of democracy in South
Africa. It is important, Anele, that we note that the youth of this
generation will not, because of the democratic rule we acquired in 1994,
behave similarly to the ‘76 generation. Indeed they will demonstrate their
willingness and commitment to defend this democracy through their electoral
power. [Applause.]

These youths voted in large numbers, because they celebrated a number of
successes over the past years. Amongst those is that some sections of the
National Youth Development Agency Act came into effect, ushering in a new
and cohesive development agency, whose first key intervention was the
implementation of the National Youth Service Programme in various areas
such as creation of decent work and sustainable livelihoods.

Our youth continue to be ravaged by unemployment and lack of participation
in the economy. The call for the one company, one learnership programme, to
ensure that there is greater experience acquired by our young people,
continues. A further call made by the President in his state of the nation
address on the creation of 500 000 jobs is a programme also geared towards
the empowerment of these young people, ensuring greater access to basic and
higher education through compulsory and free education and through the
review of various funding models, as done by the National Student Financial
Aid Scheme, to ensure that we avoid the consistent exclusion of university
students.

If the Young Communist League makes a clarion call based on observation; If
I, as a young South African person, am sitting somewhere and I am told that
a vice-chancellor excluded 20 000 black students from enrolling in a
university, I will get worried. It is a point to get worried about and it
is important that civil society organisations and political youth
formations in the country begin to speak on those issues. Unfortunately,
those who do not have organisations to speak on these issues will not have
the platform to do so. Those who do, will continue to engage on this.

It is also about ensuring healthy, positive lifestyles for our youth and
constant education on the HIV/Aids pandemic. The problem is, when I
mispronounce it, is not because I cannot read English properly, but because
of my poor eyesight. Be sensitive, please.

It is also necessary to instil a belief that a hub, a robot, a clinic and a
multipurpose community centre in Soweto is just as much needed in rural
Kganyisa or any other part of our country. We need equal development
opportunities in all our areas, despite whether they are rural, urban or
otherwise.

We further need to respond to the call made by the Minister of Police,
Minister Mthethwa, for a roll-out and maximum participation of youth
against crime and corruption. It is true that this programme will further
add to the continued effort for moral renewal and the Reconstruction and
Development Programme, RDP, of the soul. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:24.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Appointment of Whips


     1. The following members had been appointed as whips for the African
        National Congress in the National Assembly with effect from 6 May
        2009:

          a) Mr C T Frolick

          b) Ms N P Khunou

          c) Ms P Tshwete

     2. The following members had been appointed as whips for the African
        National Congress in the National Assembly with effect from 22 May
        2009:


          a) Ms J E Sosibo
          b) Ms W Ngwenya
          c) Ms N M Twala
          d) Ms M T Kubayi
          e) Ms S T Ndabeni
          f) Ms L N Moss
          g) Mr G D Schneemann
          h) Ms K R Magau
          i) Ms D M Ramodibe
          j) Mr E M Sulliman
          k) Ms H R Matlanyane
          l) Mr N B Fihla
          m) Ms X C Makasi
          n) Mr P M Mathebe
          o) Ms M L Dunjwa
          p) Mr S E Kholwane
          q) Mr M Gungubele
          r) Mr J J Maake
          s) Ms M M Maunye
          t) Mr Z C Ntuli
          u) Ms D G Nhlengethwa
          v) Mr M E Mbili
          w) Mr H P Maluleka
          x) Ms N N Sibhida
          y) Mr M R Mdakane
          z) Mr N M Duma


     3. The following members had been appointed as whips for the
        Democratic Alliance in the National Assembly with effect from 7 May
        2009:

          a) Mr M J Ellis

          b) Mr W P Doman

          c) Ms S V Kalyan

          d) Mr M Waters

          e) Ms A M Dreyer

          f) Ms J F Terblanche

          g) Mr S B Farrow

          h) Mr A C Steyn
     4. The following members had been appointed as whips for the Congress
        of the People in the National Assembly with effect from 6 May 2009:

          a) Ms L M Mashiane

          b) Ms J D Kilian

     5. The following member had been appointed as whip for the Congress of
        the People in the National Assembly with effect from 21 May 2009:

        Mr M B Shilowa

   2. Membership of Committees


      a)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Committees
         Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

           DA

           Appointed:       Coetzee, Mr T W
           Discharged:      Pretorius, Mr P J C

         Portfolio Committee on Communications

           DA

           Appointed:  Van Den Berg, Mr N J
         Committee on Private Members’ Legislative proposals and special
         petitions

           DA

           Dreyer, Ms A M

         Committee on Auditor-General

           DA
           Appointed:       George, Mr D T
                            Steele, Mr M H

      b)    The following members have been appointed to the Committees
         below:

         Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries


           UCDP


           Ditshetelo, Ms I C


           UDM


           Gaehler, Mr L B


         Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture
           UDM


           Ntapane, Mr S Z


         Portfolio Committee on Basic Education


           ID


           Hoosen, Mr M H


           UDM
           Kganyago, Mr N M


           MF


           Bhoola, Mr R B (Alt)


           ACDP


           Dudley, Ms C (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Communications


           ID


           De Lille, Ms P


         Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs


           UDM


           Gaehler, Mr L B
           MF


           Bhoola, Mr R B


           ID
           McGluwa, Mr J J (Alt)
           UCDP


           Ditshetelo, Ms I C (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans


           FF+


           Groenewald, Mr P J


           PAC


           Mphahlele, Mr L M


         Portfolio Committee on Economic Development


           UDM


           Holomisa, Mr B H


           MF


           Bhoola, Mr R B


           ID
           Greyling, Mr L W (Alt)


           ACDP


           Swart, Mr S N (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Energy


           ID


           Greyling, Mr L W


           AZAPO


           Mangena, Mr M A (Alt)


         Standing Committee on Finance
           UCDP


           Matladi, Ms M N


           ACDP


           Swart, Mr S N (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Health


           ID


           Hoosen, Mr M H


           ACDP


           Dudley, Ms C


         Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training


           AZAPO


           Mangena, Mr M A


           ACDP
           Dudley, Ms C


           MF


           Bhoola, Mr R B (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs


           ANC


           Mathebe, Mr P M


           FF+


           Mulder, Dr C P


           ACDP


           Swart, Mr S N (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements


           ID


           McGluwa, Mr J J
           MF


           Bhoola, Mr R B


           ACDP


           Dudley, Ms C (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Co-operation


           ACDP


           Meshoe, Rev K R J


           FF+


           Mulder, Dr C P


           UDM


           Holomisa, Mr B H (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development


           ACDP
           Swart, Mr S N


           UDM


           Ntapane, Mr S Z


           ID


           De Lille, Ms P (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Labour


           FF+


           Spies, Mr W D


         Portfolio Committee on Mining


           ID


           Greyling, Mr L W


         Portfolio Committee on Police


           FF+
           Groenewald, Mr P J


           ACDP


           Meshoe, Rev K R J
           ID


           Hoosen, Mr M H (Alt)
         Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises


           ID


           Greyling, Mr L W


           AZAPO


           Mangena, Mr M A


         Portfolio Committee on Public Works


           UDM


           Kganyago, Mr N M


         Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform


           PAC


           Mphahlele, Mr L M


           ID


           De Lille, Ms P
           UDM


           Ntapane, Mr S Z (Alt)


           UCDP


           Ditshetelo, Ms I C (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology


           ID


           Greyling, Mr L W


           AZAPO
           Mangena, Mr M A (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Social Development


           UDM


           Kganyago, Mr N M


           MF


           Bhoola, Mr R B (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Sports and Recreation


           UDM


           Holomisa, Mr B H


           ID


           McGluwa, Mr J J


           FF+


           Spies, Mr W D (Alt)
           PAC


           Mphahlele, Mr L M (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Tourism


           UDM


           Ntapane, Mr S Z


         Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry


           PAC


           Mphahlele, Mr L M


           FF+


           Spies, Mr W D


         Portfolio Committee on Transport


           UDM


           Gaehler, Mr L B
         Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs


           ID


           Greyling, Mr L W


           UDM


           Holomisa, Mr B H


           AZAPO


           Mangena, Mr M A (Alt)


         Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and Persons with
         Disabilities


           UCDP


           Ditshetelo, Ms I C
           Matladi, Ms M N (Alt)


         Committee on Public Accounts
           UCDP


           Matladi, Ms M N


           APC


           Godi, Mr N T

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for 2009-
        2012.

2.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the National Development Agency for 2009-
        2012.

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on Budget
    Vote 31: Science and Technology, dated 09 June 2009:
    The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having considered
    Budget Vote 31: Science and Technology, reports that it has concluded
    its deliberations thereon.


    The Committee further acknowledges that many of its Members are new to
    the portfolio of science and technology and would thus require follow-
    up engagements with the Department and its entities. This is necessary
    to enhance their understanding of the operations of the Department and
    strengthen their oversight capacity to deal with matters in this
    regard.


    The Committee agreed to a workshop with the Department and its entities
    as an important mechanism to provide the in-depth details required by
    Members.
    Report to be considered.

2.    Joint Report of the Portfolio Committee  on  Water  and  Environmental
    Affairs and the Portfolio Committee on Tourism on Budget Vote 25, dated
    09 June 2009

    The  Portfolio  Committees  on  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs  and
    Tourism, having considered the 2009 Estimates of National  Expenditure:
    Budget Vote 25 and Strategic Plans of the Department  of  Environmental
    Affairs and Tourism and its entities,  for  the  2009  financial  year,
    reports as follows:


    Due  to  the  re-alignment  of  departments  and  ministries,  the  4th
    Parliament of the Republic of South  Africa,  decided  to,  hold  joint
    meetings to consider Budget Vote 25: Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
     Whilst the departments are in the process of being re-aligned,  Budget
    Vote 25, for this financial year, is to  be  approved  and  debated  by
    Parliament as a single vote.   Parliament,  constituted  its  portfolio
    committees as per Cabinet’s  re-alignment.   This  thus,  entailed  the
    establishment  of  two  portfolio  committees  –  one  on   water   and
    environmental affairs and the other on tourism.


    On 9 June 2009, a joint meeting of the Portfolio  Committees  on  Water
    and Environmental Affairs and Tourism was called to deliberate  on  the
    following:


     • The appropriations to budget vote 25 for the 2009 financial year.
     • The transfers of monies to entities.
     • An overview of programmes, and allocations.
         • An overview of key performance areas  (priority  areas)  of  the
           department and its entities.
     • Link to government priorities.
     • Challenges.
     • Recommendations.


    The  Portfolio  Committees  on  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs  and
    Tourism, having considered Budget Vote 25 and the  strategic  plans  of
    the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and  its  entities,
    reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


    The Committees acknowledge that many of their Members are  new  to  the
    environmental and tourism sectors, and would therefore request  follow-
    up briefings and workshops with the department and its entities.


    Having considered Budget Vote 25: Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism,
    the  Portfolio  Committees  on  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs  and
    Tourism, wish to report that it supports Budget Vote No 25.


    Report to be considered.

