---
title: 'National Assembly - 05 February 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-02-05
---

                          THURSDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                   (The Late Mr Ebrahim (Cassim) Saloojee)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party:

   That the House –

     1) notes with profound sadness the passing away of hon Ebrahim
        (Cassim) Saloojee, on Sunday, 1 February 2009, after a long
        illness;


     2) recalls that hon Saloojee committed his life to the cause of
        freedom, peace and democracy and that he joined the Transvaal
        Indian Congress and became its publicity secretary;


     3) further recalls that hon Cas, as he was fondly known amongst his
        comrades, spearheaded the formation of the Johannesburg Indian
        Social Welfare Agency (Jiswa), and became its CEO and that this
        organisation played a critical role in contextualising the
        socioeconomic problems of black people within the apartheid policy
        and that he was very active, as CEO, in creating a platform,
        through Jiswa, for the mobilisation - in particular of the Indian
        community - and was a stalwart in the welfare movement ...

The SPEAKER: Order hon members! We are dealing here with a motion about a
loss of a member of this House, a colleague. Some people don’t seem to see
the seriousness of this matter. I would like those people to please leave
the House so that we remain with those people who understand that the
National Assembly is in mourning. Please continue.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

        ... and was a stalwart in the welfare movement and played a
        critical role in its transformation;
     4) remembers the momentous role played by hon Saloojee towards the
        birth of a nonracial, nonsexist democratic South Africa, as well as
        his immense contribution in the reconstruction and development of
        our country;


     5) acknowledges that his outstanding selfless dedication and
        willingness to serve in whatever capacity, was the hallmark of this
        remarkable Member, who has been a Member of Parliament since 1994,
        and that he served for ten years as Chairperson of the Portfolio
        Committee on Social Development; and


     6) conveys its condolences to the Saloojee family and the African
        National Congress.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker and hon members, it is
a special honour, albeit a very sad moment, to speak on our reminiscences
of Comrade Ebrahim Cassim Saloojee, whom we fondly and only knew as Cas
Saloojee. Comrade Cas, like many of us, had two sets of parents, his
biological parents as well as the sociopolitical context in which we were
brought up.

Describing that context, the late Comrade Govan Mbeki, during the Rivonia
Trial, quoted from a speech the late Gen J B Hertzog had made in the
National Assembly in 1936, and I quote Oom Gov quoting J B Hertzog. Hertzog
strenuously defended white supremacy, and in his own words, quoting Oom
Gov, said:


  Self preservation is the first law of nature.

The late Oom Gov also quoted the following Prime Minister, Mr J G Strijdom,
who amplified on what General Hertzog said. His views were articulated in
Afrikaans, and I quote Oom Gov quoting J G Strijdom:

   Die wit man moet altyd baas wees.


This is a context that gave birth to Comrade Cas Saloojee, over and above
the biological programme of his procreation.

This environment, the pressure and influence of great leaders such as the
proverbial three doctors, Drs Dadoo, Naicker and Xuma, and indeed many
other leaders of the democratic movement, propelled the young Cas Saloojee
into the membership, activism and finally leadership of a whole range of
democratic structures, fighting and striving for the attainment of a just,
democratic and prosperous South Africa.

I met him for the first time when all of us were members of the United
Democratic Front. Comrade Cas became the second treasurer of the United
Democratic Front, the first having been Ram Saloojee. He was one of those
leaders that many of us looked up to even when there were very difficult
and very fragmenting discussions within the democratic movement itself.

Comrade Cas played a very important role in a big debate in December 1983,
at the Feather Market Hall, on whether or not the Indian and coloured
communities should participate in an imminent referendum. Those who were
present there - and I can see some of them here - will remember how the
Transvaal delegation, of which he was part, was divided on that issue at
the conference. Together with Prof Mohamed, he led a detachment of cadres
that were floating above the ordinary thinking of the democrats that were
assembled under that roof that day. They insisted on the indivisibility of
the purpose of the democratic movement.

Comrade Cas was deeply committed to the freedom of our people, and to their
unity and nonracialism. He was a proud revolutionary and a dedicated member
of the ANC. He was one of those who knew very well, from his own
experience, that the democratic forces must co-operate and must never be
fragmented.

The relationship between the SA Communist Party, the Congress of SA Trade
Unions, the ANC and democratic movements from the nongovernmental forces of
the time had to be nursed and nurtured. He actively contributed to the
cohesion of these forces and to strengthening their unity in action, and as
a result, he chaired a number of these very important structures.
He was a passionate revolutionary who was also very passionate about sport
and he served on both the Portfolio Committee on Sport, as well as the
Portfolio Committee on Social Development, which he chaired. He always
displayed a very good knowledge of our society and what needed to be done.
He was empathic to the suffering of the poor and spared no energy in making
a contribution to the alleviation of their pain.

When the roll call of combatants for justice and prosperity is made,
thousands of combatants will jostle to their places in the ranks of the
ANC. When his name is called, all of us will move forward and shout with a
loud voice: “Present!”, because he stood for what all of us must continue
to stand for. We are very sad to lose him, but we are glad to have him as
one of our ancestors. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, it is with great sadness that we gather here
today to pay tribute to a distinguished member of this House, hon Cas
Saloojee, who passed away peacefully after a long battle with Alzheimer’s
disease.

Hon Saloojee dedicated much of his adult life to the social welfare sector,
and my first association with him was in his capacity as the Chief
Executive Officer, CEO, of the Johannesburg Indian Social Welfare Agency,
Jiswa.

He was a selfless community worker, a tireless champion of the poor and he
used the platform of Jiswa to uplift and mobilise the Indian Community in
the anti-apartheid struggle. His legacy in Jiswa lives on even today. Cas
was also the founding member of the Anti-South African Indian Council
Committee. He belonged to many community-based and political organisations
which fought the apartheid regime, and he paid the ultimate price for his
political activities when he was arrested for treason in the Maritzburg
United Democratic Front, UDF, treason trial.

His experience as the President of the Transvaal Indian Congress held him
in good stead as the TIC delegate to Codesa and the Multiparty Negotiating
Forum.

Hon Salojee’s track record in politics is most admirable - he became an MP
in 1994 and his expertise in the welfare sector resulted in his appointment
as the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development. This
is where I got to know Cas much better, as I served on this committee.

His style of leadership was inclusive and even if he did not agree with
one, he would take time to listen. I remember fondly a study tour to the
United Kingdom in 2001, which he led. We were walking into Trafalgar Square
and I was listening to stories of his life during the struggle. His
compassion and caring nature endeared him to me.
I pray that his soul rests in peace, and may Allah bless his soul and keep
him under the shade of his mercy. I also pray that Allah grants his family,
his wife Khadija in particular, strength to bear the irreplaceable loss.
Rest in peace Cas your life’s work is done.

Mrs I MARS: Madam Speaker, this is a very sad day for all of us. This is a
man of whose work I knew within Johannesburg and within the Indian
community long before I actually met him. The amazing thing about him was
that, I knew so much about him, before I had even met him. That shows you
the role he played.

We finally met in 1994 when he became the Chairperson of the Portfolio
Committee, which was then known as Welfare. He was determined to widen the
scope of this portfolio committee and he would frequently ask
representatives of opposition parties to his office to discuss these
matters, debate them and in most instances reach consensus.

I, and others, found him to be kind, caring, knowledgeable and very
concerned, and always willing to talk about the needs of our people. I
firmly believe that Cas, with his wealth of experience, was instrumental in
promoting a greater understanding of the socioeconomic background of the
majority of South Africans.

I believe that this understanding certainly impacted on the legislative
requirements of the new South Africa. Cas, in many ways, was a quiet and
gentle person. However, he was a man with great inner strength and was
passionate about his beliefs and his beliefs were that all South Africans
deserved a better life and social protection when it was needed.

The IFP extends its deepest sympathy to his wife, sons, friends and
colleagues. Parliament has lost a very special person who served for a
number of years as chairperson of a very important committee. Cas was a
doer but he could also be a talker at times. He served all of us, South
Africa and this Parliament with distinction. He will be greatly missed. I
thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon members, on behalf of the UDM I extend
our sincerest sympathies to the family, friends and colleagues of the late
hon Cas Saloojee. For this institution too, it is a grievous loss to bid
farewell to a member who had served since 1994, including a decade at the
helm of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development.

He will also be remembered for his contribution prior to 1994, when he was
fighting the injustices of apartheid and to usher in a democratic and more
just dispensation for our country. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
Saloojee family during this difficult time. We join the other parties in
saluting the life of an exceptional individual. May his soul rest in peace.
I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP was saddened to hear that Mr Cassim
Saloojee, one of the longest serving Members of Parliament, passed away on
Sunday, 1 February 2009, at his home in Johannesburg after losing his
battle against Alzheimer’s. He will be missed.

The ACDP recognises the important role that Mr Saloojee fulfilled for many
years as the voice of the Indian community. He was a hard worker and a
dynamic activist, mobilising his community and transforming the welfare
movement.

To his wife, Khadija, and two sons, Riaz and Mohamed, your husband and
father was respected and loved. In the short time I was privileged to work
under his leadership in the Social Development Portfolio Committee at
Parliament, I was impressed by his passion and genuine concern for people.
You are in our thoughts and prayers. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Hon Speaker, hon members, the United Christian Democratic
Party joins the Chief Whip of the ANC on the motion to bid the late Ebrahim
Saloojee farewell to a better place.
As a septuagenarian, he was characterised by wisdom. Younger folks should
have learnt from him that it is good to travel with your spouse. This he
did religiously.

He spent the greater part of his life in the service of the people. A look
at his profile indicates that he meant to live for the masses of the people
of this country.

He played a great role in organisations such as the Transvaal Indian
Congress and had a hand in the Mass Democratic Movement that saw to the
negotiations for the release of former President Mandela from Pollsmoor
Prison.

Mr Saloojee will be remembered for the way he carried himself. He was
always very quiet and calm. The UCDP expresses its condolences to the
Saloojee family and the African National Congress. We say: He has had his
innings and may his soul rest in peace. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, it is with great sadness that I stand at this
podium bidding farewell to a dedicated and selfless comrade and a fellow
Member of Parliament, the late Ebrahim Cassim Saloojee.

Saloojee has a great history of commitment to fighting for justice, freedom
and democracy for us as South Africans. He has served in auspicious
positions in many freedom fighting organisations and has served us in the
first generation of democracy to date.

His history does not come untainted by sacrifice and hardship of which, as
we all know, is endured by his entire family.
At this time of loss, the MF extends its heartfelt condolences to the
family, friends and loved ones of the beloved Saloojee. We pray that God
lightens your path in this difficult time.

As my neighbour in Acacia Park for the past two terms, I personally will
miss him very dearly.

Our condolences are further extended to the ANC who has lost a most
admirable comrade. May the wheels continue to churn with his great strength
and example.

We pray that the late Saloojee be granted Jannatul Firdous [a high place in
Heaven] and light be placed in his kabr [grave], Insha-Allah [God willing].

Inna-lillahi-wa-inna-ilayhi-ra-ji-oon. From God do we come and unto God do
we return.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the PAC is saddened by the passing away of
the hon Ebrahim Saloojee. He was indeed an honourable man; not just because
of the title this Parliament conferred on him, but also because he was a
real veteran of the struggle. He knew many of the PAC veterans and he often
related some of the pleasant experiences he had had with them. He was a
gentleman. In these days of parochial politics you could not tell by the
manner in which he behaved to which political party he belonged.

It takes quite a great deal of discipline to serve in this Parliament for
15 years. I understand he served on the Portfolio Committee on Finance.
Work in that committee is strenuous. Meetings are not easy and are very
long. But there was national duty to be done there and he rose to the
occasion. I daresay, he did so with distinction. It is a great loss, not
only to his family but to this nation and of course to the ANC. We convey
our condolences to his family and to the ANC. I think he fits the words of
St Paul when he said: “I have fought the good fight. I have finished the
race.” Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and members, the FD expresses
its sincere condolences to Mrs Khadijah Saloojee and the Saloojee family on
the loss of a husband, a brother, a friend and a valued member of the
family, the hon late Mr Cassim Saloojee. He was a respected Member of
Parliament and served his nation with distinction. It is sad for our nation
to lose such committed people when they still have so much to give. He was
an activist and a founder member of the UDF, who worked tirelessly for a
free and democratic South Africa. He was a soft-spoken man and when he
spoke to give advice, it was always with great wisdom.

Hon member Saloojee chaired the Standing Committee on Social Development
and gave good guidance in the development of state policy. As a former
member of the social development committee I once had the privilege to
travel with the hon Saloojee on his many trips overseas, so as to learn
more about the social services of other countries. On these trips the hon
Saloojee always led with distinction. He was an easy man to work with and
today we give him the recognition for his work done as an outstanding
parliamentarian. Our hearts go out to the family, friends, colleagues, and
the ANC on the loss of Cassim Saloojee. May his soul rest in peace. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr I VADI: Madam Speaker, I am truly humbled to have been selected by the
ANC to present a message of condolence to the family and friends of the
late Ebrahim Saloojee. It is not often that a young activist is called upon
to talk about the life of an elder and a great leader. It would have been
more fitting for veterans such as Andrew Mlangeni or Mewa Rambogin, who
were contemporaries and personal friends of Cas, to be standing here to say
a few words in memory of their comrade. But that task has been given to me.


Cassim Saloojee passed away this last weekend after a period of prolonged
illness. He suffered from a rare neurodegenerative disease resulting in
uncontrolled memory loss. I remember that, before he was given leave of
absence from this House, one evening he drove for several hours looking for
his home in Acacia Park. Quite often you would find him walking in the car
park here, not knowing where he had parked his car in the morning. But his
illness never broke his spirit. When I visited him late last year, he was
full of life. He asked about so many of you and he wanted to know what was
happening in Parliament.

Cas was a passionate social worker. He was a strong and capable political
leader, an enthusiastic sportsman and at one stage an accomplished tobacco
pipe smoker. He dedicated the better part of his life to uplifting the
welfare of ordinary people. As we have heard, he spearheaded the formation
of the Johannesburg Indian Social Welfare Association and served as its
director for over 25 years. Under the harshness of life in apartheid South
Africa, it was Cassim Saloojee and his dedicated staff at Jiswa who
provided relief, assistance, care and comfort to literally hundreds of
thousands of people, irrespective of race. Through his work in Jiswa, he
was able to develop a deep understanding of the brutality of life under
apartheid, which he later so effectively used to mobilise communities
against the apartheid system and NP rule.

In the 1980s Cassim Saloojee was one of the founders of ACTSTOP, a civic
organisation that mobilised and organised residents facing evictions in the
Johannesburg Inner City. He called upon the people to act and stop
evictions. He called upon them to defy the hated Group Areas Act and he
called upon all Blacks - Africans, Coloureds and Indians - to reclaim their
ownership over the city of Johannesburg.

When former President P W Botha established the racist tricameral
parliament in 1984, it was Cassim Saloojee, together with former members of
this House such as Dr Essop Jassat, Lalloo Chiba, the late Billy Nair,
Pravin Gordhan, Ela Ghandi, hon Mewa Ramgobin and Prof Ismail Mohamed that
had launched one of the most successful election boycott campaigns in the
history of South Africa. Under the banner of the revived Transvaal and
Natal Indian Congresses they had mobilised the vast majority of South
Africans of Indian origin to deliver a devastating blow against the
tricameral parliamentary system, thereby denying it any legitimacy in the
community.

Cassim Saloojee initially served as the publicity secretary of the
Transvaal Indian Congress and went on to become its president during the
state of emergency in the late 1980s. It was in this capacity that he led a
joint delegation of the Transvaal and Natal Indian Congresses to Lusaka to
meet with the banned ANC.

As we have heard, Comrade Cas was instrumental in the formation of the UDF.
He played a key role in the UDF, serving as its national treasurer. This
eventually led to his arrest and him being charged for treason in the
Pietermaritzburg Treason Trial, together with leaders such as Archie
Gumede, Frank Chikane, Albertina Sisulu, Mewa Ramgobin, Curtis Nkondo and
Dr Essop Jassat. Incidentally, it was during his detention that he gave up
his pipe-smoking habit. Though in his mid-50s he became a health and
fitness fanatic in prison and continued playing golf and tennis many years
later.

Cas had a zest for life. When he was Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
on Social Development, he would walk through these corridors of Parliament
with a serious look on his face. At times he was disturbingly
temperamental, but he had a splendid sense of humour. I can still see him
chewing his gum and laughing with gusto. Cas was ever ready to share a
joke; sometimes even a little naughty one with a youngster like me.

In 2001 my wife and I had the privilege of going with Cassim Saloojee and
his wonderful wife Aunty Khadijah on pilgrimage to Mecca. Cas was not a
particularly religious person, but Mecca and the city of Medina had a
profound impact on him. It softened him and ignited in him a deep sense of
spirituality that was not there before. On my final visit to him, his last
words to me were: “Ismail, when are you taking me for haj again?”

Cassim Saloojee was born in Krugersdorp in 1935. He lived in Sophiatown,
Bloemhof and Johannesburg. He studied in Bombay, at Princeton University in
the USA and the old Johannesburg College of Education. He was a teacher,
but went on to become a social worker. If I were to write a epitaph on
Cas’s tombstone, I would simply state: Here lies a man who worked for the
welfare of his people and who loved his grandchildren dearly. Dear Cas, if
your soul is present with us today, we say: Go well. Know that we love you.
Our prayers are for you. May God’s grace and mercy be upon you. To Aunty
Khadija, who is quite ill at the moment and just came out of hospital, to
Riaz, Mohamed, Fatima and the five grandchildren – be strong. The ANC
expresses its sincerest and heartfelt condolences to all of you. May the
Almighty keep you in His care! Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: That concludes the speakers’ list on this matter. I take it
that there are no objections to the motion being adopted. The presiding
officers associate themselves with the motion. I now ask members to stand
to observe a moment of silence in memory of the late Mr Saloojee.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to, members standing.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                       (The late Mr Johnny Schippers)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party:

   That the House -


   (1)            notes with sadness the passing away of hon Johnny
         Schippers on Saturday, 31 January 2009, in a car accident, while
         returning home from performing his constituency work;


   (2)      recalls that hon Schippers was born in 1943 in Tulbagh in the
         province of the Western Cape, later qualified as a teacher,
         dedicated nearly three decades of his life to the education and
         training of our country’s youth and that from 1988 to 1993, he was
         the principal of Waveren Secondary School in Tulbagh;


   (3)      acknowledges that, in addition to his dedication to teaching, he
         was actively involved in his community, in establishing the
         Tulbagh Creché for disadvantaged children and serving in the
         management committee of the home for the aged in his area and that
         his community involvement earned him the title of Witzenberger of
         the Year in 1993;


   (4)      remembers that Johnny, as he was known amongst his peers, served
         as Councillor in the Tulbagh Municipal Council from 1995 to 1999,
         became a Member of Parliament as a member of the New National
         Party and joined the ANC in 2005;


   (5)      believes that he was an honest and respected leader who leaves
         behind a legacy of dedication and hard work to his community and
         Parliament; and


   (6)      conveys its condolences to the Schippers family and the African
         National Congress.


Mr S B NTULI: Madam Speaker, hon members, and the Schippers family in the
gallery, I bid you all good afternoon.

It is an honour for me, as the ANC chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
on Defence, to pay tribute to our comrade, Johnny Schippers, my fellow
member in the Portfolio Committee on Defence.

I’ll start by saying that, just a week ago, he wanted tickets to the
gallery for extra people that he wanted to bring along for tomorrow’s state
of the nation address. Because he had an idea that my wife would not be
attending the event, he wanted to know whether I would be willing to spare
him that ticket, since he wanted to bring someone extra along.

I told him that I was not sure, but promised that I would, over the coming
weekend, confirm with my wife as to whether she would be attending the
event or not. I joked with him then and said that, if my wife chose not to
attend, he could accompany me as my partner. We both laughed at that.
Little did I know that, come the following week, when I was supposed to
give him feedback about the conversation with my wife, I would instead
receive a call informing me that Bra Johnny is no more.

I referred to him as Bra Johnny. He was a member of the Portfolio Committee
on Defence, but he was humble. He referred to me as Bra Benji. I told him
that this was odd because I was younger than him. He replied by saying, “Jy
is ’n bra [you are a brother] because we have given you responsibility.”

So, while his family feels the pain of the void created by his absence, the
portfolio committee, and I as its chairperson, feel it as well.

I thought that I should impress upon everyone here today that, as a member
of the committee, he worked hard and was very knowledgeable of financial
matters. Prior to an audit, he would always draw my attention to certain
crucial financial issues in the departmental reports that he knew the
Auditor-General would focus on.

Having lost a person of Bra Johnny’s calibre, I asked myself what I, as a
young man, could do to pay him the best possible tribute. I visited the
library. There I came across this poem. As I read it, I hope the family –
Doreen, the sons and grandchildren – as well as members will draw strength
and inspiration from it.

The renowned poet, B W Vilakazi, who, in anticipating what happens when
someone close to you passes on, penned the poem “Ma Ngificwa Ukufa”, which,
translated into English, is, “If death should steal upon me.”

Vilakazi had this to say:


    Bury me where the grass grows
    Below the weeping willow trees,
    To let their branches shed upon me
    Leaves of varied greens.
    Then, as I lie there, I shall hear
    The grass sigh a soft behest:
    “Sleep, beloved one, sleep and rest.”


    Bury me above the dam,
    There where the little chirruping birds
    Are heard to sing in merriment
    And welcome the coming Spring
    While fluttering to the waters’ brink
    To drink protected from the heat.


    Let me die beside the road,
    There where youthful scholars pass,
    For now I can no longer bear
    The loads that burden me.
    Children’s chattering must be
    A blessed comfort to the souls
    Of those who rest eternally.


    Bury me in a place like this:
    Where those who scheme and give their tongues
    To plots and anger, never can
    Displace the earth that covers me
    Nor ever keep me from my sleep.


    If you who read these lines should chance
    To find me, O, then bury me
    Where grasses whisper this behest:
    “Sleep, beloved one, sleep and rest.”

Mama Doreen, Donovan, Brenvill, daughters-in-law and grandchildren, may the
words of the poet provide solace to you during this bereavement.

We know that a void has been created. We in the Portfolio Committee on
Defence as well as the Joint Standing Committee on Defence feel that void
too. It is only human for us to say that we have indeed lost a cadre, an
honourable member.

Therefore we wish that, when we bury our comrade, his spirit will rest in
peace. We shall always strive in the manner that he did, to do our best as
dedicated Members of Parliament. On behalf of the ANC, I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnr W P DOMAN: Speaker, die agb Johnny Schippers het onverwags, en in diens
van sy gemeenskap en party, gesterf. Soos ons hom sien leef het -
konsensieus, aktief, georganiseerd, met geloofserns en ingetoë – was sy
sake sekerlik in orde om sy Maker te ontmoet.

Die omstandighede van sy dood - relatief vroeg op ’n Saterdagoggend, op pad
huis toe na Tulbagh vanaf die ANC se streekkantoor in Worcester – dui op sy
werksywer en getrouheid. Dit is tragies om so daaraan te dink dat, as hy
miskien met ’n groter, luukser voertuig gery het, in plaas van die
nederige, klein Colt-bakkie, die geweld van die botsing dalk minder
skadelik sou wees, en hy sou oorleef het.

Maar so het ons vir Johnny Schippers geken: nie opgesmuk nie, maar nederig
en plat op die aarde, een met sy gemeenskap waarin hy gedien het. Hy was
waarlik ’n profeet wat in sy gebied geëer is.

Dat hy op 65-jarige ouderdom gesterf het, is ook vir ons ’n skok, want hy
was ’n gesonde en fikse mens wat, na jare van stryd en opbou, juis nou die
vrug van sy arbeid met sy vrou Doreen en sy familie kon geniet.

Sy lewe roep egter mooi herinneringe op. Johnny Schippers het 28 jaar in
die onderwys gestaan en groot hoogtes bereik. Hy het gevorder eers tot
adjunkhoof van die Senior Sekondêre Skool Worcester, en toe, in 1993, sy
loopbaan in die onderwys afgesluit as hoof van die Sekondêre Skool Waveren
op Tulbagh. Deur hierdie jare het hy werklik help bou aan ’n nasie en het
daar letterlik duisende kinders hul lewensrigting deur sy leiding gekry.

Deur selfstudie het hy die BA-graad aan Unisa en ook die B Ed-graad aan die
Universiteit van Wes-Kaapland behaal. Ten tyde van sy dood was hy met ’n
Meestersgraad aan Unisa besig. Dit alles wys net daarop dat hy ’n voorbeeld
gestel het dat ’n mens akademies toegerus moet wees op jou diensterrein. In
hierdie opsig was hy ’n inspirasie vir die jeug.

Vanweë sy positiewe bydrae in die gemeenskap, is hy in 1993 aangewys as
Witzenberger van die Jaar. Hierdie prestasie dui op sy betrokkenheid by, en
opheffing van die gemeenskap. Ek is seker dat, in hierdie dae, talle
getuienisse van individue wat hy oor die jare en tot met sy dood bygestaan
het, na vore gaan kom.

Ons in die Parlement wat vir Johnny Schippers geken het, sal hom vir ’n
paar dinge onthou: Hy was nie ’n luidrugtige lid wat in skreeugevegte
betrokke geraak het nie. Hy het deurentyd goeie maniere gehandhaaf en, met
ernstige konfrontasie, sou hy eerder stil geraak het, of weggestap het, as
om lelik te raak. Sy bydraes wat hy hier en in die komitees gelewer het,
was weloorwoë. Hy het nie baie gepraat nie, maar wanneer hy gepraat het,
kon jy na hom luister.

Hy was ’n ernstige mens wat dinge vir hom aangetrek het. Hy kon nie spot of
ligtelik wees oor verskille of oor mense of sake wat konfronterend was nie.
Hy het hom dit ernstig aangetrek. Dit was my waarneming dat hy probleme
gehad het met die stelling dat ons onsself – veral ons as politici – nie te
ernstig moet opneem nie. Vir hom sou dit te ligsinnig wees, want hy het die
erns van sy gemeenskap op die hart gedra.

Ons onthou hom ook as een van ons bes geklede lede, wat altyd onberispelik
was in sy voorkoms.

Namens die DA vereenselwig ons ons ten volle met die bewoording van die
voorstel soos op die Ordelys. Ons betuig ons innige meegevoel met sy vrou,
Doreen, en hul seuns Donovan en Brenvill, asook sy familie en vriendekring.
Mag julle besondere krag ontvang vir die begrafnis eerskomende Saterdag en
ook om die leë plek in julle lewens te vul.

Johnny Schippers het gesterf met die hand op die ploeg en nie agtertoe
gekyk nie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN: Speaker, the hon Johnny Schippers died suddenly whilst in
the service of his community and party. As was the case with his life –
conscientious, active, organised, with religious zeal and modesty – his
affairs would have been just as organised to meet his Maker.

The circumstances of his death – relatively early on a Saturday morning, on
his way home to Tulbagh from the ANC regional office in Worcester – are
indicative of his diligence and loyalty. It is tragic to think along these
lines, but, had he perhaps driven a bigger, more luxurious vehicle instead
of the modest, small Colt bakkie, the impact of the collision might have
been less severe and he might have survived.

But that was how we came to know Johnny Schippers: not the flamboyant type
but humble and down-to-earth, one who was part and parcel of the community
that he served. He definitely was a prophet, honoured in his own region.

The fact that he died at the age of 65 also came as a shock to us since he
was a healthy and fit man who, after years of struggle and edification,
could now have been able to enjoy the fruits of his labour with his wife,
Doreen, and family.

His life, however, calls to mind wonderful memories. Johnny Schippers spent
28 years in teaching and culminated at the pinnacle. He first advanced to
the level of deputy principal of Worcester Secondary School and then, in
1993, he ended off his teaching career as principal of the Waveren
Secondary School in Tulbagh. Through these years, he actually helped to
build a nation and under his guidance, literally thousands of children were
given direction in life.

Through correspondence, he obtained a B.A. degree from Unisa and also a B
Ed degree from the University of the Western Cape. At the time of his
death, he was busy with a Master’s Degree at Unisa. All of this only
demonstrates the example he set, that one should be academically equipped
in one’s area of service. In this respect, he was an inspiration to the
youth.

On account of his positive contribution to the community, he received the
Witzenberger of the Year Award in 1993. This achievement shows his
involvement in and upliftment of the community. I am certain that, in the
days ahead, there will be many who will come forth and attest to the
support he had rendered to them over the years up to his death.

We in Parliament, who had known Johnny Schippers, would remember him for a
number of things: He was not a loud member who got engaged in screaming
matches. He consistently displayed good manners and, during serious
confrontation, he would rather withdraw or walk away, than become nasty.
His contributions here and in the committees, were prudent. He was a man of
few words, but when he spoke, you would listen.

He was the serious type who took things to heart. He was not the type to
poke fun at or be frivolous over differences or people or matters that were
confrontational. He took things to heart. In my view, he had difficulty
with the statement that – especially we as politicians – we should not take
ourselves too seriously. That would be too frivolous for him, because he
had the interests of his community at heart.

We remember him as one of our best-dressed members whose appearance was at
all times immaculate.

On behalf of the DA we concur completely with the wording of the motion on
the Order Paper. We wish to extend our deepest sympathy to his wife,
Doreen, and their sons, Donovan and Brenvill as well as his family and
friends. May you all receive great strength to cope with the funeral next
Saturday as well as filling the void in your lives.

Johnny Schippers died with his hand to the plough without looking back.]

Mnr J H VAN DER MERWE: Speaker, terwyl ek so geluister het na wat die
vorige sprekers gesê het, het die vraag by my opgekom: Wanneer is dit my
beurt? Wanneer is dit ons beurt, dat ons afsterf en dat hier oor ons
gepraat word? Die les wat ek daaruit leer is om in my eie lewe ook my lewe
so te reël dat ek gereed sal wees as ek geroep word.

Daar is genoeg oor Johnny gesê dat ek ’n bietjie van ’n ander rigting af
iets wil sê en dit is: Doreen, as Johnny vandag self hier was, wat sou hy
gesê het as hy ’n geleentheid gehad het om oor homself iets te sê? Ek dink
hy sou bedankings gedoen het. Ek dink Johnny sou eerstens gesê het: “Ek
dank die Here wat my my hele lewe lank bygestaan het.” Dan sou hy gesê het:
“Aan my vrou, Doreen, baie dankie vir die baie jare wat jy by my gestaan
het, vir my lief was en saam met my gestry het.” Vir sy kinders, vir almal
- sy kleinkinders wat vir hom dierbaar was - hy sou vir sy kollegas in die
Parlement en almal gesê het: “Baie dankie vir julle vriendskap, baie dankie
vir die goeie tyd wat ek op aarde geniet het.”

Van ons kant af wil ons vir Johnny baie dankie sê vir die pragtige
voorbeeld wat jy vir ons in die Parlement gestel het. Ek wil nie uitbrei op
wat Willem Doman gesê het nie – hy’t dit pragtig gedoen. Johnny was ’n
nederige, vriendelike mens. Altyd ’n glimlag; netjies geklee; ’n goeie
vriend. Hy was iemand wat ’n baie goeie opvoeding vir sy kinders gegee het.
Met hierdie paar woorde wil ons vir Johnny sê: Ons groet jou, Johnny. Vir
sy vrou en kinders wil ons sê: Ons bid vir julle sterkte van die Here toe.

Johnny mag dood wees, maar sy nagedagtenis sal voortleef en ons sal hom
altyd onthou. Totsiens, Johnny. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Speaker, while I was listening to what the previous
speakers said, the question came to mind: When will it be my time? When
will it be our time to die and have people here talking about us? The
lesson that I have learned is that I should organise my own life in such a
way that I will be ready when I am called.

Enough has been said about Johnny, so I would like to say something from
another perspective and that is: Doreen, if Johnny himself was here today,
what would he have said about himself if he had the opportunity? I think he
would have expressed his thanks. I think that Johnny would firstly have
said: “I thank the Lord who has stood by me throughout my life.” Then he
would have said: “To my wife, Doreen, thank you for all the years that you
have stood by me, loved me and fought the battle with me.” To his children,
to everyone – his grandchildren who were so dear to him – he would have
said to his colleagues in Parliament and to everyone: “Thank you so much
for your friendship, thank you for the good times I enjoyed on earth.”

From our side, we would like to thank you Johnny, for the beautiful example
that you had set for us in Parliament. I do not want to elaborate on what
Willem Doman said – he has said it beautifully. Johnny was a humble,
friendly person. Always with a smile; neatly dressed; a good friend. He was
someone who gave his children a very good upbringing. With these few words,
we want to say to Johnny: We salute you. To his wife and children we want
to say: We pray that the Lord may strengthen you.

Johnny may be dead, but his memory will live on and we will always remember
him. Goodbye, Johnny. [Applause.]]

Mr J BICI: Speaker, hon members, the UDM extends its condolences to the
family and friends of the late Johnny Schippers. He will be remembered for
spending his entire adult life in public service, as a polished teacher, a
responsible and caring counsellor and finally, an honourable and respected
member of this House.

The sudden and tragic manner of his passing in a motor vehicle accident is
a loss, not only to his family, friends and political party, but also to
the South African community as a whole.

Our thoughts are with his loved ones during this time of bereavement. We
hope that they will draw consolation from all the contributions he made to
the community during his lifetime. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, hon members, the ACDP joins this House in
conveying our sincere condolences to the family and friends of the hon
Johnny Schippers who died tragically in a car accident on Saturday morning,
31 January 2009.

It is our sincere hope that they have the assurance and confidence that he
has gone to be with his Maker and we pray that they will experience the
peace of Jesus Christ at this time.

I met Johnny Schippers while he was still a councillor in the Tulbagh
Municipality under the then National Party. He became a member of the
National Assembly under the New National Party in 2003 and joined the ANC
in 2005.

Here I agree with the other speakers before me that hon Schippers was a
person who worked a lot more than he spoke. At the time of his death he was
serving as member of the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Defence and
Joint Budget Committee.

We ask God to strengthen his family and colleagues during this time. May
God bless you with His peace, which transcends all understanding and guard
your hearts and minds. You are in our thoughts and prayers during this
time. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members, the UCDP mourns the loss of
Johannes Schippers who succumbed to injuries sustained in a road accident.
Whatever the circumstances around the cause of the accident, it is
regrettable that we continue to lose lives on our roads.

Mr Schippers was a self-made man who rose from humble beginnings to the
level of an elected representative among his people. As a teacher, he never
lost touch with his roots. He was humility personified. He remained
involved in the community. He never raised himself above the level of the
people he lived with. He worshipped with them, founded a crèche for the
disadvantaged community in Tulbagh and served on the management committee
of the home for the aged. We could not ask for more and better service from
him. This was a man of the people.

Surely in the late Mr Schippers’ case, it will not be inappropriate to say
that he fought the good fight and ran the full distance. We, in the UCDP,
cherish the hope that he will qualify for the crown of glory. We express
our condolences to all the relatives of the late Mr Schippers and the ANC.
May his soul rest in peace. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the tragic death of the late Johannes
Schippers has left us all disheartened. He was an honourable and dedicated
comrade whose days were ended in a service to South Africans. Mr Schippers
was a true example of the transition and the progressing democracy that
South Africa has grown to be.

The MF takes this opportunity to extend its heartfelt condolence to the
family and friends of the beloved Mr Schippers. We pray for God’s guidance
and tender hands over you all in this trying time. Let us all remember that
God said:

  My child, I send you but one way, and that is through your mother’s womb.
  But the day I call you back, you will never know when, where and how.

That day, our brother did not even know whether he was going to return home
or not.

We further extend our condolence to the ANC on the loss of an astounding,
admirable member. We thank the hon Schippers for all his commitment and
dedication in the progress of this democracy. May he rest in peace. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, I served with the hon Johannes Schippers on
the Portfolio Committee on Defence for a considerable length of time. I
travelled with him and other members of this committee to several places
such as Simon’s Town and the Saldanha Bay Military Academy. We watched the
passing-out parades of our navy and air force cadets.

On many other occasions, we attended matters of national importance in the
SA National Defence Force. Together, we shared painful times, such as when
we lost our trainees at Lohatla. To get to some of these places, we
travelled in military planes which are quite different from the comfortable
civilian SA Airways. We discussed all sorts of subjects. I was, therefore,
shocked to hear about his sudden death in a car accident. It was as if
lightning just struck next to me, because he was a colleague with whom I
exchanged many ideas.

In the Defence committee, he was often quiet. But when he made his
contribution, wisdom came out of his mouth.

The PAC sends its condolences to his family and relatives and, of course,
to the ANC. Death remains a mystery to all mankind, whether they are
theists or atheists. But those who believe in life after death have for
ages sung:


   But Lord, tis for Thee, for Thy coming we wait. The sky, not the grave,
   is our goal. Oh trump of the angel! Oh voice of the Lord! Blessed hope,
   blessed rest of my soul.

[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and members, the FD expresses
its sincere condolences to the Schippers family and the ANC on the sudden
death of a colleague of this House, the hon Mr Johnny Schippers. We realise
that his death is an unexpected blow to his family, especially to his wife,
children, grandchildren and family members.

The hon Mr Schippers was a valuable Member of Parliament who served his
constituency with diligent readiness and was committed to his work in
portfolio committees such as Safety and Security, Defence and Public Works.
He was a dedicated community builder. Because of his hard work in his
community, he was rewarded with the Witzenberger of the Year Award in 1993.
Everyone knew him as a humble and committed servant of the public who
worked tirelessly to improve the lives of ordinary people.

His family will go through a difficult time in working through the death of
a loving husband, a dedicated father, a grandfather and a good friend. Our
prayers are with you at this time. We pray that God’s grace be your comfort
as you go through this period of mourning. May his soul rest in peace. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P A GERBER: Speaker, it is a humbling honour for me today to pay tribute
to a highly respected colleague of ours who tragically passed away last
Saturday in a car accident in Wolseley, my constituency.

Johnny Schippers was born in a missionary station, Steinthal, in Tulbagh,
and he completed his high school education at another missionary station,
Genadendal. He then went to study for many years, qualifying from the
Oudtshoorn training college as a teacher, eventually obtaining his Bachelor
of Arts degree from Unisa, his Bachelor of Education degree from the
University of the Western Cape, and he was busy with his Master of
Education degree at the University of Stellenbosch.

As was mentioned before, he spent 30 years in education, becoming a teacher
and eventually a headmaster. He married Dorothea Apollis in Tulbagh in 1966
and they have two big and strong sons sitting in the gallery with her and
their families. We welcome them.

Last Saturday morning started out like any other electioneering weekend for
us as ANC MPs: Door-to-door for the whole day. All the Boland MPs were to
board at 10 ’o clock at the ANC regional office in Worcester. Comrade Cora,
mayor John Goiama, and I were standing on the stoep when the phone call
came through informing us that Comrade Johnny had been in an accident.

Unsure of where the accident happened, we jumped into my car and drove to
the accident scene 40km away. Unsure of what happened to Comrade Johnny,
the mood in the car was very sombre, as all of us have stood next to the
open grave of a loved one at some stage in our lives. Our worst fears were
confirmed when we got to the accident scene and were briefed by the police
that Comrade Johnny was not with us anymore.

On the morning of his death, he went to the ANC regional office in
Worcester to collect ANC pamphlets and money to buy food and petrol for the
various teams of canvassers. The money, a couple of thousand rand in a
brown envelope, his pistol, his wallet, also containing cash, as well as
his briefcase were all on him when the accident happened. We then, after we
went to his family, went to the Wolseley police station on the way back to
Worcester where we spoke to the police officer there. He informed us that
everything that was with Comrade Johnny was with the police and would be
handed over to the family. Not a single cent, the pistol, or anything got
lost between the police, the ambulance staff, and the public who stopped
there.

This is an incredible story, but is something we will never read about in
the newspaper because it is a good news story. All our thanks go to the
Wolseley police and everybody else who helped at the scene.

I met Comrade Johnny more than 15 years ago, when I was still the National
Party youth leader and he an active National Party member. It was at the
time when so-called coloured people were joining the National Party with
the likes of Gerald Morkel, Peter Marais, Cecil Herandien, Nick Isaacs, and
those people.

Johnny was a National Party councillor for Tulbagh from 1995 to 1999. In
that time we also put him on the list to come to Parliament. He was number
one for a very long time, but every time there was a vacancy and he had to
go to Parliament, the then leadership found an excuse to put in a member
from the old guard. Then, at one point, some of the seniors in the National
Party went to the leadership and said enough is enough and that was when
Comrade Johnny came to join us here at Parliament. He had endured all that
disappointment and frustration, but never gave up.

His decision to join the ANC was not taken lightly. It was a decision he
had to internalise for a long time, because he was never an opportunist.
When he joined the ANC, he was so absolutely committed that he became an
example to us all of how to work harder and better. In the last election,
when he was still a National Party member, his region had the most votes
for the then National Party.

His humility will always be part of my memories of him. Being a leader in
his town, Tulbagh, he continued to live amongst the people and the children
he taught. He never moved to a more expensive part of Tulbagh. He never
smoked or used alcohol and was quite upset when his 36-year-old son told
him recently that he sometimes takes a beer.

What struck me on Saturday, when we went to his house to sympathise with
his family, was his beautiful garden which is now, as we speak, full of
flowers. It is as if the flowers are there especially for Johnny. We must
ask ourselves: If we die today and our friends come to sympathise with our
family, will there also be flowers in our gardens? Are we ready?

Johnny was a perfectionist. He, and everything about him, was always ready.
Whether he was going to meet the President or whether he was going to meet
his Maker, Johnny was ready. Johnny, a couple of weeks earlier, told his
family that one day when he dies, he doesn’t want any tributes. He didn’t
want people to stand there and say how wonderful he was. We are grateful
and thankful to the family for having allowed us to bend his wishes a
little bit, for us to have this today.

Ek wil graag die Griekwa-Psalm 23 vir u, as familie, vriende en kollegas
lees:


  Die Jirre is my skawagter ...
  Hy sal my nooit verloor lat lê nie
  en sal ek ok niks oor my hê nie
  en al wei ek wyd warie wind begin:
  Hy lei my na waterse tissenie deine in;
  Hy sit my siel in my lyf in trig;
  Hy breekslat slang se hoepelrig! ...

Soos Job gesê het in Vers 26:14 (b): Maar die volle krag van Sy dade, wie
kan dit verstaan?

Aan u, van ons as die ANC, sy weduwee, Doreen, sy seuns, Brenvill en
Donovan, en hul gesinne op die gallery: In die lang gange van hierdie
Parlement lê daar baie van Johnny se spore en dit sal altyd daar wees. Baie
sterkte, en dankie dat julle hom vir ons geleen het. Dit was ’n voorreg om
hom te ken. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to read to you, the family, friends and colleagues, the
Griqua version of Psalm 23:

  Die Jirre is my skawagter ...
  Hy sal my nooit verloor lat lê nie
  en sal ek ok niks oor my hê nie
  en al wei ek wyd warie wind begin:
  Hy lei my na waterse tissenie deine in;
  Hy sit my siel in my lyf in trig;
  Hy breekslat slang se hoepelrig! ...

As Job said in Verse 26:14 (b): Who then can understand the thunder of His
power?

From us as the ANC, to you, his widow, Doreen, his sons, Brenvill and
Donovan, and their families in the gallery: In the long corridors of this
Parliament many of Johnny’s footprints lie - and it will always be there.
Our thoughts accompany you, and we thank you for lending him to us. It was
a privilege to know him. Thank you.]

The SPEAKER: That concludes the speakers list on this matter. I take it
that there are no objections to the motion being adopted. The Presiding
Officers associate themselves with the motion. I now ask members to stand
to observe a moment of silence in memory of the late Mr Schippers.

The condolences of the House will be conveyed to the Schippers family and
to the African National Congress.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to, members standing.

  ESTABLISHMENT OF AN AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER THE APPOINTMENT OF
           MEMBERS TO THE NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENGY BOARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, with leave, I
move without notice:

   That the House, noting that the National  Youth  Development  Agency  Act
   (Act 54 of 2008) will  be  promulgated  this  week  and  subject  to  the
   concurrence of the National Council of Provinces, resolves –


     1) to establish an ad hoc joint committee in terms of Joint Rule
        138(1)(a) to consider, upon the commencement of the Act, the
        appointment of members to the National Youth Development Agency
        Board;


     2) that the Committee exercises those powers in Joint Rule 32 that may
        assist it in carrying out its task;


     3) that the Committee consists of 13 Members of the National Assembly
        (ANC 8, DA 2, IFP 1 and all other parties 2) and 9 Members of the
        National Council of Provinces; and


     4) that the Committee reports by 19 February 2009.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 15:11.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 30 JANUARY 2009
ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

The Speaker

   1. Reconsideration of Bills

      (1)   The Speaker received a letter dated 27 January 2009 from the
          President of the Republic informing her that he had reservations
          about the constitutionality of the following Bill:


             Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 27D – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec75)


          and that, in terms of section 79(1) of the Constitution, he was
          referring the Bill back to the National Assembly for
          reconsideration. The President’s letter reads as follows:


CREDA INSERT - T090130e-insert1 – PAGES 137-139

      (2)   The Speaker received a letter dated 27 January 2009 from the
          President of the Republic informing her that he had reservations
          about the constitutionality of the following Bill:


             Competition Amendment Bill [B 31D – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec75)


          and that, in terms of section 79(1) of the Constitution, he was
          referring the Bill back to the National Assembly for
          reconsideration. The President’s letter reads as follows:
CREDA INSERT - T090130e-insert2 – PAGES 140-142

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Draft Rules made in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of
        Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

 2. The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Employment Equity Report of the Department of Home Affairs for
        1 October 2007 to 30 September 2008, in terms of section 22(2) of
        the Employment Equity Act, 1998 (Act No 55 of 1998).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Reply from the Minister of Public Service and Administration to
        recommendations in the 24th Report of the Committee on Public
        Accounts (Annual Report and Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of the South African Management Development
        Institute (SAMDI) for the 2006/07 financial year), adopted by the
        House on 23 September 2008.


        Referred to the Committee on Public Accounts and to the Portfolio
        Committee on Public Service and Administration.


    (b)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 9 January 2009  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing Members of the Assembly of the employment  of  the  South
        African National Defence Force for a service in  co-operation  with
        the South African Police Service:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE  SOUTH  AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE  FORCE  FOR  A
        SERVICE IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force  (SANDF)
        personnel, for a service in co-operation  with  the  South  African
        Police Service (SAPS) in prevention  and  combating  of  crime  and
        maintenance and preservation of law and order within  the  Republic
        of South  Africa,  during  2008/2009  festive  season,  the  voters
        registration period and 2009 general elections.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions  of
        section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 19 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 852 SANDF members are deployed in cooperation  with  the
        SAPS until 31 March 2009. The number of members  deployed  will  be
        increased to 1611 as from 01 April 2009 to 14 July 2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces, and wish to  request  that  you  bring  the  contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.
        Regards


        signed
        K P MOTLANTHE

                           MONDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B 23D – 2008] – Act
         No 56 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 27 January
         2009).

      2) South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B 30D – 2008] – Act No
         57 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 27 January
         2009).

National Assembly

The Speaker

    2. Referral of Bills for reconsideration

      (a)   The Speaker, in terms of Joint Rule 203(1), has referred the
          Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 27D – 2006] (National
          Assembly – sec 75) and the President’s reservations about the
          constitutionality of the Bill (see Announcements, Tablings and
          Committee Reports, 30 January 2009, p 136) to the Portfolio
          Committee on Home Affairs for consideration and report.

       b) The Speaker, in terms of Joint Rule 203(1), has referred the
          Competition Amendment Bill [B 31D – 2008] (National Assembly –
          sec 75) and the President’s reservations about the
          constitutionality of the Bill (see Announcements, Tablings and
          Committee Reports, 30 January 2009, p 140) to the Portfolio
          Committee on Trade and Industry for consideration and report.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:
          a) Draft Rules made in terms of section 7(3) of the  Promotion  of
             Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Pension Funds Adjudicator
         for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

                          TUESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Membership of Committees


    Mr C V Burgess has been appointed chairperson of the Joint Standing
    Committee on Intelligence in terms of section 2(4) of the Intelligence
    Services Oversight Act, 1994 (Act No 40 of 1994) with effect from 27
    January 2009.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly

    (a)    The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
         resignation of Rev N M Mahlawe with effect from 20 January 2009,
         has been filled with effect from 27 January 2009 by the nomination
         of Mr J M Matshoba.


      b) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
         resignation of Ms M A A Njobe with effect from 21 January 2009, has
         been filled with effect from 27 January 2009 by the nomination of
         Ms A D N Qikani.


      c) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
         loss of membership of Mr S L Dithebe with effect from 27 January
         2009, has been filled with effect from 27 January 2009 by the
         nomination of Mr D Erleigh.


      d) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
         resignation of Mr M E George with effect from 23 September 2008,
         has been filled with effect from 27 January 2009 by the nomination
         of Mr D R Rwexu.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2007-
        2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on Monies in
        Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2007-2008 [RP 282-2008].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

       a) Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme for 2007-
          2008.

                          THURSDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly

    (a)    A vacancy occurred in the National Assembly owing to the passing
         away of Mr J Schippers on 31 January 2009.


     (b)    A vacancy occurred in the National Assembly owing to the passing
        away of Mr E Saloojee on 1 February 2009.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      (1)   The following paper is referred to the Committee on the Auditor-
           General:


      (a)   The Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General of South
           Africa for 2009-12 [RP 288-2008].

      (2)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08 is referred to the Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
           2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08.


      (3)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry for consideration and report:

      (a)   Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee (Cafcom) for 2007-08.


      (4)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
           Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           for the year ended June 2008 are referred to the Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration:
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for the year ended
           June 2008, including the Report of the Independent  Auditors  on
           the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Namakwa Water Board for the
           year ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
           2008.


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle Northern Water for
           the year ended June 2008, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
           ended June 2008.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the year
           ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
           2008.


      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the year
           ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
           2008.


      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
           ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
           2008.

      (5)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance:


      (a)   Government Notice No 1370 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           31726, dated 15 December 2008: Commencement dates  in  terms  of
           the Insurance Laws Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 27 of 2008).

      (b)   Government Notice No  11  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           31772, dated 9 January 2009: Commencement dates in terms of  the
           Special Pensions Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 13 of 2008).

      (c)   Government Notice No R.1373 published in Government Gazette No
           31716, dated 19 December 2008: Designation of activities that do
           not fall within the meaning of “the business of a bank” in terms
           of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990) for Ithala Limited, a
           wholly owned subsidiary of Ithaba Development Finance
           Corporation Limited.


      (d)   Government Notice No R.1374 published in Government Gazette No
           31716, dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
           3/640) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91
           of 1964).


      (e)   Government Notice No R.1375 published in Government Gazette No
           31716, dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           1/1/1370) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No
           91 of 1964).


      (f)   Government Notice No R.1376 published in Government Gazette No
           31716, dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           1/1/1371) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No
           91 of 1964).
      (g)   Government Notice No R.1377 published in Government Gazette No
           31716, dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
           4/315) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91
           of 1964).
      (h)   Government Notice No R.1378 published in Government Gazette No
           31716, dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No
           5/89) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91 of
           1964).


      (6)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


      (a)   Government Notice No R.1223 published in Government  Gazette  No
           31601, dated 14 November 2008: Amendment of regulations in terms
           of the Marine Living Resources Act, 2008 (Act No 18 of 1998).


      (b)   Government Notice No 1241 published in Government Gazette No
           31615, dated 21 November 2008: Intention to establish the Vaal
           Triangle Air-Shed Priority Area Air Quality Management Plan in
           terms of the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act,
           2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


      (c)   Government Notice No 1242 published in Government Gazette No
           31615, dated 21 November 2008: Regulations for implementing and
           enforcing the Vaal Triangle Air-Shed Priority Area Air Quality
           Management Plan in terms of the National Environmental
           Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


      (d)   Government Notice No 1346 published in Government Gazette No
           31694, dated 12 December 2008: Declaration of the Hantam
           National Botanical Garden in terms of the National Environmental
           Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


      (e)   Government Notice No 1358 published in Government Gazette No
           31707, dated 12 December 2008: Invitation to comment on the
           Draft Policy for the Allocation and Management of Medium-Term
           Subsistence Fishing Rights in terms of the Marine Living
           Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


      (f)   Government Notice No 1380 published in Government Gazette No
           31715, dated 19 December 2008: Invitation for public comment on
           proposed increases in and amendments to levies on fish and fish
           products in terms of section 29 of the Sea Fishery Act, 1988
           (Act No 12 of 1988).


      (g)   Government Notice No 1381 published in Government Gazette No
           31715, dated 19 December 2008: Invitation for public comment on
           proposed increases in the fees payable in respect of
           applications for and the issuing or granting of rights, permits
           and licences in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1988
           (Act No 18 of 1998).

      (7)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry.

      (a)   Government Notice No 1053 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           31461, dated 3 October 2008: Standards matters in terms  of  the
           Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


      (b)   Government Notice No 1082 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           31485, dated 10 October 2008: Standards matters in terms of  the
           Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


      (c)   Government Notice No 1106 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           31503, dated 17 October 2008: Export control  measures  relating
           to the International Trade Administration  Commission  of  South
           Africa,  amended   in   terms   of   the   International   Trade
           Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


      (d)   Government Notice No R.1123 published in Government  Gazette  No
           31520,  dated  24  October  2008:  Proposed  amendment  to   the
           compulsory specification for Replacement Brake-Lining Assemblies
           for Road Vehicles in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29
           of 1993).


      (e)   Government Notice No R.1134 published in Government  Gazette  No
           31520,  dated  24  October  2008:  Proposed  introduction  of  a
           compulsory specification for Motor Vehicles  of  Category  L  in
           terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      (8)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
           Committee on Provincial and Local Government:

      (a)   Draft Municipal Budget and Reporting Regulations made in terms
           of section 169(2) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
           Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).
      (9)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Home Affairs for consideration and report:

      (a)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho on the Facilitation
           of Cross-Border Movement of Citizens of the  Republic  of  South
           Africa and the Kingdom of Lesotho, tabled in  terms  of  section
           231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
           of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
           Kingdom of Lesotho on the Facilitation of Cross-Border Movement
           of Citizens of the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of
           Lesotho.

      (10)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
           Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the  year
           ended  June  2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year  ended  June
           2008.

      (11)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Home Affairs:

      (a)   Employment Equity Report of the Department of Home Affairs for 1
           October 2007 to 30 September 2008, tabled in terms of section
           22(2) of the Employment Equity Act, 1998 (Act No 55 of 1998).

      (12)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements for 2007-08 is referred to
           the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Pension Funds Adjudicator
           for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements for 2007-08.


      (13)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08 is referred to the Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Department of Arts
           and Culture for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 13 for 2007-08.

      (14)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
           Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2007-08 are referred to the
           Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water for the year
           ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
           2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water for the year
           ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
           2008.

      (15)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Public Service and Administration for consideration:

      (a)   Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Monitoring
           Fact Sheet on Complaints Lodged with the Public Service
           Commission during the 2007/2008 Financial Year – July 2008 [RP
           197-2008].


      (b)   Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Founding
           Document on Organisational Performance Assessment in the Public
           Service – September 2008 [RP 263-2008].


      (c)   Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
           Consolidated Report on Inspection of Service Delivery Sites:
           Department of Education - September 2008 [RP 174-2008].

      (16)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Education for consideration:
      (a)   Revised Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2008-
           12 and the Operational Plans of the Department of Education for
           2008-09.

      (17)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
           report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements for 2007-08 is referred to the Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration:


         b) Report and Financial Statements of the Presidents’ Fund for 2007-
            08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
            Statements for 2007-08 [RP 245-2008].


      (18)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance:


      (a)   Multi-Annual Indicative Programme and Country Strategy Paper
           between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
           European Community for 2007-2013, tabled in terms of section
           231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (b)   Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning Water for
           Growth and Development Programme (Masimbabane III) (SA/001/07),
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (c)   Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning
           “Sustainable Rural Development in the Eastern Cape (SURUDEC)”
           (SA/005/06 Rev), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

      (d)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
           Technical Cooperation in 2006, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
           of the Constitution, 1996.

      (e)   Protocol between the Government of the People’s Republic of
           China and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
           Economic and Technical Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
           231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (f)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
           Technical Cooperation in 2004, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
           of the Constitution, 1996.

      (g)   Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning the Sector-
           Wide Enterprise, Employment and Equity Programme (SWEEEP)
           (SA/1006/000), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

      (h)   Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning Innovation
           for Poverty Alleviation, Sector-Wide Budget Support to the
           Department of Science and Technology for 2008-2012, tabled in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (i)   Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning the
           Expanded Programme of Partnership for the Delivery of Primary
           Health Care, HIV and Aids Services (SA/003/06 Rev), tabled in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (j)   Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning Official
           Development Assistance Programme (ODA-P) (SA/002/06 Rev), tabled
           in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (k)   Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning Programme
           to Support Pro-poor Policy Development in South Africa (PSPPD)
           (SA/001/06 Rev), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

      (l)   Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning Expanding
           and Strengthening Community-Based Participation in Local
           Government (CBP), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

      (m)   Proclamation No R.41 published in Government Gazette No 31512,
           dated 13 October 2008: Determining a date on which the Diamond
           Export Levy Act, 2007 (Act No 15 of 2007) comes into operation.

      (n)   Proclamation No R.41 published in Government Gazette No 31512
           dated 13 October 2008: Determining a date on which the Diamond
           Export Levy (Administration) Act, 2007 (Act No 21 of 2007) comes
           into operation.

      (o)   Government Notice No 1170 published in Government Gazette No
           31561, dated 31 October 2008: Determining the commencement date
           of certain provisions of the Financial Services Laws General
           Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 22 of 2008).

      (p)   Government Notice No 1163 published in Government Gazette No
           31554, dated 30 October 2008: Prescribing the amount referred to
           in paragraph (b) of the definition of  “Living Annuity” in
           section 1 of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (q)   Government Notice No 1164 published in Government Gazette No
           31554, dated 30 October 2008: Prescribing the amount referred to
           in paragraph (c) of the definition of  “Living Annuity” in
           section 1 of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (r)   Government Notice No 1160 published in Government Gazette No
           31548, dated 31 October 2008: Regulations issued in terms of
           section 75B of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962),
           prescribing administrative penalties in respect of non-
           compliance.

      (s)   Government Notice No R.1236 published in Government Gazette No
           31614, dated 21 November 2008: Regulations to be issued in terms
           of section 10(1) (d)(iii) and (iv) of the Income Tax Act, 1962
           (Act No 58 of 1962), prescribing conditions according to which
           the Commissioner may approve an entity for the purpose of that
           section.

      (19)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
           Traditional Leaders (NHTL) for 2007-08 [RP 206-2008].

      (20)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Housing for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2007-08 is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Home Builders
           Registration Council for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08.

      (21)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
           report:

      (a)   Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2007-08.

      (22)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
           Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           for 2007-08 are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Bloem Water for the year
           ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
           2008.
      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Overberg Water for the year
           ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
           2008.

      (23)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Public Service and Administration for consideration:

      (a)   Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Management
           of Gifts in the Public Service – March 2008 [RP 39-2008].


      (24)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of
           the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 are
           referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of Trade
          and Industry for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          of Vote 32 for 2007-08 [RP 198-2008].

       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
          Resources for Industry Programme for 2007-08, including the
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2007-08.

       c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund
          for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
          the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08
          [RP 228-2008].

       d) Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
          Board for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

       e) Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
          Development Agency for 2007-08, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-08.


     (25)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Trade and Industry for consideration and report and to the
          Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Portfolio Committee on
          Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
          the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction for the
          period July 2007 to 31 March 2008.

      26) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:
      (a)   Government Notice No R.827 published in Government Gazette No
           31297, dated 1 August 2008: Amendment of regulations in terms of
           section 81(1) of the Attorneys Act, 1979 (Act No 53 of 1979).

       27) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Public Service and Administration for consideration and report.
           The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2007-08 are referred to the
           Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of Public
           Service and Administration for 2007-08, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 9 for 2007-08 [RP 218-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 – Public Service
           Commission (PSC) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 10 for 2007-08 [RP 194-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
           Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (Sita) for 2007-08,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 236-
           2008].

      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 – South African
           Management Development Institute (Samdi) for 2007-08, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information of Vote 11 for 2007-08.


       28) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Safety and Security for consideration and report. The Reports of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department for
           Safety and Security for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 23 for 2007-08 [RP 204-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Independent
           Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2007-08, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information of Vote 21 for 2007-08 [RP 259-2008].


       29) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry for consideration:


      (a)   Report of the Strategic Industrial Projects for April 2002 to
March 2008.


      (b)   Report on the National Lotteries Distribution Trust Fund –
           Souvenir Brochure 2008.


       30) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
           Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
           referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of Land
           Affairs for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           28 for 2007-08.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department of
           Agriculture for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 24 for 2007-08 [RP 248-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
           Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2007-08, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for
           2007-08, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2007-08.


      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board for
           2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements for 2007-08.


      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
           Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2007-08, including the Report
           of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
           08.


      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
           Council (ARC) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2007-08 [RP 227-2008].
       31) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry for consideration and report:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
           Development Agency Technology Programme for 2007-08.

       32) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Defence for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of
           Defence for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           20 for 2007-08. [RP 238-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
           South Africa Limited (Armscor) for 2007-08, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 58-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope for
           2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP
           165-2008].


       33) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Foreign Affairs for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
           Foreign Affairs for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 3 for 2007-08.

       34) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
           Communications for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 25 for 2007-08 [RP 247-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and
           Access Agency of South Africa (Usaasa) for 2007-08, including
           the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           of the Universal Service and Access Agency of South Africa
           (Usaasa) and the Universal Service and Access Fund (USAF) for
           2007-08 [RP 219-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
           Institute of South Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of 2007-08.
      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
           Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2007-08,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information of Vote 7 for 2007-08 [RP
           213-2008].

      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
           Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08.

       35) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
           General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information are referred to the Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National Treasury
           for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2007-08 [RP 123-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2007-08,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2007-08.


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
           Southern Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
           Southern Africa Development Fund for 2007-08, including the
           Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           of the Fund for 2007-08.

      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
           (FSB) 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
           the Financial Statements for 2007-08 [RP 139-2008].

      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
           Bank for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 12 - Statistics South
           Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           12 for 2007-08 [RP 126-2008].


      (h)   Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
           Board for Auditors for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08.

      (i)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
           Service (Sars) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2007-08 [RP 193-2008].

      (j)   Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
           Commission (FFC) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08 [RP 206-2008].

      (k)   Annual Financial Statements of the Project Development Facility
           (PDF) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements Ltd for 2007-08 [RP 123-2008].

      (l)   Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
           Centre for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 167-2008].

      (m)   Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
           Corporation Limited for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-08 [RP 223-
           2008].


      (n)   Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud for
           Financial Services Providers for 2007-08, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-08.

       36) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Transport for consideration and report. The Reports of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
           Transport for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 33 for 2007-08 [RP 252-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
           Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2007-08, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08 [RP 150-2008].

      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
           (UTF) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 216-2008].


      (d)   Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of
           South Africa and Air Navigation Services Company for 2007-08.


      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
           Roads Agency Limited for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08 [RP 104-2008].


      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
           Rescue Organisation (SASAR) for 2007-08.


      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
           Corporation for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2007-08 [RP 103-2008].
      (h)   Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
           (RSR) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 130-2008].


      (i)   Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
           Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

      (j)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail
           Commuter Corporation Limited (SARRC) for 2007-08, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Group Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 230-2008].

      (k)   Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund (RAF)
           for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP
           226-2008].


       37) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Public Works for consideration and report. The Reports of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of Public
           Works for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           6 for 2007-08 [RP 249-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
           Environment (CBE) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08.


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
           Development Board (CIDB) for 2007-08, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
           Trust for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 154-2008].

      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa for
2007-08.


       38) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development:


      (a)   Proclamation No R.35 of Government Gazette No 31394, dated 4
           September 2008: Referral of matters to existing Special
           Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of the Special
           Investigation Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74
           of 1996).


      (b)   Proclamation No R.36 of Government Gazette No 31394, dated 4
           September 2008: Referral of matters to existing Special
           Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of the Special
           Investigation Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74
           of 1996).

       39) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Reports
           of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
           the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of
           Science and Technology for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 31 for 2007-08 [RP 200-2008].

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
           Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 215-2007].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory Council
           on Innovation for 2007-08.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
           Foundation (NRF) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
           and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2007-08, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 147-2008].

      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
           Council (HSRC) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2007-08 [RP 112-2008].

      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of the Tshumisano Trust for 2007-
           08, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2007-08.

      (h)   Report and Financial Statements of Academy of Science of South
           Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

       40) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Education for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to
           the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
           Educators (SACE) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

       41) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report.
           The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information is referred to the Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
           Parks (Sanparks) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08 [RP 182-2008].

       42) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Housing for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
           General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information are referred to the Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
           Housing for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           27 for 2007-08 [RP 127-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing Foundation
           for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
           for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
           Reconstruction and Housing Agency (Nurcha) for 2007-08,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2007-08.

      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
           (Pty) Limited for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
           Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


       43) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
           report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department of
           Justice and Constitutional Development for 2007-08, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information of Vote 23 for 2007-08 [RP 232-
           2008].

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
           Authority for 2007-08, including the Reports of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2007-08 and on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of the Criminal Assets Recovery Account for 2007-08
           [RP 225-2008].

       44) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Minerals and Energy for consideration and report. The Reports of
           the Auditor-General and of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
           the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of
           Minerals and Energy for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 29 for 2007-08 [RP 229-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Mineral Technology (Mintek)
           for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08.

      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond and
           Precious Metals Regulator for the nine months ended 31 March
           2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for the nine
           months ended 31 March 2008 [RP 179-2008].

      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy Regulator
           of South Africa (Nersa) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08 [RP 205-2008].


      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
           Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2007-08, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 234-2008].

      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond
           Board for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 178-2008].

      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of the State Diamond Trader for
           the seven months ended 31 March 2008, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for the seven months ended 31 March 2008.

      (h)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
           Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2007-08, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 163-2008].


      (i)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
           Regulator (NNR) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2007-08 [RP 36-2008].

      (j)   Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
           Council for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 46-2008].


      (k)   Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group
           of Companies (CEF) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information of the Central Energy
           Fund Group of Companies for 2007-08 [RP 155-2008].


      (l)   Annual Review of the Central Energy Fund CEF (Pty) Ltd for 2007-
           08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information of the Central Energy
           Fund CEF (Pty) Ltd for 2007-08.

      (m)   Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
           (CGS) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 106-2008].


       45) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Social Development for consideration and report. The Reports of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of
           Social Development for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 17 for 2007-08 [RP 152-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
           Agency (NDA) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements for 2007-08 [RP 56-2008].

       46) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts Centre of
           the Free State (Pacofs) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of South
           Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 222-2008].

       47) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration:


      (a)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), serving
           as the Secretariat for the African Ministerial Conference on the
           Environment (AMCEN), on the hosting of the Twelfth Session of
           AMCEN in Johannesburg from 7 to 12 June 2008, tabled in terms of
           section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


      (b)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) regarding
           the Fifth Session of the Conference of Parties to the Nairobi
           Convention and the Eighth Session of the Conference of Parties
           to the Abidjan Convention in Johannesburg from 5 to 8 November
           2007, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Convention, 1996.

      (c)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
           Republic of South Africa and the United Nations Convention on
           Migratory Species on Conservation and Management of Atlantic
           Ocean Marine Turtles, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

      (d)   Global Environment Facility Trust Fund Grant Agreement between
           the Republic of South Africa and International Bank for
           Reconstruction and Development, acting as an Implementing Agency
           of the Global Environment Facility, on the Western Indian Ocean
           Marine Highway Development and Coastal and Marine Contamination
           Prevention Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

      (e)   Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of
           Nigeria and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
           Cooperation in the Field of Tourism, tabled in terms of section
           231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (f)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the French Republic on Cooperation pertaining to Tourism,
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (g)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Republic of Angola on Cooperation in the Field of
           Tourism, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
           1996.

       48) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development:


      (a)   Report of the Auditor-General on an Investigation into
           Procurement at the Department of Justice and Constitutional
           Development – June 2008 [RP 162-2008].

       49) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
           Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
           referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of Water
           Affairs and Forestry for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 34 for 2007-08 [RP 246-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
           for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP
           180-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
           Authority (TCTA) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

       50) The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring
           Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women
           and the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
           Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons for
           consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General is
           referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
           2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 1 for
           2007-08.

       51) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report and to
           the Portfolio Committee on Finance. The Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
           Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2007-08,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements for 2007-08 [RP 159-2008].

               52) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio
                   Committee on Finance:


      (a)   Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank – 18
           September 2008.

       53) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report.
           The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information are referred to the Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
           Provincial and Local Government for 2007-08, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information of Vote 5 for 2007-08 [RP 255-2008].
      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
           Board for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 191-2008].

       54) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report and
           to the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture. The Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
           Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious
           and Linguistic Communities (CRL) for 2007-08, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 237-2008].

       55) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Report of
           the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Pty) Limited for 2007-
           08, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2007-08.

       56) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Health for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
           Health for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           16 for 2007-08 [RP 129-2008].

       57) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Home Affairs for consideration and report. The Reports of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
           Affairs for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           4 for 2007-08 [RP 258-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication
           Board for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           08 [RP 176-2008].

       58) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
           report:


      (a)   Code of Good Administrative Conduct in terms of the Promotion of
           Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).
TABLINGS


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    a) Report of the Public Protector in terms of Section 8(1) of the
       Public Protector Act, 1994 (Act No 23 of 1994), on an allegation of
       the improper deduction of pension benefits of a former member of the
       South African Police Service and the identification of systemic
       deficiencies in the practices and procedures for the recovery of the
       Departmental debt from pension benefits.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
    Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons

    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of  Quality  of
    Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons on the  African
    Youth Charter dated 04 February 2009:


    The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality  of  Life  and
    Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons, having  considered  the
    request for approval  by  Parliament  of  the  African  Youth  Charter,
    referred to it, recommends that the National Assembly and the  National
    Council of Provinces, in terms of section 231(2) of  the  Constitution,
    approve the said Charter.

