---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 October 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-10-20
---

                          TUESDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

           WELCOMING OF MULTIPARTY DELEGATION OF CITY COUNCILLORS

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to acknowledge the presence in the
gallery of councillors from the Johannesburg City Council - I don’t know if
all of them are here – as well as from the Ekurhuleni City Council. The
delegation is on a visit to our Parliament and is led by Cllr Nonqeba
Molwele, chief whip of the majority party in the Johannesburg City Council.
It’s a multiparty delegation. You are welcome in Parliament.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr P S SIZANI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House discuss rural development as a strategy to address poverty
   and unemployment.

Mr D J MAYNIER: Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion on the next sitting day of the House:

   That the House–


   (1)      notes -


         (a)      the revelations in Parliament concerning the procurement
               of eight Airbus A400M transport aircraft for the SA Air
               Force;


         (b)      that, according to the chief executive officer of Armscor,
               Sipho Thomo, the estimated cost of procuring the aircraft has
               increased by R30 billion from R17 billion in 2005 to R47
               billion in 2009;


         (c)      that, according to a report of the Auditor-General on the
               Financial Statement of the Special Defence Account for the
               2008-09 financial year, irregular expenditure to the amount
               of R2,9 billion had been incurred in procuring the aircraft;
               and


         (d)      that a number of departments, including the Department of
               Trade and Industry, the Department of Public Enterprises, the
               Department of Transport, the National Treasury and the
               Department of Defence, played a role in the acquisition of
               the aircraft; and ...

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: We do have a
certain procedure on how we deal with notices of motion and usually they
are very brief. On a previous occasion the Deputy Chief Whip of the DA
raised a concern that some of these motions were too long, and that’s
exactly what the hon member is doing now. Thank you.

Mr D J MAYNIER: May I conclude, Speaker?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, please, but let’s observe the way we do things. If
it’s a motion to discuss something, it should really be short, because
you’re saying we should be discussing it.

Mr D J MAYNIER: To conclude, Speaker, I shall move that the House-


      2) resolves to establish a multiparty ad hoc committee to investigate
         the Airbus A400M arms deal.
Ms C M P KOTSI: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:
    That the House-


   (1)      records its appreciation of the stalwart contributions  of  Tito
         Mboweni, the outgoing  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  who  will
         preside for the last time over the Monetary Policy Committee on  21
         October 2009 before taking his leave of that august body;


   (2)      recognises that Mboweni, as the eighth Governor of  the  Reserve
         Bank of the Republic of South  Africa,  served  the  country  well,
         being unafraid to take tough decisions for the good of the  economy
         even when he  was  subjected  to  intense  pressure  by  the  union
         federation, Cosatu; and


   (3)      wishes him well wherever his career leads him and thanks him for
         his sterling contributions.


Mr N SINGH: Madam Deputy Speaker, noting that Friday, 16 October 2009 was
declared World Food Day, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the next
sitting day of the House on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House debate South Africa’s ability to feed the nation.

Mr M SWART: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the DA I hereby give notice that I
shall move:

   That the House debate the tendency of Government departments to
   underspend on their annual budgets and then request a roll-over of funds
   to maintain budget provisions at high levels, and solutions thereto.

Mr D A KGANARE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on behalf
of Cope:

   That the House debate the issue of asthma as an occupational disease in
   Danielskuil and the need for the Department of Health to institute an
   investigation into the impact of this disease, and suggestions for a
   programme that can be implemented to alleviate the impact of this disease
   in this town.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP I hereby give
notice that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:


   That the House debate the reasons for poor performance of many township
   public schools in the light of the great successes and achievements of
   Mbilwi Secondary School that, for example, got a 100% pass rate from 2002
   to 2005, a 98,8% pass rate in 2006, a 97,8% pass rate in 2007 and a 100%
   pass rate last year.

Ms F HAJAIG: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the ANC I hereby give notice that
on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:


   That the House debate a review of the first five years of the Pan-African
   Parliament.

               32ND ANNIVERSARY OF NATIONAL MEDIA FREEDOM DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I move without notice:

  That the House –


 (1)  notes that yesterday, 19 October 2009 marked the 32nd anniversary of
       National Media Freedom Day;


 (2)  further notes that on 19 October 1977 the apartheid government banned
       The World and Weekend World as well as Pro Veritate, a religious
       publication that was run by the late Beyers Naudé and that the day
       was later known as Black Wednesday;


 (3)  believes that media freedom is one of the cornerstones of our
       democracy and this freedom, that is entrenched in the South African
       Constitution, should be guarded at all times;


 (4)  further believes that media freedom plays a very important role in
       creating and motivating public debate; and


    5) supports media freedom and freedom of expression.

Agreed to.

                 CHEETAHS AND BLUE BULLS IN CURRIE CUP FINAL

                             (Draft Resolution)


Ms S V KALYAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –

 (1)  notes that on Saturday, 17 October 2009, the Blue Bulls beat Western
       Province and the Cheetahs beat the Sharks in the Currie Cup semi-
       finals;


 (2)  further notes that these two teams will be playing in the final for
       the renowned crown of Currie Cup winners on Saturday, 31 October
       2009;


 (3)  recognises the efforts of all the teams who competed in this
       tournament;
 (4)  further recognises the exceptional play of the Blue Bulls and the
       Cheetahs, which secured them a place in the final;


 (5)  acknowledges that this will indeed be a very tough game, which will
       require good sportsmanship and equal respect; and


 (6)  wishes these two teams all the best for the upcoming final game.

Agreed to.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure they won by a penalty, so we can agree to
that. [Applause.]

                       TRIBUTE TO CHIEF ALBERT LUTHULI

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I move without notice:

  That the House –


 (1)  notes that Chief Albert Luthuli was elected national president-
       general of the African National Congress on 16 October 1952;
 (2)  further notes that in 1961 Chief Albert Luthuli was awarded the Nobel
       Peace Prize;


 (3)  remembers that in 1956 he was arrested and charged with treason, but
       subsequent to these charges being dropped, he was faced with another
       five-year ban as the apartheid government restricted his movement in
       the form of banning orders;


 (4)  acknowledges that he has been lauded as one of the greatest men in
       South African history and this is reflected in the `Order of
       Luthuli’, the highest award for contributions to democracy, human
       rights, justice and peace;


 (5)  recognises that Chief Luthuli’s enormous contribution to the
       liberation struggle in South Africa is not disputed; and


 (6)  salutes Chief Albert Luthuli for his outstanding and selfless
       contribution to the struggle for a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic
       and prosperous South Africa.


Agreed to.

        OUTSTANDING ACHIEVEMENTS OF MBILWI SECONDARY SCHOOL, LIMPOPO

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


  (1) notes a Sunday Times report on the excellent performance of the top
       ten public schools in the country;


  (2) further notes that among the top ten is Mbilwi Secondary School in
       Limpopo that has debunked the myth that only well-resourced schools
       can produce top results;


  (3) further notes that Mbilwi’s principal, Mr Nditsheni Ramugondo, who
       has been at the helm for 17 years, said that a committed school,
       management team and teachers, together with strict discipline and a
       strong work ethic, contributed to the school’s success; and


  (4) congratulates Mr Ramugondo, his teachers and management team on a job
       well done and trusts that their excellent results will motivate
       other principals, particularly in the townships, to also aim for a
       place in the top ten in the near future.


Agreed to.

    MICHELLE KNIGHT WINS EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY’S UNIVERSITY UNDERGRADUATE
                                 COMPETITION
                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S V KALYAN: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


  (1) notes that Rhodes University science student Michelle Knight has won
       the European Space Agency’s university undergraduate category’s “Be
       an integral astronomer” competition;


  (2) further notes that by doing so she managed to beat astronomy students
       from around the world who took part in this competition to mark 2009
       as the International Year of Astronomy;


  (3) congratulates her on winning this award; and


  (4) encourages Knight, a recipient of the Square Kilometre Array bursary,
       to keep up the good work she is doing on the MeerKAT project, as
       well as on the South African Astronomical Observatory’s Outreach
       Programme that encourages our nation’s youngsters to become space
       scientists.


Agreed to.


                          TRIBUTE TO SAMORA MACHEL
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C T FROLICK: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:

  That the House –

 (1)  notes that yesterday, 19 October 2009, marked the 23rd anniversary of
       the tragic death of one of the greatest sons of Africa and the first
       President of a liberated Mozambique, Samora Machel;


 (2)  recalls that in Samora Machel the peoples of Mozambique and all of
       Southern Africa had a leader of great intellect and courage, a
       general with a strategic grasp and unwavering commitment to freedom
       and justice, a visionary for whom the interdependence of the
       countries and peoples of our region meant that none could enjoy
       freedom while some remained oppressed;


 (3)  further recalls that it was Samora Machel who cemented a bond between
       our two peoples founded on a deep belief that “solidarity is not an
       act of charity, but mutual support in pursuit of shared objectives”;
       and


 (4)  believes that the highest tribute that we can pay Samora Machel and
       those who perished on that fateful day, is to eradicate poverty,
       illiteracy and disease, and create prosperous societies whose ethos
       of justice and equity were the passion of Samora Machel’s life.

Agreed to.

   WELCOMING OF COUNCILLOR MAHLOMOLA, THE CHILDREN OF CHÉ GUEVARA AND THE
                              CUBAN AMBASSADOR

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before we continue with the motion on the Order
Paper, I want to recognise also the presence of the Chief Whip of the
Ekurhuleni Municipality, Cllr Mahlomola, as well as the presence of the
daughter of Comrade Ché Guevara, Aleida, and her brother accompanied by the
Cuban Ambassador to South Africa in the gallery up there. [Applause.]

   EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR AD HOC COMMITTEE TO REPORT ON GREEN PAPER ON
                NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLANNING – SEPTEMBER 2009

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I move:

   That the House, notwithstanding the resolution it adopted on 10 September
   2009, resolves to extend the deadline by which the Ad Hoc Committee to
   consider and report on the Green Paper on National Strategic Planning –
   September 2009 has to report, to 29 October 2009.

Agreed to.

                WELCOME TO ALEIDA GUEVARA AND CAMILO GUEVARA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C L GOLOLO (ANC): The ANC wants to acknowledge the presence in the House
of Aleida Guevara and Camilo Guevara, representing the Cuban people here
today.

I want to greet these comrades and say...

Bien venido a Sur África, compañeros. Nosotros Sur Africanos y ustedes
somos hermanos de sangre, como junto vamos a mantener la paz en todo el
mundo y seremos como le Ché. (Translation of Spanish paragraph follows.)

[Welcome to South Africa, comrades. We, South Africans, and you, our blood
brothers, together will support world peace, and will be like Ché.]
Aleida and Camilo are in South Africa to raise awareness about the Cuban
Five, Gerardo Hernández, Ramón Labañino, Antonio Guerrero, Fernando
González and René González are being illegitimately and illegally held in
US prisons.

The Cuban Five were in the US to monitor the activities of the Miami-based
anti-Cuban groups and to prevent terrorist attacks on Cuba. These Miami-
based organisations have mounted various attacks on the island over the
years, in which as many as 3 000 people have been killed as a result of
their actions.

They were sentenced in June 2001 in a US federal court to 15 years, 19
years, and life respectively for committing so-called espionage. The Cuban
Five were not convicted because they violated US laws, but because their
work exposed those who were doing so. By infiltrating the terror networks
that are allowed to exist in Florida, they exposed the hypocrisy and double
standards with regard to the fight against terrorism.

Cubans played a very important role in the liberation of Angola, Namibia
and South Africa and, therefore, the ANC wants to reaffirm our solidarity
with the Cuban people by demanding that these five gallant and heroic
Cubans be released from prison and reunited with their families and
compatriots.

Patria ou muerte, venceremos! [Fatherland or death, we will be victorious!]

               DA VICTORY IN BREEDE VALLEY WARD 11 BY-ELECTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J F MARAIS (DA): Deputy Speaker, this House should take note of the
outcome of various by-elections contested in the Western Cape on 14 October
2009, more specifically the contest in ward 11 within the Breede Valley
Municipality, with Worcester as its centre.

This is an ANC-led municipality where the lack of service delivery and
sustainable job creation has frustrated the community for quite some time.
Since 2000, ward 11 was always held by the ANC, although it may have been
by a small margin in 2006.

Hierdie wyk is verlede week gemaklik gewen deur die DA en sy kandidaat, mnr
Alver Uys, teen veral die ANC. Hierdie oorwinning is ’n geval waar die DA-
verteenwoordigers deurentyd betrokke was by die kommer van die inwoners op
’n opregte en eerlike wyse, waarna veral verteenwoordigers vanuit hierdie
gemeenskap ’n beduidende rol gespeel het in die oorwinning van die DA.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[This ward was won with ease from the ANC in particular by the DA and its
candidate, Mr Alver Uys. This victory is a case of DA representatives
having been constantly involved in an honest and fair manner with the
residents’ concerns, after which representatives from this community in
particular played a significant role in the victory by the DA.]

This triumph was by the people, for the people.

Sonder om enigsins gebruik te maak van ’n “rent-a-crowd” soos die ander
partye, dui die sege op ’n waterskeiding wat die DA die ooglopende
alternatief vir die ANC-onderprestasies op die Wes-Kaapse platteland maak
en bou dit voort op die tendens van die DA-steun in die April 2009
verkiesing.

Toenemende steun vir die DA se oopgeleentheid-samelewing-beginsels en die
groter ontgogeling van die swak prestasie van die ANC blyk aan die orde van
die dag te wees. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Having not made use of a rent-a-crowd, unlike the other parties, this
victory points towards a watershed which has made the DA the obvious
alternative to the ANC’s dismal performance in the rural Western Cape,
building on the trend of support for the DA in the April 2009 election.

Increased support for the DA’s principle of an open opportunity society and
the bigger disillusionment caused by the ANC’s poor performance seem to be
the order of the day. I thank you. [Applause.]]

             SCHABIR SHAIK’S APPLICATION FOR PRESIDENTIAL PARDON

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Madam Deputy Speaker, when history comes to judge the
ANC of 2009, it will record how it began to nibble away, like a rat at a
piece of cheese, at the Constitution it has sworn, in this House, to
uphold. Members present here must keep in mind Abraham Lincoln’s
observation that those who sin by silence, when they should be protesting,
are cowards.

Deputy Speaker, it is common knowledge that convicted fraudster Schabir
Shaik barely saw the inside of Qalakabusha Prison in Empangeni. He spent
much of his time at the plush St Augustine’s Hospital, a relatively free
man, enjoying a relatively free life. That issue itself raised many
questions. Hot on the heels of that grave concern came the unpalatable news
of his questionable parole. To give credence to the fact that he was
neither gravely ill nor at death’s door, he acquired a R10 million home in
Durban and was reported to have been seen driving his car.

Now we learn from the media that the prisoner-turned-parolee wants his
friend, the President of our Republic, to pardon him. To pardon him would
confirm our gravest suspicion, that the reasons for his parole were
manifestly untrue and that the governing party misled this House and the
country in general.

Equality before the law must apply. If Schabir Shaik is well enough to ask
for a pardon, he is well enough to complete his prison term. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                      BRUTAL KILLING OF FAMILY IN TSOLO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz B N DLULANE (ANC): Somlomo, umbutho i-ANC ukhwankqisiwe kukwanda
kobundlongondlongo nokudlakathiswa kwababhinqileyo ngaphakathi emakhaya,
emisebenzini nasekuhlaleni ngokubanzi. Sothuswe ngakumbi sisiganeko somhla
wesi-3 kweyeDwarha, xa inkondekazi nabazukulwana abane baye bagetyengwa
ngokuxatyelwa ngezembe lilungu lekhaya kwilali yaseTyeni kuTsolo, eMpuma
Koloni.

I-ANC, njengomthunywa wabantu, iza kuthi gqolo ukulwa neendlobongela ezenza
ababhinqileyo nabantwana amaxhoba azo. Oku iza kwenza ngokuxhasa usungulo
lofakelelo lweziqwengana zomthetho eziza kunika ingqwalasela yokwalela
ukuxolelwa kwezi zibhoja nezibhongobhiyane ezidungadunga uxolo ekuhlaleni.
Sithi aba mabaqamele ngenqindi ngaphaya kwemixokelelwano yamatyathanga bade
bagqolele kwanongqongqo.

Siziphethe ngeenkophe kwaye sinemfobe nemfesane. Sidlulisa uvelwano
olungazenzisiyo kwizihlobo nezalamane ngesi sihelegu sibehleleyo. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Ms B N DLULANE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC is shocked by the escalating
violence and the abuse of women at home, in the workplace and in
communities at large. We were further shocked by the incident which took
place on 3 October when a member of the family brutally hacked to death an
old lady and her four grandchildren with an axe. This happened in a village
called Tyeni in the Eastern Cape.

The ANC as a servant of the people will continue to fight the thugs who are
victimising women and children. It will do this by supporting the amendment
to the section of the Act that deals with denying the pardon of these thugs
who are destabilising peace in the communities. We are saying that these
thugs must rot in jail.

We sincerely empathise and sympathise with this situation. We therefore
convey our condolences to the family and friends who suffered this tragedy.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

  ANC YOUTH LEAGUE PRESIDENT’S VISIT TO MANGOSUTHU UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
                              IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP appreciates the
visit of the hon Minister of Higher Education, Dr Blade Nzimande, to
Mangosuthu University of Technology, where he urged students, among other
things, to focus on their studies.

We are, however, concerned about the remarks made by the ANC Youth League
President, Julius Malema, who recently, during a visit to the same campus,
remarked that it was a beautiful university but that it had the wrong name.
The IFP believes that these comments border on hate speech and the IFP
would like to know whether the hon Minister agrees with Malema’s
statements. [Interjections.] Shut up!

This ANC youth leader has made many hurtful remarks in the past, and we
wonder why the ruling party is so quiet on Malema’s offensive and divisive
statements. Malema’s statements do not bode well for reconciliation; in
fact Malema might be unity’s worst enemy. I thank you. [Applause.]

     CODE OF ETHICS INVESTIGATION OF MINISTER OF POLICE, NATHI MTHETHWA

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr M H HOOSEN (ID): Deputy Speaker, the ID has called on the Public
Protector to investigate whether or not our Minister of Police, Nathi
Mthethwa, has contravened the provisions of the code of ethics for
executive members in accordance with the provisions of the Executive
Member’s Ethics Act.

This follows the Minister’s recent extravagant spending spree on luxury
accommodation at two five-star hotels in Cape Town and Durban. Once again,
this is yet another example of a sickness that is beginning to permeate the
executive through the attempts of some of our Ministers to live the life of
the rich and famous at the expense of the poor and weak.

Speaker, some of our Ministers have no conscience when millions of South
Africans are living in such shameful poverty. What kind of example is the
Minister setting to the thousands of policemen, who lay their lives on the
line in the service of our country?

The ID calls on members of the executive to conduct themselves in a more
modest and responsible manner when spending taxpayers’ money, and further
calls for a review of the Ministerial Handbook which many Ministers are
hiding behind to justify their extravagant lifestyles. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                   SCAM INVOLVING SALE OF LOW-COST HOUSING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M PILLAY (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, this ANC government is expected
to deliver on its promise of decent houses. It is, therefore, with regret
that I have to stand here today to report that we have knowledge of the
selling of RDP houses in Uitenhage and surrounding areas.

In many of these areas, registration and application for low-cost housing
commence prior to the construction of these houses; hence, more than 80% of
these houses do not have a title deed or a pre-emptive condition and a
restrictive clause that prevents the sale of these houses for a period of
eight years. The omission of this restrictive clause has opened the door
for homeowners and unscrupulous agents to exploit this loophole and sell
these houses randomly.

Houses worth R59 000 are being sold for a mere R3 000 by desperate
homeowners who are then left destitute. We believe that more than 30% of
the houses that were allocated to people last year have already been sold.

There is also a legal scam in that houses that are bought or built
privately with low-cost housing subsidies do not have this restrictive
condition and these houses are also being sold to two or three owners.
We, therefore, recommend that this matter be investigated and that
regulations be promulgated so as to prevent the sale of any RDP house,
except with the specific authority of the government. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                    DELAYS IN ISSUING OF DRIVING LICENCES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP is very
concerned about the time, procedures and extent of the burden relating to
the issuance of driving licences. Driving licences are an enabling tool for
most of the population.

In a developmental state and perhaps in a developed state, it should not
take more than three hours to issue a driving licence. We are experiencing
a situation where it takes as much as 18 months for someone to receive a
driving licence, which will enable that person to become an active
participant in the economy and in society.

We call on the Department of Transport and the Minister of Transport to
look at what has been done internationally to be able to issue driving
licences within a matter, not of months, not of days, but of hours.

                     MANGAUNG AFRICAN CULTURAL FESTIVAL
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M D NXUMALO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC appreciates with a deep
sense of pride the successful conclusion on 11 October 2009 of the 12th
edition of the twelve-day Mangaung African Cultural Festival, Macufe.
Macufe is a significant event on our cultural calendar, showcasing the best
in African music, art, dance and theatre.

Culture plays a critical role in promoting social cohesion and a sense of
unity and of belonging to a diverse democratic society. Our arts and
culture can play a crucial role in nation-building, reconciliation and the
development of a new national identity as well as an ethos reflective of
our new democracy.

The festival was designed not only to entertain, but also as a government
vehicle to develop artists in all disciplines, to give exposure to new,
unknown artists, to empower SSMEs and to promote tourism in our beautiful
province.

Since its launch in 1997, Macufe has become one of the biggest cultural
festivals on the continent and enjoys international acclaim. This year
alone, it has enticed more than 140 000 people from South Africa and
surrounding countries to the Free State.

The ANC supports government efforts to encourage, promote and support all
cultural activities that celebrate the rich and diverse cultural heritage
of all South Africans. Thank you.

              VIOLENT PROTESTS IN MUNICIPALITIES IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J MASANGO (DA): Deputy Speaker, the DA is extremely concerned about
the violent protests that are taking place in many municipalities across
Mpumalanga. The DA has repeatedly raised issues concerning poor service
delivery, fraud, corruption and nepotism with the ANC-led government at
provincial and national levels ...

... kodwa kufana nokukhuluma nobonda ... [... it is like talking to a brick
wall ...]

The DA understands and sympathises with the communities frustration and
supports peaceful protest action, but we condemn violence, vandalism,
destruction of property, intimidation and loss of life.

While service delivery and corruption are the main issues raised at these
marches, the ANC’s internal fights cannot be ruled out. Neglecting the
issues at hand due to these struggles may contribute to the unrest. The
struggle for power among the tripartite alliance partners is spilling over
and causing serious problems for our citizens.

The Zuma and Mbeki camps still exist. [Interjections.] At local level the
municipalities are in the hands of the Mbeki camp, while the Zuma camp is
at grass-roots level. They don’t understand why they should wait for 2011
to take power if Zuma is already the President. There are separate
elections and the members need to understand this.

The President must act now and stop being silent on issues that need
immediate attention. He needs to visit those areas affected by violent
protest and speak to the people. The message to the people should be
simple: Violent protest is not a solution to the problem; swapping ANC
councillors now is not a solution; wait for 2011 and use your power to make
a cross on the ballot paper to vote for a party that will deliver to the
community. I thank you. [Applause.]

          WITHDRAWAL OF TRANSPORT FOR FARMWORKERS’ LEARNER CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Deputy Speaker, during the elections all of us
promised the people of South Africa a better life. We committed ourselves
to work to improve the conditions of the poorest of the poor. The
understanding is that public funds will be used to realise these honourable
objectives.

It is regrettable that the Free State Department of Education has decided
to withdraw learner transport for farmworkers’ children as from the next
academic year.

To ensure that these decisions are made legitimate, the department convened
a meeting with the relevant officials to drill them on how the so-called
public hearings will be conducted. The intention of these public hearings
is to ensure that the hearings result in the implementation of the
department’s decision. These shenanigans amount to conning the poorest of
the poor.

The policy on learner transport was developed because there were children
who walked an average of 40km per day to get to school. Some of the girls
were raped by people who offered them a lift, and, during winter, most of
these learners left their homes when it was dark and returned when it was
dark.

Where transport was not feasible, these children were placed in state
hostels, where the state carried the costs. It seems this alternative is
also not going to be implemented. The excuse being offered is that there is
no money. This programme was budgeted for for all these years, until the
department decided to withdraw it.

What is disgusting is that, just two weeks ago, the province wasted
R45 million on the Mangaung Macufe, although it was also not budgeted for.
The province also spends R25 million per annum on Letlaka Communications,
just to print a Premier’s praise-singing weekly tabloid.

Every time ANC MPs follow up a question answered by the Ministers, they
precede their statement with, and I quote: “Thank you for your
comprehensive response.” [Laughter.] This time, the farmworkers of the Free
State have been comprehensively conned by the SACP-led ANC government.
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                  IMPACT OF SKILLS SHORTAGE ON THE ECONOMY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G S RADEBE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker and our Cuban friends in the
gallery, the ANC has always viewed education as a means of promoting good
citizenship as well as preparing our people for the needs of a modern
economy and a democratic society.

However, South Africa is experiencing a skills shortage, which may have a
debilitating effect on the country’s future economic growth. The shortage
of professionals, particularly artisans, may impact negatively on our
country’s endeavourers to achieve the targeted 6% growth rate in the period
of 2010 to 2014.
Indeed, to deal with these challenges, the Department of Higher Education
and Training has earmarked about R2,3 million for scarce skills areas for
the 2010-2011 financial year, as well as the 2011-2012 financial year. This
is in line with the broad objectives of the ANC government, the Joint
Initiative on Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa, which was launched in
March 2006 to focus on the scarce and critical skills required to deliver
on their commitment, and targeted to the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa.

This initiative places the future of education and training colleges at the
centre of the popular drive to transfer skills to our people, provide
institutions with more resources, and scale up dedicated bursary schemes to
popularise and subsidise attendance at Further Education and Training
institutions. Thank you.

 OVERSIGHT VISIT TO EASTERN CAPE BY PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Portfolio Committee on Human
Settlements went on an oversight visit to the Eastern Cape between 4 and 10
October. Naturally, we visited a substantial number of housing projects.
What was particularly striking was that the number of new projects under
construction probably constituted no more than 10% to 15% of the projects
we visited.

The remaining 85% to 90% of the projects fell into one of two categories.
The first one was the blocked projects. These are projects that were
abandoned and never completed. Some of them started as far back as the late
1990s or the early 2000s, and became blocked for various reasons and had to
be unblocked. Unfortunately, some of these unblocked projects are on the
verge of becoming blocked again.

The second category of projects we visited fell within what is called the
rectification projects. These are projects that were also started years
ago, but where some houses are incomplete and those that were completed
were of such an inferior quality that they had to be demolished and
rebuilt.

However, what was even more shocking was the fact that the majority of
these housing projects, contrary to national requirements and what we were
told by officials from various municipalities, including the Nelson Mandela
Metro, had no infrastructure or basic services whatsoever.

Beneficiaries are given occupation, without them having any running water
and although some have toilets installed for waterborne sewerage, those
toilets are not even connected to the main sewerage reticulation, where it
does exist. Therefore, people have to make use of ordinary, small, plastic
baskets which they have to empty in the surrounding open areas.

In the light of this, I would like to suggest to the hon Fransman that he
should use his time constructively and accompany Minister Shiceka to the
Eastern Cape to witness firsthand how people live without the minimum basic
services under an ANC-led government, instead of going on witch-hunts
against the DA in the Western Cape, and address this despicable situation.
I thank you. [Applause.]

       REVITALISATION OF NURSING COLLEGES BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M J SEGALE-DISWAI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC believes that
there have been many achievements in improving access to health care.
However, much more needs to be done in terms of quality health care. The
Department of Health is to focus more energy on revitalising nursing
colleges and creating a vibrant nursing education and training system.

The next focus for the Department of Health is to strengthen colleges. In
this regard, the discussions with the Department of Higher Education and
Training are at an advanced stage.

The department will identify the colleges with strengths that may be
replicated throughout the system and which have an innovative approach to
planning, management and student support. The two departments also agreed
on the need for diversified nursing education and training, cutting across
higher education and a further education programme level in the national
qualification framework.

The ANC commends the Department of Health and the Department of Higher
Education and Training on their efforts to revitalise nursing colleges, as
this will ensure the improvement of skills in the health system as well as
meet the national standards of quality care. I thank you. [Applause.]

                       IMPROVEMENT OF SERVICE DELIVERY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms R J MASHIGO ANC: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC will continuously make
every effort to improve service delivery to society through enhanced public
infrastructure, efficient service and the requisite personnel.

On Friday, 16 September 2009, the North West MEC for Health and Social
Development, Rebecca Kasienyane, opened a newly revitalised accident
emergency trauma unit at the Job Simankane Tabane Hospital in Rustenburg to
help improve service delivery.

Currently, the hospital is attending to 8 000 patients per month and more
than 50% of them are trauma cases. The unit is fully equipped with modern
health care technology worth R30 million. It includes electronic and
hydraulic resuscitation, gynaecology breast complex patient monitors, a
digital x-ray machine and electronic access control doors to allow smooth
flow.

The unit revitalisation is part of ongoing projects in Bojanala Platinum
District health facilities, in preparation for the 2010 Fifa World Cup, and
is intended to improve emergency and clinical service delivery,
particularly in the trauma unit.

The ANC is committed to working with our people in improving the quality of
life and accelerating the said delivery of services to millions and
achieving a better life for all of us and the people we represent. I thank
you. [Applause.]

                WELCOME TO ALEIDA GUEVARA AND CAMILO GUEVARA
                    DELAYS IN ISSUING OF DRIVING LICENCES
          WITHDRAWAL OF TRANSPORT FOR FARMWORKERS’ LEARNER CHILDREN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Speaker, in 1959 the Cuban people
finally overthrew what was a neocolonial, corrupt and mafia-linked regime.
From 1959 onwards they embarked on a remarkable process of development in
which they have achieved remarkable successes in the fields of health,
education, sport and many others.

This was, however, an example which was not to be tolerated by a powerful
imperial force very close to the Cuban island.

Since 1959, an unremitting war of terrorism and destabilisation has been
waged against Cuba. Thousands of Cuban citizens have been killed. Crops
have been poisoned. Factories have been destroyed. A Cuban aircraft was
bombed in mid-air, killing a Cuban sporting team and many nationals from
other countries. There have been bombing raids on the island. There have
been hundreds of assassination attempts against the Cuban leader, Fidel
Castro.

What we easily forget is that this is not just a Cold War reality; these
acts of sabotage and terrorism against Cuba have continued into the 2000s,
into the new millennium.

Now, we agree with the United States of America that there needs to be a
war on terrorism. Indeed, as recently as last week, this country supported
the US when there were apparent threats against US citizens in our country.
We supported the US in that, but war on terrorism must be war on terrorism,
and not on people embarking on developmental agendas.

What the Cuban Five have been imprisoned for in the US is so-called spying
- espionage. What they were spying on – and they were indeed spying – were
Cuban exiles engaged in terrorist activities against Cuba from US soil.
They did not spy on a single US facility, on a single US resource; their
attentions were focused purely on the war against terrorism, in this case
terrorism directed at Cuba.

Therefore, we fully associate ourselves with what my colleague from the ANC
benches has said, namely that the Cuban Five must be released. It is
absolutely imperative.

I would just like to respond to two other matters. On the issue of driving
licences, we share hon Oriani-Ambrosini’s impatience and frustration with
the long time delays at driving testing stations. Minister Ndebele is very
seized with this matter; he is deeply concerned about it.

There are also other problems; it is not just long waiting lists. Sometimes
people take less than three hours to get a driving licence - through
corrupt means. That’s another problem. The relevance of the driving test to
actual driving is another issue that we are also looking at.

The hon Kganare spoke so fast and was so anxious to get in his factionalist
points about the ANC-led government that I did not catch everything he
said. I would, however, urge him to tell me exactly what it is about
scholar transport in the Free State that concerns him.

We are deeply concerned that scholar transport should be supported. It is a
matter that is under the education budget, but the Department of Transport
is very concerned about the long distances that our students often have to
walk. So if he would please, apart from factional concerns, raise the
matter in detail we, from the side of the Department of Transport, will
certainly look at it. Thank you.

                    IMPACT OF SKILLS SHORTAGE ON ECONOMY
         REVITALISATION OF NURSING COLLEGES BY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Deputy Speaker, I would like to
thank the hon member for drawing the House’s attention to the importance of
Jipsa, a programme that was launched in order to address the human skills
shortage that we have in our country.

I wish to share with the House the fact that we have made a good start. The
FET colleges have been recapitalised to the tune of R1,9 billion in the
past three years. They have been rationalised. I think the location of
training, now with the Department of Higher Education, is correct and
allows for better articulation between education and training.

The issue raised by my colleague concerning the FET colleges being a
wonderful vehicle or venue for the training of nurses and, indeed,
educators, is something that we are looking at very closely as well.

With regard to basic education and the technical skills that are in such
great demand, I can announce or share with the House the fact that we are
expanding or recapitalising our technical schools. There will be pilots in
each one of the nine provinces.

Courses, ranging from electrical engineering to plumbing, to boiler making
and tool making, are going to be offered in these institutions. These
institutions will place a particular emphasis on access and will be
responsive and relevant to the needs of the learners, so I think a
wonderful start has been made.

The other advantage is that the legislation governing FET colleges has been
changed in the previous year. These changes allow for a very flexible
environment that enables institutions to provide courses that address the
skills that are so desperately required in our country. Thank you.

             PROPOSED POLICIES ON PARLIAMENT’S BUDGET AND TRAVEL

       (Consideration of Report of Parliamentary Oversight Authority)

There was no debate.

Mr C T FROLICK: Chair, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I
move:


   That –


      1) the House adopts the Report, including Appendix A; and


      2) the Parliamentary Oversight Authority gives further consideration
         to the composition of delegations.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
    GERMANY FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON
                            INCOME AND ON CAPITAL

      (Consideration of request for approval in terms of sec 231(2) of
                                Constitution)
    AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE UNITED MEXICAN
  STATES FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND THE PREVENTION OF FISCAL
                   EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME

      (Consideration of request for approval in terms of sec 231(2) of
                                Constitution)

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Chair, today I will be introducing the two
trade agreements between South Africa and the Federal Republic of Germany
and the United Mexican States.

The trade agreements define rules for the conduct of the trade policy and
these rules must strike a balance between commitment and flexibility. While
too much flexibility may undermine the value of the commitment, too little
flexibility may render the rules unsustainable. Therefore, while government
has many good reasons for signing trade agreements, it is crucial that
effective agreements must strike an appropriate balance between flexibility
and commitment.

With regard to Germany, we have come a long way and we know that it is
already one of our major trading partners. It has already contributed more
than R42 billion in 2002. It has also created approximately 60 000 jobs in
the country with 450 companies.

With regard to the United Mexican States, even though we know that the
Latin American market is relatively small, representing only 2% of South
African trade with the Southern Common Market, these agreements will assist
in the light of the fact that they will apply to the following taxes: the
federal income tax; business flat rates tax; and in South Africa it will
also assist us with normal tax, secondary tax and companies withholding tax
and royalties; and tax on foreign entertainment and sportspersons.

As in the agreement with Germany, in addition to existing tax, the
agreement shall also apply to any identical or substantially similar taxes
that are imposed after the days of the signing of these agreements.

In conclusion, the trade agreements seek to regulate taxation and remove
fiscal obstacles between the two countries, as well as providing for fair
business practices in a foreign country through the provisions on
nondiscrimination. Exchange of information relating to the agreement is
also important as is collaboration between the contracting states, in the
case of South Africa and Mexican States, with regard to the collection of
the revenue that has been claimed. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic of
Germany for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on
Income and on Capital approved.

Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the United Mexican
States for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income approved.

The House adjourned at 14:55.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           MONDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly


The Speaker

(1)   Request from Minister of Communications

    Request from the Minister of Communications for approval by the
    National Assembly of the following candidate recommended for
    appointment to the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa
    (Icasa) in terms of section 5(1B) of the Independent Communications
    Authority of South Africa Act (No 13 of 2000), as amended: Mr William
    Stucke.


    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for consideration
    and report.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)      Report   and   Financial   Statements   of   the   Independent
        Communications Authority of South Africa for  2008-2009,  including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 219-2009].

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Report of the Registrar of Pension Funds for 2006-2007 [RP  244-
          2007].
         [RP 244-2007]


                          TUESDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2009
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)    Report of the Research and Development Tax  Incentive  Programme
        and Trends in Research and Development Expenditure in South  Africa
        for 2007-2008.

    2. The Speaker and the Chairperson


CREDA INSERT - T091020e-insert1 – PAGES 1085-1126

