---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 February 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-02-11
---

WEDNESDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                   WESTERN CAPE INHERITED DEBT RELIEF BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Deputy President,
President of the ANC, distinguished Cabinet colleagues and Deputy
Ministers, hon members, Governor and Deputy Governors of the South African
Reserve Bank, MECs for Finance, ambassadors and high commissioners,
distinguished representatives or members of the diplomatic corps, our
friends in the gallery and – wherever you may be this afternoon, sharing
with us - fellow South Africans, ladies and gentlemen, from time to time in
the Budget Speech we have chosen to go back to the words of wisdom of some
other people to test that which we do and that which we believe, and
members of this House will not be surprised that I go back to the Nigerian
writer Ben Okri, who writes:

   If the things we face are greater and more important than the things we
   refuse to face, then at least we have begun the re-evaluation of the
   world. At least we have begun to learn to see and live again. But if we
   refuse to face any of our awkward and deepest truths, then sooner or
   later, we are going to have to become deaf and blind. And then,
   eventually, we are going to have to silence our dreams, and the dreams of
   others. In other words, we die. We die in life.

Part of living out the dreams of others is remembering today that it is 11
February; it is almost 19 years to the minute of the day that Nelson
Mandela walked out of Victor Verster, a free man. [Applause.] Part of these
dreams that we live out and hold onto, are the dreams of our forebears.
They are the dreams of very ordinary people in this country. They are the
hopes and aspirations for themselves and their children and part of what we
have as a responsibility as decision-makers in this country. It is the
ability to stand between our people and their dreams.

Madam Speaker, the storm that we spoke of last year has broken, and it is
more severe than anyone anticipated. Confronted with the prospect of an
economic cataclysm, world leaders have announced huge supportive
interventions. A transformation of the world economy is indeed in progress,
which we trust will tame the excesses of unregulated financial markets. A
restructuring of global trade and incomes is underway which we hope will
bring greater opportunities to the world’s poor. But for now, the
transition has brought sizeable disruptions.

The Budget that I have the honour to table here today, Madam Speaker,
remains firmly focused on the longer-term transformation challenge. While
responding to the changed economic outlook, our primary goal remains the
reconstruction and development of our economy and the progressive building
of a shared future in which we can take pride in the quality of our public
services and the creation of jobs for our people and security in our
communities.

And so, in Ben Okri’s words, because we will not silence our dreams,
because we choose life and we will not die, we stand ready to face our
awkward and deepest truths. We will not be deaf to the voice of those in
pain. We will not be blind to incompetence or greed.

Our response to the present crisis is to face the challenges before us
boldly and as a nation united. Our duty is to construct a South African
approach, founded on our own vision for a shared future. This approach can
only be built on an engagement between social partners, not just at the
level of a national dialogue, but on factory floors and in community halls.
Our resolve will be tested to its limits. We have to put self-interest
aside; we have to face each other honestly and openly.

Our task is to see through the challenges of economic vulnerability today,
to the construction of the new South Africa that is our passion and our
pride. We can do this all the better as a united people.

In framing this Budget, therefore, we have been guided by five enduring
principles: firstly, protecting the poor; secondly, sustaining employment
growth and expanding training opportunities; thirdly, building economic
capacity and promoting investment; fourthly, addressing the barriers to
competitiveness that limit an  equitable sharing of opportunities; and
fifthly, in doing these things, we must maintain a sustainable debt level
so that our actions today do not constrain our development tomorrow.

The global economy is experiencing a sharp downturn, spreading from
developed to developing countries. Its origins lie in macroeconomic
imbalances of an unprecedented scale. The accumulation of debt by firms and
households in some countries has been matched by an extraordinary rise in
export earnings and savings in other regions. Behind these flows are
millions of savers and lenders, linked through a financial architecture of
such complexity that neither accounting standards nor regulatory oversight
have served their intended purposes: Prudential banking rules have been
overwhelmed by folly and fraud, masquerading as financial innovation.

This is a cycle that has played itself out periodically. The economic
historian Karl Polanyi, 65 years ago, provided a classic account of how a
utopian faith in self-regulation has repeatedly led to exuberances of this
kind in the rise and fall of market economies.

The consequences are felt everywhere. If the balance sheet of a bank
shrinks, its capacity to lend is eroded. If its lending is curtailed,
businesses and households have to reduce their spending. If demand falls in
Birmingham, factories close in Beijing. If production lines in China slow,
demand for commodities from Africa dries up. The vegetable shop next to the
mine closes and the drivers of the delivery vehicles are asked to work
short time, on half pay, and if the driver then cannot pay his mortgage,
the bank forecloses on his bond and the bank writes down its balance sheet
again – this is the cycle the world is living through at the moment.

When a global motor company cuts back on making cars – because people are
not buying them - it cancels its orders for catalytic converters. Madam
Speaker, this firm making catalytic converters is not in Detroit or in
Shanghai; it is here in Uitenhage in the Eastern Cape. The mine producing
the platinum that goes into that converter is sitting close to Rustenburg.
The worker in the factory in Uitenhage and the mineworker in Rustenburg are
now without work. We saw the largest platinum producer earlier this week
announce the termination of 10 000 jobs. And the woman who runs the little
stall selling vegetables outside the mine is making less money each passing
week. And their families, all of them, face a future made more precarious
by the vagaries of global finance.

In a very short period, Madam Speaker, what started off as a financial
crisis may well become the second Great Depression. Last year, 2,6 million
US workers lost their jobs. This year, in fact two weeks ago, some 20
million migrant workers who left their places of work for the rural areas
in China to celebrate the lunar New Year, were advised that they should not
return to the cities, because their jobs have disappeared. Twenty million
workers in China come to about one and a half times the number of people in
employ in South Africa. That is the scale of what we are talking about.

In the past ten months, the International Monetary Fund has revised its
forecast for global growth in 2009 downwards no less than five times, from
3,8 % in April last year to its current estimate of just half a per cent.
Initially the downgrades were focused on developed countries, but
projections for GDP growth in emerging markets have now halved from 6,6% in
April to 3,3% currently, which is a lower number than we have become
accustomed to, Mr President, but that 3,3% says to us that the only growth
in the world this year will come from the developing parts of the globe.
The United States has been in recession since the last quarter of 2007 and
its economy is expected to contract by 1,6% in 2009. The official interest
rate in the US has been cut to almost zero. Growth in Europe has slowed to
1% in 2008 and is forecast to contract to minus 2% in 2009. The UK economy
is expected to shrink by 2,8% in 2009.

China’s GDP growth fell to 6,8% in the last quarter of 2008 and will slow
this year to its lowest level since 1990. India’s growth will fall by
almost half.

Sub-Saharan Africa is feeling the effects of the commodity price plunge and
declining investor confidence. Projected growth slows to 3,5% in 2009 from
5,4% in 2008. When we talk of Sub-Saharan Africa, we can look at the growth
number, but we need to constantly remind ourselves that that growth is of
an incredibly low base.

In responding to the crisis, immense commitments of funds have been made by
the governments of major economies in support of their financial
institutions, and central banks have lowered interest rates to
unprecedented levels. If my numbers are correct, then the announcement by
the Treasury Secretary in the United States yesterday is for an additional
2,5 trillion dollars.

However, low interest rates do not automatically translate into available
credit. Households remain wary of further debt, and firms that face trading
losses are not yet creditworthy. In an ironic twist, capital is leaving
emerging markets and flowing into reserve currencies such as the US dollar
or the euro, seemingly undeterred by the institutional origins of the
financial collapse. Countries such as Brazil, India and Russia cannot raise
debt except at premium interest rates. South Africa’s cost of borrowing on
international capital markets also increased sharply late last year and at
this point still remains much too high.

While many countries are borrowing heavily to finance their bailouts and
deficits, which may well be the correct policy approach to restore
confidence in their economies, this build-up of debt will have to be paid
back, with interest, by future generations in those countries or, perhaps,
by future generations in other countries. It will require higher tax rates
in future, slowing growth for decades to come. The re-evaluation of the
world cannot be indefinitely deferred.

We should also appreciate that the causes of this crisis run deeper than
its financial currents. It is embedded in the structure of growth and trade
and the widening inequality that we have seen over the past decade and a
half. In responding to this crisis, on a global scale and here at home, we
must tackle its root causes. Financial systems cannot go unregulated; trade
arrangements cannot be subordinate to shortsighted protectionist influence;
the distribution of income cannot be entrusted to the merciless
counterpoise of executive greed and unsupervised labour market dynamics.
[Applause.]

In Polanyi’s words, our task is to harness the instrumentality of both
power and planning in pursuit of more abundant freedoms. To say that this
can be done, nationally and globally, is to place democratic governance in
its rightful place at the head of the global development agenda.

And, in facing these things that are greater and more important than the
arithmetic of our revenue and expenditure plans, we will at least begin the
re-evaluation of our world.

This means: Protecting the poor. It means employment and training. It means
investing in infrastructure and building a competitive economy. It means
sustainable public finances.

Ke rata go boeletsa ke re: Re batla go sireletsa batlhoki; go tlhola
ditiro; go beeletsa mo diphetogong le go rotloetsa dikgaisano mo
memmarakeng ya ikonomi.Go raya gore, go tshegetsa maema a lotseno.
[Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[I would like to repeat: We want to protect the poor; to create jobs; to
invest in infrastructure and to build a competitive economy. It means
sustainable public finances. [Applause.]]

Against this backdrop of what we need to do, let me share with the House
the Treasury’s expectations for the South African economy over the period
ahead.

Incomes and output slowed sharply in the second half of last year, bringing
growth for 2008 to about 3,1%. With commodity prices generating lower
export earnings, with weak consumer spending and slowing private sector
investment, growth in 2009 is forecast to be 1,2%, the lowest rate since
1998. We lived with four years of growth in excess of 5%. Growth for this
year, we say, will be as low as 1,2%.

We expect output growth to improve next year, supported by public
infrastructure spending, lower interest rates, the 2010 Fifa World Cup and
the recovery in the world economy. But trading conditions are tough and are
likely to deteriorate further in the short term.

In 2008, South African producers were affected by a series of economic
shocks, including electricity shortages, rising input costs, higher
interest rates and slowing demand. This led to a marked slowdown in
consumer-oriented sectors and weak mining and manufacturing output. Several
sectors, including mining, manufacturing, retail trade and residential
construction, have retrenched workers and the pace of job losses may,
unfortunately, accelerate further.

However, civil construction has performed well, supported by ongoing
infrastructure investment. Our agricultural sector has grown strongly in
response to higher prices and better rains. Sharply lower oil prices – a
barrel of crude oil has fallen by 69% from a peak of US$145 a barrel in
July 2008 to about US$45 per barrel at present. This reduction will, of
course, help to cut our import bill, but we are also experiencing a
simultaneous fall in export earnings.

The platinum price has fallen by about 60%, from a high of US$2 254/oz in
March 2008 to about US$980/oz currently. Part of the price concern in
platinum is that it drives two worrisome sectors, namely automobiles, which
are in decline, and high-end jewellery. When the bankers in Wall Street can
afford the jewellery again, it will be great for our platinum sector. We
have to hold out till then.

Lower consumer demand and the softer real exchange rate will dampen import
demand in 2009, but infrastructure investment will continue to draw in
capital goods. This will continue to generate a sizeable current account
deficit, expected to average 6,7% a year over the period ahead.

Over the past five years the financing of our international balance has
been heavily dependent on portfolio inflows to the equity and bond markets.
Though still adequate to finance the current account deficit, the
composition of inflows changed significantly in 2008, including increased
use of loan financing and repatriation of foreign assets by the banking
sector.

Our development expenditure over the period ahead will require both
improved domestic saving and continued capital inflows. And so a sound
banking system, healthy fiscal position, credible monetary policy and
appropriate foreign exchange regulations will continue to limit our
exposure to the international downturn, while serving as key building
blocks in financing future growth and development.

The soundness of South Africa’s financial system was subjected to an
international assessment last year, which concluded that our banking system
is diversified and is supported by an appropriate financial infrastructure
and a generally effective regulatory framework. Let me pause and simply say
that this financial sector assessment programme confirms that the banking
sector in South Africa is sound. [Applause.] It is not a point that they
would hazard making in many countries on this globe, but it is a point that
they have made about the banking sector in South Africa.

Although our banks were not significantly exposed to subprime-related
products, they are nonetheless affected by deteriorating credit conditions.
That our banks are mainly capitalised in rands is an important strength.
This is a key element of our evolving macro-prudential framework.
Nevertheless, it is incumbent on us to remain vigilant, to sharpen our
regulatory oversight and to work with banks to identify any potential
problems early and deal with these decisively.

Credit extension has slowed, probably more rapidly than is desirable. We
expect our banks to continue to extend credit to worthy customers, noting
that it is precisely the rapid withdrawal of credit that has plunged much
of the developed world into crisis.

Against this backdrop, both global and South African, how do you make a
budget? The central goals of economic policy remain accelerating growth and
job creation, broadening economic participation and reducing poverty.
Progress in these areas will be more difficult over the period ahead.
Policy adjustments need to reinforce macroeconomic stability in the context
of a deteriorating international environment and provide a temporary
cushion to the domestic economy. Lower inflation in the months ahead should
contribute to moderating interest rates. I am not trying to decide for the
highly and strongly-willed independent Reserve Bank. I am merely making an
economic observation, Mr President.

Under the leadership of President Motlanthe, a task team, comprising
business, organised labour and community organisations with government, has
been convened to agree on an appropriate South African response to the
current crisis. Chaired by the CEO of Nedlac, Mr Herbert Mkhize, this
initiative is rightly focused on both the immediate response required and
our longer-term policy goals.

I have already alluded to the five principles that have informed our budget
planning this year: Protecting the poor; creating employment; investing in
infrastructure; promoting competitiveness; and fiscal sustainability.

Ngithanda ukusho futhi ngithi sifuna ukuvikela abampofu. Sifuna ukudala
amathuba emisebenzi. [Ihlombe.] Ukuthuthukisa ingqalasizinda, ezohwebo
kanye nomnotho. Ukusimama kwesimo sezimali. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[I would also like to say that we want to protect the poor. We want to
create jobs ... [Applause.] ... develop infrastructure, trade and industry;
and fiscal sustainability. [Applause.]]

It is okay, Mr Ellis, I am just repeating what I said in English. Don’t
worry. [Laughter.]

The largest adjustments to spending plans go to poverty reduction: R25
billion is added to the budgets of provinces, mainly for education and
health care. ... [Applause.] ... Some R13 billion for social assistance
grants and their administration. [Applause.] The sum of R4 billion is added
to the school nutrition programme and R2,5 billion goes to municipalities
for basic services. [Applause.]
Madam Speaker, the amount of money allocated to these programmes is not
what provides relief. No, we can only be satisfied when we know that the
quality of life of the poor is improving, that children are being properly
educated, that learners have access to food in schools, that mothers
visiting clinics get proper and dignified treatment, and that the criminal
justice system is putting those who rob and thieve behind bars. It’s what
the money buys that matters, and so fixations about the size of deficits or
surpluses are illusory detours. Let us focus on what matters. [Applause.]

Secondly, greater effort is needed to accelerate employment growth.
Government will work with business and organised labour to protect work
opportunities and accelerate skills development over the period ahead.
Additional funding over the medium term will go to the Working for Water
and Working on Fire programmes, and R1 billion goes to the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund. [Applause.]

A total of R3,7 billion is added for low-income housing projects and R4,1
billion is set aside for the second phase of the Expanded Public Works
Programme. [Applause.]

Hon members, as we deal with the issue of training, let us pause and remind
ourselves that the programme that is probably the wealthiest in all of what
we do is called the Skills Development Fund. It exists as a payroll levy
and there are huge amounts of unspent money and, even where the money is
spent, we cannot look at ourselves in the mirror and say: It buys the
quality improvement in the labour force that it needs. [Applause.]

We raise this, not in order to support the DA, but because we treasure the
contribution of working people and the ability of working people
continually to improve their skills in this economy. It is a desire and the
dream of every worker in South Africa. [Applause.]

I propose that participating departments, provinces and municipalities in
the Expanded Public Works Programme be challenged to exceed their targets
for creating EPWP jobs over the period ahead, and so the contingency
reserve must have built into it a little envelope that says: To those who
create jobs, more money will be provided. [Applause.] Hopefully, the
incoming administration will make a note of this and be able to take this
forward in the Adjustments Appropriation Bill later this year.

Building our capacity to grow is the third thrust of our spending plans. It
is reflected in the government’s R787 billion infrastructure investment
plans and is a cornerstone of our development contract with business,
organised labour and other social partners. In this budget a further R6,4
billion is added for public transport, roads and rail networks; R4,1
billion for school buildings, clinics and other provincial infrastructure
projects and R5,3 billion for municipal infrastructure and bulk water
systems. Major investments in power generation, transport networks and
telecommunications are in progress, building an environment within which
mining and industrial development, tourism and our services economy will
prosper, even if the short-term outlook is not as rosy as we would like it
to be.

Fourthly, a time of restructuring is an opportunity to address regulatory
and microeconomic barriers to our competitiveness. This involves detailed
sectoral analysis and ongoing consultation with affected industries and
interest groups. It is the key to sustained, faster, long-term growth.

In this budget, R1,6 billion is added to industrial development and small
enterprise support programmes and R1,8 billion goes to rural development
and small farmer support. [Applause.] I need to check whether the gentleman
from Xala is listening to me. The R1,8 billion goes to rural development
and small farmer support, Mr Mantashe. [Applause.]

A further R1 billion is added for electricity demand management, together
with tax incentives for investment in energy-efficient technologies. The
new automotive production and development programme includes a production
subsidy, which receives R870 million over the next three years. Additional
funding also goes to consumer protection, the competition authorities and
enhanced testing capacity of the SA Bureau of Standards.
The fifth principle is the sustainability of the public finances. In the
present global uncertainty, our task is to respond to the economic downturn
without putting our long-term financial position at risk. Although the
budget deficit will rise to 3,8% of GDP next year, debt service costs will
remain moderate over the next three years, at about 2,5% of GDP. This is
possible because we have had the courage to make the right choices over the
past decade.

In 1996 public debt was 48% of GDP and rising. We brought to this House a
macroeconomic strategy that confronted the problem, boldly and decisively.
Today, public debt is 23% of GDP. Reducing the budget deficit was neither
easy nor popular. But it was the right thing to do, and the outcome is
that, year by year, the burden of debt service costs has declined and
resources have been released to spend on education, health care, housing
and infrastructure, rather than on those who lend us the money sitting far
away and those in between the merchant bankers. [Applause.]

This also means that today we are able to respond to the economic downturn,
boldly and decisively. We are able to announce a countercyclical fiscal
stimulus on the strength of a secure and sustainable fiscal position.

Members of the House will know that substantial capital spending projects
are under way in the electricity sector, in the construction of new
commuter rail facilities and in improving the Gauteng freeway network, that
are financed outside of the main budget framework. Taking the financing
needs of these entities into account, the public sector borrowing
requirement for next year is expected to be 7,5% of GDP, or some R186
billion, to be raised from domestic institutions, investors, multilateral
institutions and portfolio inflows from abroad. This is a substantial
fiscal boost against the background of the budget surplus recorded over the
three years to 2007-08.

But, members of the House and fellow South Africans, it is important to
note that we are borrowing, not to rescue failed banks or to artificially
delay the restructuring of our industry and trade, but to construct the
roads and the power stations, the classrooms and hospital wards, to
modernise technology and transform public service delivery, as the
foundations of growth and broad-based development in the decades ahead.
[Applause.]

The term “shovel ready” is sometimes used to distinguish projects that are
ready for implementation from those that have still to be planned. I
observe that around the world finance ministers get up and announce
projects that will still have to be planned and call them stimulus
packages. The term “shovel ready” has sometimes been used to distinguish
those projects that are ready for implementation. We are fortunate in that
so much of our spending programme is not just “shovel ready”, but is
“already shovelling”. [Applause.]
The expansion of our public employment programme has been a year in the
planning and is ready for implementation. Rapid bus transit systems,
freeway improvements, electricity and water systems and rail projects are
under way. And so our roads, our airports and our railway stations have
become construction sites, as millions of inconvenienced commuters
experience daily. But it is an inconvenience that I think we can look at
and say: Oh, what joy! [Applause.]

The national Budget contributes to the financing of some of these
investments, and there is also a role for our development finance
institutions, in supporting state-owned enterprises, municipalities and
private companies, to raise the finance required for major capital
projects. The success of Siyenza Manje in bringing in skills in support of
municipal infrastructure investment is an example of how a developmental
state can better co-ordinate its interventions. The Development Bank of
Southern Africa is now considering broadening this model to support the
financial management and delivery capacity of more municipalities.

In addition, a proposal to strengthen the balance sheet of the Development
Bank of Southern Africa is currently under consideration. We want to enable
the DBSA to expand its contribution to financing municipal infrastructure
improvements in partnership with private sector lenders. The extended
facilities for municipalities must ensure that more people have access to
potable, safe water; that there will be sufficient water in the far-flung
municipalities to maintain filtration schemes and to do all of those things
that people feel improves measurably on their quality of life, because we
are a caring society. And that is what we must do together. [Applause.] I
hope, Minister Shiceka, we will be able to look at municipalities and ask
more of them to take on projects such as Siyenza Manje. It should not just
be left to those who want to, but we can direct the resources to those who
actually need them and are afraid to admit it.

Key to transforming rural livelihoods is to better enable small-scale
farmers to use land more productively. Improved support to farmers is
important, but access to long-term finance is a critical ingredient too.
Following good progress in repairing its integrity and in giving effect to
its core mandate to support agricultural investment, government will also
consider proposals by the board of the Land Bank to strengthen its balance
sheet. I want to emphasise that between where the Land Bank is and where
newly settled or newly restituted farmers are, is a huge gap. We will not
get rural development unless we can fill that gap with the appropriate
interventions that recognise that land is an asset to be worked.
[Applause.] As emotional as the land question is in South Africa, land is
an asset that we must work, and those are the interventions that will drive
the change. If we don’t do that, hon members, the Land Bank will sit with
an exceedingly healthy balance sheet, but there will be deep poverty in the
rural areas. [Interjections.]
The Industrial Development Corporation is currently assessing its possible
role as a partner in supporting investment and employment in sectors or
industries affected by the cyclical slowdown. Differentiating the effects
of short-term cyclical difficulty from the need for longer-term industrial
restructuring is difficult and sometimes involves policy considerations,
and so risk sharing with the private sector has its place in preparing for
future growth. At the same time, government is mindful of the need to avoid
passing on risks to taxpayers that would be better managed in the business
sector. Though there may be a role for public funds in support of
businesses in difficulty, we need to ensure that an undue capitalisation of
private wealth does not result in a financial burden of debt on future
generations. In other words, if a sector is found to be in need and these
interventions must be made, we have a responsibility and Parliament’s
oversight in this regard is exceedingly important in that responsibility to
ensure that those who benefited, to get them out of the ditch, will pay
back so that our children don’t carry the debt for that intervention in
perpetuity while the beneficiaries grow rich on the interventions made in
their support. [Applause.] It is a pact. It is a compact. It is about the
link between the present and the future and it is about a path that we must
be prepared to walk to ensure that the lives of our children are better
than our lives.

Madam Speaker, there is also an expanding role for our housing finance
institutions and for the agencies that support small enterprise development
and economic empowerment transactions in the evolution of our development
finance architecture. These are the instrumentalities of our developmental
state, not in isolation from the wider financial system, but sharing risk,
co-financing investment and jointly engaging with the banking sector in
constructing a vibrant, growing economy.

Let me turn, then, to our public expenditure plans and growth, employment
and social development. Total government spending next year will amount to
R834 billion, including the second tranche of the R60 billion loan to Eskom
and an unallocated contingency reserve of R6 billion. Real growth in
spending on public services will average 5,1% over the next three years.

Let me elaborate briefly on some of the key spending proposals that are
provided for in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework set out in this
year’s Budget Review and the Estimates of National Expenditure. With regard
to education, government’s contribution to public education remains our
single largest investment – and I want to use that word again; it is not
just an expenditure item, it is an investment. We know that it is the key
to reducing poverty and accelerating long-term economic growth. Education
spending has grown by 14% a year for the past three years and accounts for
R140,4 billion in the spending plans of provinces and national government
for the fiscal year 2008-09.

We received a tip from Mr Xolani Notshe of Port Elizabeth, thanking us for
allocating money to libraries. He says: “Libraries are central in community
development.

   Libraries will assist your successor to collect more taxes because we
   would be an educated and skilled nation.

I agree entirely, Mr Notshe. [Applause.]

Key priorities in education include extending the no-fee schools to 60% of
schools, from 40% at present; expanding the school nutrition programme;
reducing average class sizes in schools serving lower-income communities;
increasing expenditure on school buildings, strengthening teacher training
programmes and recapitalising technical high schools over the next three
years. [Applause.]

I want to address somebody in the gallery and say: Now please, please,
please, can we deliver on what we have called the non-negotiables for
education? Teachers should be in class, on time, teaching. No abuse of
learners. [Applause.] No abuse of learners and no neglect of duty. Now, all
of those who have applauded, and I have observed you, please go home and
ensure, through the school governing bodies in the areas where you live or
where you hail from, that this is delivered. That is what is going to make
this applause successful. That is what is going to give our children a
chance in life. [Applause.]

An additional R700 million is allocated for higher education subsidies and
to accommodate the anticipated growth in student enrolment from 783 900
last year to 836 800 in 2011. The National Student Financial Aid Scheme
receives an additional R330 million.

Funding is also provided for a new National Education Evaluation Unit. Many
South Africans will agree, I am sure, with Mr Paul King, who sent this tip
and writes:

   Regarding the salaries of teachers, I personally feel that we do not
   reward them enough for what they do and what we expect from them in terms
   of the daily care and education of our children.

A new salary dispensation for teachers was introduced last year, linked to
school and teacher performance, hence the urgency of establishing this new
evaluation unit. It is not just about how much more people earn; it is how
much more they provide for the successive generations in this country.
[Applause.]

In health services a new unit to address the quality of service provision
is also included in our health spending proposals. This will be named the
National Office for Standards Compliance and it will set and audit norms
and standards for hospitals and primary care centres. We are profoundly
conscious of the complexity of the challenges facing our health services
and the strain on resources associated with a rising disease burden. Policy
interventions supported in this budget focus both on health facilities and
services and on more aggressively combating the causes of ill health. An
additional R1,8 billion is budgeted to introduce three new child vaccines,
which have proved effective in preventing infant and child deaths. The
tuberculosis and HIV and Aids programmes both receive additional resources.
We are budgeting to extend screening of pregnant mothers coming into the
public health system and to phase in an improved drug regimen to prevent
mother-to-child HIV transmission. Our antiretroviral programme now covers
630 000 people – on the public system; and the MTEF provides for an
increase to 1,4 million by 2011-12. [Applause.]

The 2009 Budget makes provision for further improvements in the
remuneration of health professionals and for continued expansion of the
hospital revitalisation programme. A total of 31 hospitals are under
construction, 18 of which will be completed over the next three years. The
development of a national health insurance system is aimed at improving the
equity of health care financing and enhancing the quality of care for all
South Africans. These are complex reforms and the task team on social
security has been mandated to conduct research and advise on the way
forward. Let me just emphasise also that by improving on the quality of
services in the public sector, we will, in fact, shorten the traverse to
get to the national health insurance. It is not a case of either/or. We
have to do both, and we have to accelerate what is happening in the public
health sector.

The fight against crime is drawing on the work of the criminal justice
sector review. Efforts to overhaul the forensic and investigative capacity
of the police are under way, together with enhanced use of available
technology. A further R5,4 billion is allocated to interventions aimed at
improving criminal justice services, the creation of an integrated
fingerprint and DNA database, improving detective capacity, upgrading IT
and telecommunications systems and increasing the number of police
officials from 183 000 last year to over 204 000 in 2011-12. [Applause.]

But amongst members of this House, the distinguished Deputy Minister for
Justice and Constitutional Development, Johnny de Lange, will tell us that
the money is only a part of this. It is about overseeing the management of
this to ensure that these things actually happen and that there are
measurable improvements in the outcomes. One of the outcomes that we are
looking for is lower incidences of crime and a quicker resolution of crime
through the judicial process.

Funding is also provided for additional policing capacity during the 2010
Fifa World Cup, for the construction of new prisons and for implementation
of the Child Justice Bill.

Regarding agricultural support and rural development, a notable tip on the
current economic situation and the steps which can be taken to alleviate
its effects came from Mr Lazarus Lamola of Polokwane. He writes that when
he was a teenager ...

   ... the villagers used to plough their land and harvest enough food to
   last at least a year. There was plenty of maize, beans and other
   vegetables and, except for drastic drought years, we would never go
   hungry. The subsistence farming system has totally collapsed in many
   areas. It is sad to see vast amounts of land go to waste when we have a
   food price problem.

He suggests the encouragement of partnerships between private farmers and
villagers to once again use the land for food production and sustenance. I
am sure you know that Mr Lamola speaks my sentiments on this matter.

Increasing agricultural output, raising rural incomes, supporting small-
scale farmers and investing in rural roads are key objectives of
government’s rural development strategy. The budgets of the Illima/Letsema
campaign, which distributes agricultural starter packs to poor households,
the comprehensive agricultural support programme and allocations to
targeted rural infrastructure projects receive a further R1,2 billion. The
budget for land reform and land restitution over the next three years
amounts to some R20,3 billion.

Regarding investing in housing and municipal infrastructure, we should
remember that housing and the eradication of informal settlements remain at
the forefront of our infrastructure investment plans and impact
significantly on both employment creation and poverty reduction. In the
past three years, the Municipal Infrastructure Grant programme has spent
about R32 billion. Over the next three years, infrastructure grants to
municipalities total    R67 billion, and a further R45 billion will be
spent on the Breaking New Ground housing programme. [Applause.] Together
with investment in roads and public transport, these constitute one of the
largest areas of expansion of public sector spending and are rightly
prioritised as part of our response to the current deterioration in
employment and economic activity.

The budget adds R13,2 billion to our social grants programme. The extension
of the child support grant to 15 takes effect this year and the reduction
in the eligible age for men to 60-60, Mr President - is in progress.
Strengthening our social security safety net is critical during this period
when many more poor families are vulnerable.

With effect from April this year, the maximum values of the old age,
disability and care dependency grants will rise by R50 to R1 010 a month.
[Applause.] I know in October there was a bit of a concern because people
thought that the annual increase was only R20 – that was on top of the
increase that we announced in the Budget last year. Now we are adding R50
to that to take it to R1 010. [Applause.]

The foster care grant will increase to R680 and child support will rise to
R240 a month. Compelling evidence that the phasing in of the child support
grant has contributed significantly to reducing child poverty has emerged
in recent research, and so consideration is being given, subject to
affordability, to the extension of the child support grant to the age of
18. One of the issues that is being considered at the same time is the
issue of introducing conditionalities, including the need to ensure that
recipients of the child support grant actually attend school. [Applause.]
The Minister for Social Development is in fact in Mexico at a conference on
social development and, while there, will be able to witness first-hand
what can happen when the conditionalities are introduced. It is not just
money down the chute. You can measure the change, and that is what we are
looking for, if we desire the best for our children.

The Budget papers contain details of many more areas of public expenditure
– increased allocations for roads and commuter transport services; an
allocation to the Universal Access Services Agency to subsidise set-top
boxes as part of the digital television broadcasting initiative; an
expansion in the training capacity for the Reserve Force of the Department
of Defence; upgraded IT systems for the Department of Home Affairs; and to
modernise immigration and customs services at border control points.
Funding goes to the Independent Electoral Commission for 30 000 barcode
scanners – so-called zip-zips - and 105 000 transparent ballot boxes. We
are budgeting R1,6 billion for the South African Airways to support its
turnaround strategy ... [Interjections.] ... which includes reducing costs
and improving efficiency. I am sure that the House will agree with my hope
that this will not be a recurring allocation. [Applause.]

Budgeting is not only about expanding expenditure on constructive and
necessary activities, it is also about rooting out waste, promoting cost-
efficiency and phasing out ineffective programmes. This is the hardest
thing in government. Departments have again been asked to identify savings,
and cuts amounting to R19 billion were effected in January as we had to try
and give departments a haircut generally, and these rose as we prepared
this Budget finally.

In the period ahead it will be necessary to take stronger action in pursuit
of efficiency and better targeted expenditure. There is insufficient
control of foreign travel, advertising and public relations activities and
consultancy services. [Applause.]

I don’t know why Members of Parliament are looking away, because oversight
is the responsibility of Parliament. [Applause.] Stricter oversight of the
activities and executive remuneration in agencies and government
enterprises is also required. I believe, Madam Speaker, that Parliament and
our committees should play a more active role in challenging accounting
officers to plan their efficiency-saving initiatives upfront and report
regularly on progress. A greater sense of responsibility needs to prevail.
The next few years are going to be tougher. If we are to afford the
continued expansion of social services and our social wage, then, in
addition to the need for greater efficiency, we have to conduct a thorough
assessment of all of government’s programmes to see how we can improve
value for money and to identify areas where we can eliminate or reduce
wastage. [Applause.]

The Ministers’ Committee on the Budget intends, in its handover report to
the new administration, to propose that the incoming President announce a
Comprehensive Expenditure Review. Its aim would be to ensure that as we
spend more, we also spend better. [Applause.] In addition, we should
confront the awkward truth that there are programmes of government that do
not work and on which we should spend less. By less, I mean as close to
zero as we can get. [Applause.]

Turning to our revenue estimates and tax proposals, the revised estimate of
revenue for 2008-09 is R14,2 billion less than we planned in the 2008
Budget. For the year ahead, the main budget revenue estimate is R50 billion
lower than we projected in February last year, against the background of
slower growth, depressed trade and declining company profits. In setting
the gross tax revenue target of R659 billion for the year ahead, we have
taken into account the need to provide relief to households and
encouragement to the business sector, while continuing to broaden the tax
base through which the requirements of the fiscus have to be met.

The proposed adjustment to the personal income tax schedules will provide
relief of R13,6 billion to individual taxpayers, compensating fully for the
effects of inflation and providing further relief mainly to lower and
middle income earners. The tax-free income threshold next year will be R54
200 for taxpayers below the age of 65 and R84 200 for those over 65. This
means that Mr Vavi and Mr George next to him should say less about the tax
policy. Their members are not going to pay tax anymore.

It is gratifying to note that there has again been excellent progress in
expanding the number of registered taxpayers. In view of progress in
simplifying the tax return process and the waiver of the annual filing
requirement for qualifying taxpayers, it is proposed that the current
Standard Income Tax on Employees system, the so-called SITE system, should
be discontinued by 2010. I appreciate that the administrative reforms, the
adjustment to e-filing arrangements and the construction of more effective
communication channels between Sars and individual taxpayers are huge
reform projects, on the one hand, and sources of numerous personal
inconveniences, on the other. But we are getting there, and these
improvements will serve as a platform for improved fiscal integrity for
decades to come.

Regarding mineral and petroleum royalties, I am sure that hon members would
be aware of the fact that the royalties are meant to be effective from 1
April 2009. But, after discussions with both labour and the mining industry
and taking into account the potential impact of the economic slowdown on
the mining industry, I propose to defer the mining royalties regime from
this year to 2010. This provides a boost to the industry of about R1,8
billion, which will assist in minimising job losses. [Applause.] I have
agreed with the mineworkers’ unions and the Minister of Minerals and Energy
that government will consider establishing an agency, to be jointly managed
by business, labour and government, to invest in economic development in
mining towns or labour-sending areas affected by retrenchments. [Applause.]

Perhaps it is because miners are used to digging deeper that their
creativity and commitment to improve conditions for mining communities
serve as an example of the kinds of partnership required to ensure that
South Africa emerges stronger from this global crisis. If the new
development agency can be established this year, I am sure that an
allocation could be set aside towards its activities in the adjustments
budget.

Tax tips continue to make up the majority of the “Tips for Trevor”
submitted. Mr Saul Margolis of Johannesburg called for a tax to be imposed
on incandescent light bulbs to encourage people to use compact fluorescent
light bulbs and save energy. Mr. Margolis, I have asked that this be
included in the revenue proposals this year. We propose taking further
steps to encourage energy efficiency and reduce harmful emissions, some of
which have tax implications: An incentive for investments by companies in
energy-efficient equipment will be introduced in the form of a
supplementary depreciation allowance; the levy on plastic shopping bags
will be increased from 3 cents to 4 cents; an increase is proposed in the
international air passenger departure tax which was last raised in 2005-06;
and the existing excise duties on motor vehicles will be adjusted to take
into account carbon emissions. It is important, furthermore, that we should
encourage South African companies to take advantage of the clean
development mechanism established in the Kyoto Protocol. A favourable tax
treatment will therefore be introduced for the recognition of income
derived from the sale of emission reductions.

The tax code discourages another category of atmospheric emissions. I refer
to the duties on tobacco products. This year’s increase in the duty on
cigarettes and cigars is 13%, with somewhat lower increases in respect of
cigarette and pipe tobacco. A packet of 20 cigarettes will cost 88 cents
more. [Applause.] I should also advise that a bottle of wine will cost 10,5
cents more and a can of beer 7 cents more.

One of the most innovative tips I received this year is from a gentleman,
whom I think is in the Boland somewhere. His name is At du Plooy. He
writes:

   Please be a little more lenient on the tax on whisky for the old folks.
   We have so little to enjoy; you know, things that used to happen after
   dark, no longer happen. All we have left to enjoy is a little
   entertainment before supper.

[Laughter.] He asks for leniency, reminding me that this will ultimately be
for my own benefit as well. A bottle of whisky, Mr Du Plooy, goes up by
R3,21. [Interjections.]

Let us turn to fuel levies: As road-users ... [Interjections.] I didn’t
hear what ... [Interjections.] You survived without any whisky before and
after dark, Baba?

As road-users we have gained some advantage since mid-2008 from lower
international oil prices. As road-users we also know that there is a
substantial increase in spending on maintenance and construction underway,
and we still face the heavy burden of road accidents and associated
compensation claims. These are costs that have to be covered, and so there
will be increases in the fuel levies on 1 April this year of 23 cents and
24 cents per litre, in respect of the general petrol and diesel levies, and
17,5 cents in the road accident fund levy. As indicated last year, it is
proposed that the general fuel levy should form part of a new municipal
revenue arrangement to replace the former Regional Services Council levies.
In 2009-10, 23% of the general fuel levy will be earmarked for metropolitan
municipalities to support expenditure on roads and transportation
infrastructure. Let’s see it being spent.

Over the years we have received many tips from people running small
businesses, calling for an increase in the VAT registration thresholds. Mr
Ivan Faught wrote in 2003 that “such a change would make it easier to work
oneself up to entrepreneurial status.” Effective from this year, the VAT
threshold is increased from    R300 000 to R1 million. [Applause.]

Several administrative reforms are also in progress at Sars, including
customs modernisation in support of the rapidly changing trade environment
and improved use of technology and third-party information to authenticate
data and reduce the need for supporting documents. I am pleased to announce
that taxpayers, practitioners and employers can look forward to the return
of the traditional tax season deadlines this year. The Tax Season 2009
timetable includes a 60-day reconciliation period for employers in April
and May. Tax season for individuals starts in July. The deadline for
submission of income tax returns for individuals and trusts is 18 September
for manual filers and 20 November for electronic submissions.

Madam Speaker, I need to thank those many South Africans who have
contributed to the “Tips for Trevor” campaign. Since it was first
introduced nearly 10 years ago, these diligent South Africans have sent us
around 20 000 suggestions, including 2 363 this year. I want to say to
these people who take the time and effort – and it is a range of people;
some of them are better known, some are journalists, but most are just
ordinary people in faraway places who want to raise their concerns - that
we gratefully appreciate this. We want to say to every contributor: Your
voice has been heard in countless ways. You advised in the early years that
the child support grant should be extended above its initial age threshold
of 7 - and that has been done. You advised that public benefit
organisations needed greater tax relief and that has been done. You advised
that the tax treatment of retirement fund withdrawals was too onerous, and
so that has been revised. You have advised in no uncertain terms that the
SARS call centre is dysfunctional, and so that is being fixed as we speak.

The call for the provision of free anti-retroviral treatment was another
topic that featured over the years. Jackie Mondi of Berario wrote an
extensive tip in 2003, calling for a “special fund for fighting HIV/Aids;
that focus should be on both care and prevention.” In 2004 government was
able to roll out ARV treatment in public health facilities across the
country for those living with HIV and Aids. Recent tips reflect
appreciation of this, such as the one from Gemi Malau who wrote: “I think
the budget needs to be commended as it is now focusing on HIV/Aids.”

Our people watch, observe and share. It is one of the great features of
this wonderful democracy that we have. [Applause.]

Let me conclude: At this time last year, Madam Speaker, we noted that -

   ... as with the weather ... economic trends do not stop at border posts,
   they carry no passports, yet they have the potential to wreak havoc, even
   when plans have been carefully laid.

Every corner of the globe is affected by the economic turmoil that we are
currently experiencing. It is not just that the adjustments to the economic
crisis may be difficult or expensive, but there is also the uncertainty
about the burden that will be visited on future generations by the
interventions being contemplated today.

Nouriel Roubini, an economist at New York University, popularly credited
with predicting the present financial crisis, recently wrote:

   ...while this crisis does not imply the end of market-economy capitalism,
   it has shown the failure of a particular model of capitalism. Namely, the
   laissez-faire, unregulated (or aggressively deregulated), Wild West model
   of free market capitalism with lack of prudential regulation, supervision
   of financial markets and proper provision of public goods by governments.

Fellow South Africans, our response to the challenge before us builds on
policies that we have consistently pursued over the past decade and a half:
Sound prudential regulation of the financial sector and a strong emphasis
on the provision of public goods by government.

Last week, President Motlanthe summarised our response to this financial
crisis: Firstly, he said that over the next three years, we will invest
R787 billion in the infrastructure needed for future growth and
development; secondly, we will accelerate the Expanded Public Works
Programme and work with business to mitigate job losses and accelerate
skills development; thirdly, we will strengthen our development finance
institutions and support industrial restructuring and agricultural
development; and fourthly, our social assistance programmes will reach over
13 million people and public expenditure on education and health care will
increase strongly.

But, it is not the numbers in the Budget that will measure the quality of
our response to the present crisis, Madam Speaker, but the character of our
resolve to work together, putting others before ourselves, confident in the
choices we have made and are committed to face; what Okri calls, our
awkward and deepest truths.

Madam Speaker, there will be a new administration in place next year and
there will no doubt be new insights on which to draw in framing the next
budget and MTEF. It will be in place this year and by the Budget next year.
But the National Treasury as a source of economic and fiscal expertise will
still be there, and I want to commend to the House the constructive role
that the Treasury plays in absorbing and synthesising a vast tapestry of
economic and financial statistics, policy documents and programme
information, as part of the process of preparing the national budget
proposals.

I table before the House today a number of documents: The Budget Speech,
the Estimates of National Revenue, the Budget Review, including Tax
Proposals in Respect of Customs and Excise Duties, the Appropriation Bill,
the Division of Revenue Bill, the Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill
and this large tome called the Estimates of National Expenditure.

After drawing on advice from so many diverse quarters, I am also indebted
to my colleagues in Cabinet who share with me the collective responsibility
for the overall integrity and coherence of the Budget. President Mbeki, and
in recent months President Motlanthe, have provided the leadership and good
judgement required to bring the budget process to a conclusion, ably
supported by the Deputy President then, Mlambo-Ngcuka, and now, Mbete.
Thank you very much for your support. We know that our backs are covered
when there is strong leadership, clear about the direction that we must
take. [Applause.]

I am especially indebted to members of the Ministers’ Committee on the
Budget, who have set aside their time, reviewed lengthy budget memoranda
and engaged with insight and energy - especially those who came new into
the process as late as October – with new insight into the debates that
contribute to refining our spending proposals.

Over the past year there have been two Deputy Ministers of Finance. Jabu
Moleketi served the Treasury with distinction. He was very strong in the
2010 Local Organising Committee. And his successor, the distinguished
former chairperson of the portfolio committee, the hon Nhlanhla Nene, has
brought a keen eye for detail as he sat with us through the final stages of
the Budget process. [Applause.]

The MECs for Finance – and they are seated in the front row on the gallery
- have again been generous in sharing their experience and insights and in
dealing with the very difficult challenges this year. This was the year
that we will all remember for three letters: OSD. I wish to express
personal appreciation for their support and dedication to the cause of
sound public finance.

Our collective thanks are due also to: Governor Tito Mboweni – in his
absence today - whose leadership of the Reserve Bank is cause for both
pride and confidence in our monetary management and banking supervision. We
also want to express our appreciation to the Deputy Governors - I saw Dr
Mokate earlier ... [Applause.] ... Commissioner Pravin Gordhan and the
staff of the South African Revenue Service, who continue to serve the
nation and the fiscus with dedication beyond the call of duty. [Applause.]

Mr Howard Gabriels, who chairs the Statistics Council, and Statistician-
General Pali Lehohla, who is at a very important conference in Luanda,
though the Acting SG, Dr Rashaad Kassiem, is here with us, have a very
important role to play. In recent months, unfortunately, they have brought
some unwelcome news on the economics statistics front but, nonetheless, we
want to thank them for their timely and comprehensive statistics. It is
also up to us to face those awkward truths. [Applause.]

We also thank the Financial and Fiscal Commission and its chairperson, Dr
Bethuel Setai, whose advice remains critical to the integrity of our
intergovernmental fiscal system. [Applause.]

We thank Nedlac and its CEO, Mr Herbert Mkhize, and the representatives of
the business, labour and community constituencies on the Public Finance and
Monetary Chamber, particularly for their efforts to bring coherence to a
national perspective on the current economic crisis and how we should
respond. [Applause.]

To the honourable Arthur Moloto and the honourable Tutu Ralane, who chair
the Portfolio and Select Committees on Finance respectively, and to the
joint chairs of the Budget committee, hon Louisa Mabe and hon Elliot
Sogoni, thank you very much. [Applause.]

I’ll do wrong and single out the DG Lesetja Kganyago, who leads the
National Treasury team with unflagging energy. [Applause.] Thank you to the
staff in the Ministry who, in my presence, tell me that they tolerate me
with good grace and endless patience. I know what they say behind my back,
but they are there and form a very important part of this. [Laughter.]

My family is in the gallery - I can officially claim a wife now.
[Applause.] My sons, my mom, and my sister are all a very important part of
what makes me.

Nineteen years ago, on this date, as I said earlier, Nelson Mandela ...
[Applause.] ... walked out of Victor Verster a free man. We have for
Members of the National Assembly a mahala, a tribute to Madiba; something
to know that his greatness will live on with us. [Applause.]

Later that day, in this city, on 11 February 1990, just 200 metres from
this Parliament, he stepped up to the podium to make his first address as
our icon. His first address as a free man. He said, and I quote:

   The need to unite the people of our country is as important a task now as
   it has always been. No individual leader is able to take on this enormous
   task on his own.
[Applause.]

May I say on this day, 19 years later, in the face of what confronts us as
a nation, the call for unity is even more important than it was when Madiba
made it 19 years ago. [Applause.] But Madiba ended that speech by tying a
link into his own past. He said:

   In conclusion I wish to quote my own words during my trial in 1964. They
   are as true today as they were then. ‘I fought against white domination
   and I fought against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a
   democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony
   and with equal opportunity. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and
   to achieve but if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to
   die.

[Applause.] In concluding his speech on 19 February with those words,
Madiba tied his present with his own past. Today we can take the same words
and provide the continuity, because the spirit of those words remains as
true in defining who we are and what we are, and when we measure our
nationhood, it is against the performance on these criteria, set by our own
leaders in the cause of struggle.

When we start with the words of Ben Okri that talk about the dreams of
others, they are the dreams of our own forebears. They are the dreams of
our forebears – some of whom laid down their lives in our cause. The dreams
cannot be silenced and our dreams will never be extinguished. Our dreams
and the dreams of our forebears will live on and they will live on through
our children because they define the raison d’être of what we are and how
we should behave in relation to others and in relation to our nationhood.
[Applause.]

Those dreams speak to the courage that we all must now muster as a nation
to face what lies ahead. We can’t promise an easy road ahead or a rapid
resolution of the economic and social challenges we face. But we know that
the choices we have made set us on a path of shared growth and broadening
participation in a fairer and more dynamic economy – there is hard work to
be done if we are to achieve the transformation we seek. To travel this
road with confidence, we must, all of us, remain united. Ngiyabonga. [Thank
you.] [Applause.]

The Appropriation Bill, together with the introductory speech and tabled
papers, referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
and report, and to the Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its
mandate.

The Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill referred to the Portfolio
Committee on Finance for consideration and report.

The House adjourned at 15:29.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management
         Bill [B 40D – 2007] – Act No 24 of 2008 (assented to and signed by
         President on 9 February 2009).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
             Amendment Bill [B 3 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75)

3.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Division of Revenue Bill, 2009, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the
         Select Committee on Finance.

4.    Introduction of Bills


     1.     The Minister of Finance

        a) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2009] (National Assembly –
           proposed sec 76)


         (b)     Appropriation Bill [B 5 – 2009] (National Assembly –
              proposed sec 77)


         (c)      Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 – 2009]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 77)

             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Finance of the National Assembly for consideration and report,
             and to the Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its
             mandate, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Membership of Committees

    (a)    The following members have been appointment to serve on the Ad
        Hoc Joint Committee for the appointment of members to the National
        Youth Development Agency Board:

        ANC


        Combrinck, Mr J J
        Johnson, Mr M
        Mkongi, Mr B M
        Mokoto, Ms N R
        Newhoudt-Druchen, Mrs W S
        Sibhidla, Ms N N
        Sunduza, Mr T B
        Wang, Mr Y
        DA


        Morgan, Mr G R
        Swathe, Mr M M


        IFP


        Lebenya-Ntanzi, Ms S P


        ID


        Greyling, Mr L W
        Jenner, Mr I E

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance – 11 February 2009 [RP
         03-2009].


      b) Estimates of National Revenue for 2009 [RP 04-2009].


      c) Budget Review 2009 [RP 02-2009], including:
           • Taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise duties.

      d) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 - 2009], tabled in terms of section
         10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No
         97 of 1997).

      e) Appropriation Bill [B 5 - 2009].

      f) Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 - 2009]

      g) Estimates of National Expenditure 2009 [RP 01-2009], which
         includes:


          1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


          2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;


          3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


          4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;


          5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;


          6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Government Communications and
             Information System", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


          7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Administration Leadership and
             Management Academy", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service and Administration",
             Main Estimates, 2009-2010;

         10.      Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service Commission",
             Main Estimates, 2009-2010;

         11.      Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;

         12.      Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Arts and Culture", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;

         13.      Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Education", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;

         14.      Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;

         15.      Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;

         16.      Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Social Development", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         17.      Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Sport and Recreation South
             Africa", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         18.      Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Correctional Services", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         19.      Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;

         20.      Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Independent Complaints
             Directorate", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         21.      Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Justice and Constitutional
             Development", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         22.      Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Safety and Security”, Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         23.      Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


         24.      Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Communications", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;

         25.      Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Environmental Affairs and
             Tourism", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         26.      Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;


         27.      Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


         28.      Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Minerals and Energy", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         29.      Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Provincial and Local
             Government", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         30.      Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Enterprises", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;

         31.      Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         32.      Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         33.      Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


         34.      Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
             Main Estimates, 2009-2010.


    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
    report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T090211e-insert1 – PAGES 305-318


