---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-11-04
---

WEDNESDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

           WELCOMING OF DELEGATON FROM PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to acknowledge the presence in the gallery
of His Excellency Mr Wang Zhaoguo, the first Vice-Chairman of the Standing
Committee of the National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of
China, and his delegation. [Applause.]

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

           Position regarding land claims in Kruger National Park


13.   Mr N J J van R Koornhof (Cope) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether he has been informed that the former cabinet had
           resolved the land claims in the Kruger National Park; if not,
           what is the position in this regard; if so,


      (2)   whether he has been informed that there are interested groups
           who are campaigning to reopen the issue of land claims in the
           Kruger National Park; if not, what is the position in this
           regard; if so,


      (3)   whether he will support the protection of the Kruger National
           Park; if not, what are the future plans with regard to land
           claims in the Kruger National Park?
                                        NO1438E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker and hon members, following deliberations
over a number of months, in December 2008 Cabinet approved the use of
equitable redress as the only option for the settlement of land claims
against the Kruger National Park. This option is provided for in terms of
section 34 of the Land Restitution Act. In terms of this section, claimants
receive fair and equitable financial compensation for the loss of their
land rights. This option was chosen because restoration of title on this
land in the National Park was not feasible.

However, Cabinet decided that the community’s expectation of taking
possession of their ancestral land is a deserving and reasonable
expectation. That is why Cabinet felt we need to address this matter in a
manner that would create a win-win situation, because the requirements of
maintaining the park for biodiversity purposes are as important to the
country and the nation as a whole as the rights of the claimants to that
land, hence the decision to compensate them.


In addition to financial compensation, the claimant families of land within
the park will have rights to ancestral graves or traditional site visits on
agreed calendar days for commemorations or any ritual that they need to
observe; acknowledgement of the history of communities when naming
facilities and camps; environmental education for children and youth; job
opportunities; and preferential procurement opportunities. These are some
of the elements built into this package.

A community levy will be charged to all visitors, and it will be channelled
into a community trust fund which will be used to fund future community
development projects, broad-based black economic empowerment opportunities
and equity in commercial concessions. These options were considered and the
decision was taken by Cabinet on merit to create this win-win solution. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF: Hon Deputy President, I thank you very much for
that reply. I think you are bringing back certainty to the Kruger National
Park. It is one of our world heritage sites and a valuable asset, not only
to South Africa, but to the whole world. I thank you very much for that. I
just need clarity: You say today that the decision that was taken by
Cabinet in 2008 is the decision that still stands today.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, I confirm that that is the decision that still
stands. I thank you.

Mr M M SWATHE: Thank you very much, Speaker. Deputy President, considering
the backlog of paying landowners, what money has been budgeted to ensure
that claimants are compensated? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker and hon member, that is a matter of
detail. I would not be able to give you the figures right here. That is a
matter that the Department of Rural Development would be responsible for.
Thank you.

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Speaker, I pressed the hon Sibhida’s button by mistake.
I am H F Matlanyane. Thank you, Deputy President, for the response. I would
like to know whether there are different circumstances in the claim by the
Makuleke community in the Kruger National Park and in the outstanding
claims resulting in a different approach by government in settlement of
these claims? If so, what are the different circumstances? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon member. The Makuleke arrangement is a
leaseback agreement to a private company that comprises a section of the
Kruger National Park, and that has its own problems. As government is
trying to attend to those problems, it was felt that this is not a model to
be replicated. A big difference here is that the Makuleke community is one
community, whereas the others were diverse communities. It would have meant
that if we went by the Makuleke model, the park itself would cease to be a
national park.

        Progress in implementing Sudan Comprehensive Peace Agreement

14.   Mr H T Magama (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      What (a) progress has been made by the Sudanese government in
      implementing the Sudan Comprehensive Peace Agreement and (b) role will
      the (i) African Union and/or (ii) Government play to ensure that the
      2010 election and national referendum are conducted peacefully?
                                              NO2611E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker, hon members, there’s been progress in
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, since its signing
in January 2005, between the government of the Sudan and the government of
Southern Sudan. Some of the main highlights are that the ceasefire is
generally holding well, despite a few clashes that have been reported in
areas such as Malakal and Abyei.

The government of national unity and Southern Sudan have adopted interim
constitutions and established various key state institutions that commenced
the process of postconflict reconstruction and the development of Southern
Sudan and other war-affected areas.

The Sudanese interim national assembly and the Southern Sudan Legislative
Assembly have been formed. The national electoral Act was passed in July
2008, which established the national electoral commission and set the date
for the Sudanese general elections for February 2010.

The governments of national unity and the Southern Sudan continue to share
the oil revenue. However, notwithstanding the aforementioned progress,
challenges still remain. There are some contentious issues whose resolution
remains imperative for the success of the implementation process.

The demarcation of the border between the north and south is yet to be
completed. The SPLM, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement, and the NCP,
the National Congress Party, have indefinitely suspended consultation on
the matter, but have urged the government of South Africa, under the
auspices of the AU, to assist in finding a solution to these difficulties.

The slow pace of preparing for the national elections in 2010 is a matter
of concern. The electoral commission has started demarcating constituencies
according to the results of the fifth national population census. However,
the government of Southern Sudan has rejected the census results.

The referendum law, which was to be passed in terms of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement by the beginning of 2008, has not been finalised yet. More
fundamental, though, is the acknowledgement by both parties that they have
failed to achieve the critical objective of making the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, that is the provision for unity, attractive to all and sundry
both in the north and the south.

The African Union is a guarantor of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
is represented on the Assessment and Evaluation Commission. As South
Africa, in our capacity as chair of the AU Ministerial Committee on
Postconflict Reconstruction and Development in the Sudan, we have engaged
both the SPLM and the National Congress Party to encourage the effective
implementation of the peace agreement.

The Sudan electoral commission has invited international observers to
observe the elections, and South Africa will respond to the African Union
if we are asked to be part of the team of AU observers. We will work with
the parties and our international partners to encourage progress on the
preparations for the 2011 self-determination referendum in the south. We
will abide by whatever decision the people of Southern Sudan take, and we
will assist them to prepare to take responsibility for whatever option they
choose. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, Speaker. Thank you, Deputy President, for your
reply. In the bilateral talks held in Juba between the delegation of the
Republic of South Africa, headed by you, hon Deputy President, and the
delegation from Sudan, you promised to support technically Southern Sudan
in preparation for the upcoming elections and referendum.

The UN’s chief electoral affairs officer in Sudan, Ray Kennedy, told a news
briefing that Sudanese organisers were facing a series of problems. One
challenge was the complexity of the elections, with six votes running at
the same time, using a range of voting methods.

In light of the hon President’s promise of technical help and what Ray
Kennedy said, what is government going to do to ensure that the complex
electoral arrangements, with six votes running at the same time, are
simplified so that the people of Southern Sudan are not confused, but are
able to choose candidates of their choice? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Rev Meshoe. Indeed, the elections
procedures are very complex, because each voter would be expected to vote
12 times in the north and eight times in the south. And for people who are
participating for the very first time in such an election, it is quite a
challenge.

We would encourage our NGOs that have accumulated experience in voter
education to assist, particularly in the areas that are not that stable.
You will no doubt know that there is even a section of the Sudanese
population that is nomadic, and therefore doesn’t stay in one place
forever.

So, technically, we will try to encourage all of our institutions that can
play a role in assisting to ensure that the electorate is sufficiently
empowered to ensure that these elections produce outcomes that will be a
true reflection of the will of the people. That’s what we believe we ought
to do, but I must say that the challenges are quite serious. Thank you.

Mr K S MUBU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Deputy President, part of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement suggests that Southern Sudan will have to
decide whether to remain part of the greater Sudan or to secede.

If they decide to secede, what implications do you think this will have on
stability in the region? Secondly, what kind of support can the South
African government render to such a new territory, if you like? Thirdly,
what is the position of Darfur in the whole equation? Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, there should only be one supplementary question,
and not a number of them.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Mubu, for the question. Speaker, the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement indeed provides for this referendum that
would be conducted in the south, on whether the south wants to go it alone
or to remain part of one integrated Sudan.

We cannot pre-empt the outcomes of such a referendum. In our engagement
with the governing party in the Sudan and the governing party in the south,
all we can do is to make clear the pros and cons of secession.

We believe that more advantages lie in the Sudan remaining one united
entity rather than for the south to go it alone. This is precisely because,
as I indicated earlier, there are still very big issues to be resolved. For
instance, the border between the south and the north has not been
determined, and if you add to that challenge the fact that this border is
likely to be drawn across oil fields, then you have an ingredient there for
instability and conflict going forward.

The situation in Darfur is a work in progress. As we know, former President
Mbeki led the Committee of the Wise, which made its report available to the
AU on 29 October 2009. We are still waiting for the AU’s assessment of the
report and the steps that will flow out of the recommendations of that
report. For now, all we know is that all efforts are being made to try to
get all people who are not Darfurians out of that area in order to enhance
peace and stability in Darfur itself, which we hope will hold. Thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Speaker. Your Excellency Deputy President, I want
to know about the contentious issues, because you have said that the
ceasefire agreement is holding. There is a case against the presidency of
Sudan. What is going on with these contentious issues? Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Speaker, the real contentious issues between the
north and the south include the determination of the border between the
two.

Of course, there is also the challenge that the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement makes provision for the establishment of one central bank.
However, at the moment there’s a conflict between the north and the south
around this very matter, because the north follows the Islamic banking
system, whereas the south follows the normal banking system that allows for
interest to be charged and so on.

They have not agreed on how to address this difference by establishing one
central bank with perhaps two systems: One system accommodating profit-
making and the charging of interest and the other system servicing mainly
Islamic investors. So that is one of the problems.

A census has been conducted which is used for demarcating the
constituencies. But this census has been rejected by the south, which may
mean that the elections that are planned for next year will be affected by
the failure to resolve this difference.

The very fact that there has been a census conducted which is then used for
demarcating the constituencies, but is rejected by the south, may mean that
the elections that are planned for next year will be affected by failure to
resolve this difference. Those are the contentious issues.

The matter of the charges against President al-Bashir is a matter that the
Committee of the Wise, of the AU, is attending to. The AU has taken a
stance that there should be a stay of prosecution to allow for the culprits
to be brought to book and also for peace and stability to be attained
without allowing for impunity. Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Thank you very much, hon Speaker, for your indulgence. Hon
Deputy President, one of the most important issues that seem to be
emanating from this conflict, according to the media, is the lack of
impartiality of the judges. This is a very important aspect in resolving
the conflict in Sudan.

Is there anything that the government can do to try to resolve this? There
seems to be some resistance on the part of the government to what is being
recommended, that is the use of foreign or outside judges to try to find an
effective solution to this problem. I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Ngonyama, for the question. In our
discussions, the Vice President of the Sudan, His Excellency Osman Taha,
indicated that – and I met him before the Committee of the Wise submitted
its report – his government accepts the recommendations and that although
they have reservations about certain aspects, overall they accept the
report because they believe that it will serve as a basis for consolidating
peace and for moving forward.

It may very well be that the part that they have reservations about is the
recommendation to include foreign judges in hearing the cases against the
perpetrators of violence and crime in Darfur. It may very well be that that
is the source of their reservations, but overall he did say that his
government accepts the report as is. Thank you.

 Effect of government social assistance in encouraging economic productivity

15.   Mrs Y R Botha (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      To what extent does the current basket of social assistance offered by
      the Government to vulnerable groups like the poor and unemployed
      encourage them to become active participants in all spheres of society
      to make them economically productive and less dependent on government
      social relief programmes?    NO2613E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Mrs Botha, the South African government has
adopted a social protection package for families as an approach in its
effort to alleviate poverty.

This social protection package for families in poverty includes no-fee
schools and school fee exemptions; free health care services for pregnant
mothers and children under the age of six, and free primary health care
services for people without medical aid; social grants for the elderly in
the form of old age pensions; for children in poverty, the child support
grant and foster care grant; and the disability grant for people with
disabilities.

There is also social relief of distress for temporary relief aimed at
people in desperate need. This is paid in cash or in the form of vouchers.

There’s the indigent policy which provides for free basic water and
electricity in some municipalities.

There’s the school feeding scheme for primary schools in poor areas and
there is also the provision by social development departments in provinces,
partially to fund NGOs to deliver a range of social welfare services to
poor children and families, including partial care in crèches and early
childhood development services; prevention and early intervention services,
including home-based care, counselling and linking families to the full
social protection package, with protection services for children in need of
care and protection, for youth in youth care centres.

With regard to the social assistance grants, it needs to be noted that the
unemployed do not receive any specific grants. The mothers or caregivers of
children receive their grants on behalf of the children.

The other largest groups of recipients are the aged who are out of the
labour market, as well as people with disabilities who are unable to work
for themselves. Therefore, it is not possible for the social assistance
grants to have a discouraging effect on employment.

There’s considerable evidence that shows that the social protection package
for families approach is having numerous positive effects in poor
households. For example, children who are recipients of social grants are
shown to have higher participation in school and are, generally speaking,
healthier.

All the assistance that government provides both in cash and in kind to
poor households definitely assists other members of the household to seek
employment. This, therefore, allows members from poor households the
opportunity to become more economically productive and ultimately, to
become less dependent on government’s social relief programmes. I thank
you.

Mrs Y R BOTHA: Hon Speaker, the extension of the child support grant by
government to the age of 18 years for all eligible children is widely
welcomed. The question that I would like to pose is: Has government
anticipated the measurable impact this extension will have on its poverty
reduction targets for South Africa, as well as its impact on the
socioeconomic rights of our children?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker, yes, indeed we have looked at the impact
of this extension, and we believe that it will be positive. As I said,
we‘ve identified education as the key to lifting these households and
families out of the cycle of poverty, and the extension is aimed at
ensuring that these youths remain in school and attain education as well as
skills, in order to serve as change agents in their families and households
to prevent the transfer of poverty from one generation to the next. Thank
you.

Mr N SINGH: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, thank you for your response,
and I think we have no doubt in this House that given the economic
recession, there’s certainly a need to provide a safety net for the poor
and vulnerable in our society. However, we believe that if it goes
unchecked, a culture of dependency could entrench itself.

My question is: Would the Presidency encourage all government departments
to include, in their programmes, specific projects that would promote self-
help and self-reliance amongst our communities? I am asking this, because I
have no doubt that many people in our country would like to work and have a
sense of pride, rather than rely on handouts. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Singh, I totally agree with you and yes, indeed,
we would, as we are already doing under the pilot project of war on
poverty, ensure that we encourage all departments to empower our people as
a way of restoring their dignity, so that they don’t depend on handouts and
these grants. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Hon Speaker and hon Deputy President, the ACDP is fully
supportive of social welfare grants to protect the poorest and most
vulnerable, particularly during this time of domestic recession.

However, this is clearly not sustainable in the long run. The creation of
jobs, particularly amongst millions of relatively unskilled South Africans,
remains the country’s greatest economic challenge. The Medium-Term Budget
Policy statement announced last week mentions a number of commendable
options available to government to protect existing and create new jobs.

Of particular interest is the restructuring and recapitalisation of further
education colleges with an accumulative target of 350 000 industrial and
related apprenticeships and scarce learnerships having been set by the
Minister of Higher Education.

Whilst my question is not directly related to social assistance, it does go
to the heart of job creation and economic productivity, and it is whether
this target is sufficient, given the high levels of unemployment and the
shortage of skills which we are experiencing, and the fact that it is to be
achieved over a five-year period. Is there scope for revision of this
figure should there be a sufficient budget? Clearly the possibility ...
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, indeed, there is scope for revision of the
budget if the economy recovers fully and Sars is able to collect sufficient
revenue; more will be allocated, because education is indeed one of our key
priorities. Thank you.

Rev H M DANDALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to say how much we really
appreciate the extensive support that is given to the poorest of the poor,
and I want to appreciate more the help that is given, particularly for
education.

I am interested in knowing whether we have a tracking system through which
we could determine if any of the young people who have been helped through
these programmes, in the various families, actually break through to become
active economic players? Wouldn’t it be helpful if we had a system whereby
we could keep track of this? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Dandala, I couldn’t agree with you more that it
would be very helpful to have a dashboard to track progress made by those
who are beneficiaries of this kind of assistance, and the impact of their
progress on their families and households.

Unfortunately, at the moment such a system does not exist. We do not have
that kind of system; progress is tracked at a localised level, and it would
indeed be important for us to have a system that can assist us to monitor
that progress on an ongoing basis. Thank you. [Applause.]

  Measures to ensure timeous and adequate responses by members of executive
                                to questions

16.   Mr I O Davidson (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether he has implemented any  measures  and/or  mechanisms  to
          ensure that members of the executive uphold their  constitutional
          obligation  by  responding  to  questions  within  the   required
          timeframe and in an adequate manner; if so, what are the relevant
          details; if not,


      (2)   whether he will take action against members of the executive who
          are not upholding their constitutional obligation by  failing  to
          reply to questions within  the  allowable  timeframe  and  in  an
          adequate manner; if not, why not; if so, what action;


      (3)   whether there will be any consequences for members of the
          executive for failure to answer questions; if not, why not; if
          so, what are the relevant details?                  NO2616E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon Davidson, as I indicated
in my reply to your deputy, the hon Ellis, in this House on 19 August this
year, the Rules of this House provide mechanisms for ensuring that
questions to the executive are answered. As these Rules are adopted by this
House and not the executive, I believe it would be up to the National
Assembly to decide whether there is a need to tighten up these Rules or to
strengthen them in some way.

The hon Ellis made a suggestion during that exchange in August that if
Ministers did not reply to their written questions within the time limits,
they should have to stand up in this House and explain why not. I indicated
in my response that if the National Assembly decided to introduce this
rule, I would support it. I am not aware of such a proposal having been
made to the National Assembly Rules Committee.

As I indicated in my reply to hon Ellis’ question, as Leader of Government
Business, it is both my duty and my responsibility to ensure that Cabinet
Ministers are reminded of their obligation and I do so by regularly
reporting, in detail, to each meeting of Cabinet, the number of questions
each Minister has outstanding. Even this morning I did that.

I do that religiously and I am quite confident that we will arrive at a
point where there will be no outstanding questions to Ministers. We are, on
an ongoing basis, reminding Ministers of outstanding questions. We supply
them with the number of the question, the date and everything, and I’m
quite confident that there will be an improvement. Thank you.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Mr Speaker, thanks to the hon Deputy President for that
reply. I am very well aware of the fact that you did have that interchange
with my deputy, but I address you in that capacity of the Leader of
Government Business. We don’t want to treat Ministers like schoolchildren
and get them to stand up and tell us why. I think they have a
responsibility to actually answer these questions.

Indeed, in terms of the oversight and accountability model, there’s a duty
to answer those questions, as indeed there is a duty on ourselves to ask
those questions, exercise oversight and bring Ministers to account. It’s in
that context that I hope the Deputy President is aware that as of 2
November there are 510 questions outstanding, and that’s a record as far as
we are concerned – 510 questions! Now, you can wish them away, you can use
all sorts of sophistry, but the fact is that there are 510 questions
outstanding.

I’m very happy to hand over to the Deputy President a record of those
questions, which I hope as Leader of Government Business he would follow up
and make sure they are responded to, otherwise we may have to treat Cabinet
Ministers like schoolchildren. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Davidson. I agree with you that it is
the responsibility of members of the executive to respond to questions.
That very point was made even this morning in Cabinet and as I’ve assured
you and this Assembly, you will see improvements. I don’t have the sum
total of the outstanding questions because we break them down per Minister,
and I’ve furnished each Minister with a set of questions that are still
outstanding.

I hope we will not come to a point where Ministers are treated like
schoolchildren, I agree with that. Thank you.

Mr T BOTHA: Hon Speaker, given that it is the oversight responsibility of
Parliament to ask questions, and that, in terms of the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa, members of the executive are accountable,
collectively as well as individually, to Parliament for exercise of their
powers and functions, does the Deputy President not agree that Ministers
not answering questions posed by the hon members of the House are in fact
undermining the very Constitution, the House and some portfolio committees,
which are an extension of the House? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Botha. Yes, indeed I agree that if
this institution is to function as our people expect it to, all of us have
to meet our obligations, and indeed it is the duty of members to ask
questions, which must be answered by members of the executive. We shall not
in any way deliberately undermine that, hence the commitment that we will
indeed see an improvement in that regard. Thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Speaker, I think it must be very embarrassing for
the hon Deputy President to have to answer this question today, because
I’ve never heard of a place where more than 500 questions were outstanding.
But the reassuring part is that the hon Deputy President clearly is
embarrassed and he’s trying to do something about it, and we laud you for
that.

I want to add, however, hon Deputy President, that some Ministers also do
not answer their correspondence. I have reported a certain Minister to the
President and that didn’t help either. We’re now going to issue a summons
in the High Court against that Minister for not doing her work.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, order, hon members!

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Van der Merwe. While that wasn’t a
question, I can indeed confirm that I’m embarrassed for myself here.
[Laughter.] It was a comment that I can confirm. Thank you.

                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 4

MINISTERS:

    Number and nature of small enterprises assisted by Tourism Enterprise
                                  Programme

267.  Mr D M Gumede (ANC) asked the Minister of Tourism:

      (1)   How many small enterprises have been  assisted  by  the  Tourism
           Enterprise Programme;


      (2)   (a) how many were from (i) historically disadvantaged
           communities and (ii) rural areas and (b) what kind of assistance
           was given in each case?                            NO2592E

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Speaker, since the incorporation of the Tourism
Enterprise Partnership, TEP, as a section 21 company on 1 April 2008 to
date, 1 842 tourism small enterprises have been assisted. Two thirds of the
small enterprises that TEP has assisted since that date – 1 233, that is
66% – have been from historically disadvantaged communities. About 736 –
that is, 40% – of the tourism small businesses that TEP assists are from
the rural areas.

Historically disadvantaged enterprises were assisted with the following TEP
interventions: The Business Development Fund; South African host training
mentorship; business skills training; toolkit training; market access; and
the craft programme; as well as the cluster programme related to the
grouping and linking of products to create bigger and more market-
significant products.

Mr D M GUMEDE: Hon Speaker, thank you very much, and thank you very much,
hon Minister, for the response. Perhaps, hon Minister, it would be
interesting to hear from you as to how many jobs are in rural areas and, in
the process, how many sustainable livelihoods have been created, especially
in rural areas and especially for the historically disadvantaged groups
such as the youth, black people, the disabled and rural people. Thank you
very much, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Mr Speaker, in terms of the answer provided I
pointed out that 40% of those businesses are from the rural areas, but we
can certainly provide the hon member with a more detailed breakdown in
terms of jobs created.

I would also like to extend an invitation to the hon member and to the
portfolio committee: They are more than welcome to visit these projects. We
are closely monitoring the funds that we are investing to ensure that they
are not just once-off support, as we really want these enterprises to
survive and be sustainable.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Thank you, Speaker, and thank you, Minister, for that
answer. I would like you to be a little bit more precise if possible. We
note that good intentions have not always led to good implementation of
various government plans and programmes. Examples have been reported with
respect to the SMMEs assisted by the Tourism Enterprise Programme that are
now derelict or dysfunctional.

In the light of this, could the Minister give this House some indication of
the sustainability of this project? For example – and this is where I like
it to be more precise, Minister – are you aware what percentage of the
SMMEs so assisted are still viable three years after being assisted?

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Mr Speaker, we certainly can provide that
information. Obviously, with any venture of this kind there is a percentage
of failure, but we would like the success rate to be as high as possible. I
will table in Parliament – I have it available – a more detailed breakdown
that will answer that question.

Can I say that the TEP programme in my view is one of the most successful
public-private partnerships that we have. Apart from the funding that we
provide from the side of government, the business sector – the private
sector – also provides funding and we are jointly managing and monitoring
the project. But I will table the detailed answer that the hon member
required here. Thank you.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Minister, the Tourism
Enterprise Partnership has identified a number of the most common
constraints faced by small enterprises, for example a lack of access to
information, a lack of access to credibility and reputation, a lack of
critical size – some being too small to warrant attention by tour operators
– and a lack of access to finance being one of the most significant
barriers to the growth of small enterprises and, therefore, a barrier to
the transformation of the industry.

In your budget speech in June this year you promised to finalise a tourism
growth strategy with the provinces and a toolkit to assist local government
with tourism development. How relevant will such a toolkit be, hon
Minister, to address constraints faced by small enterprises? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Speaker, obviously we are doing the best that we
can. There are also other funds available for some of those enterprises
that the hon member referred to – quite a variety of them. That’s a
discussion that we in government are having at the moment to see if it’s
not more proper and more appropriate to start consolidating some of those
funds.

But let me just give an indication of the kind of money we are investing,
and I am quite sure that the hon member will appreciate that although we
can make some useful interventions, it is impossible to help each and every
business and person that applies.

In 2004 we started off with R27 million in that financial year. In 2007-08,
from the side of government, it went up to R100 million, But these must be
enterprises that qualify in terms of the definition of small businesses,
and obviously there are some businesses that fall outside of that scope and
should rather approach their local governments or their provincial
governments.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, hon Minister. Aspects of my question have been
answered, but I also want to know what capacity the programme actually had
in terms of following up to ensure that small businesses have the best
possibility of succeeding, what the challenges are from the programme’s
point of view, and what the department is able to do about this. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Speaker, that answer I provided to the question of
the hon Krumbock. I will table the answer here in Parliament and it will
give a detailed breakdown of each of the programmes in terms of success
rates, examples of success, problems experienced and where we need to
improve. So, I will table a fully comprehensive answer for the benefit of
the member.

         Programmes and projects to promote implementation of Nepad

268.  Mrs F Hajaig (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      What programmes and projects are in place to promote the
      implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (Nepad)
      (a) in the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region and
      (b) on the African continent?                NO2593E
The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Deputy Speaker, at the SADC level,
South Africa is closely involved in a number of cross-border infrastructure
projects, which are driven mainly through the Africa bilateral Spatial
Development Initiative, SDI, programme. The SDI methodology was developed
in South Africa in 1996 as an integrated planning tool aimed at promoting
investment in regions which are underdeveloped, but which have potential
for growth.

The methodology involves a process in which the public sector develops or
facilitates conditions conducive to private investment and public-private
community partnerships. It is also an integrated process of identifying
economic potential in specific geographical areas and the requisite
infrastructure necessary to promote trade.

Initiatives currently receiving assistance from the South African SDI
support programme are the Maputo Development Corridor, the Limpopo Valley
SDI and the Beira Development Corridor SDI that has been suspended, but
will pick up again when the political situation in Zimbabwe improves. Other
SDIs we are involved in include the Zambezi Valley, the Nacala Development
Corridor, the Mtwara Development Corridor, the Central Development Corridor
and the Great Lakes – Bas Congo – SDI. They are all at various stages of
implementation.

At a continental level, the implementation of Nepad programmes and projects
is guided by the African Union-Nepad African Action Plan. The Department of
Trade and Industry provides technical support to the Nepad Spatial
Development programme through the Nepad Secretariat. The department also
works through the Nepad-OECD Africa Investment Initiative to assist African
countries’ efforts to strengthen their investment environment for growth
and development.

In terms of the programmes and projects for the strategy for the
implementation of the action plan for Accelerated Industrial Development of
Africa, the DTI has participated in developing an implementation strategy
that sets out seven clusters of action. The implementation of this strategy
is monitored by the Conference of African Ministers of Industry, of which
South Africa is the current chair and is providing leadership in the
implementation of agreed projects. Thank you.

Mr B A RADEBE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, yesterday a
successful binational meeting was held between South Africa and Namibia.
What projects were identified by both countries to promote integration
between the two countries?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you for that follow-up question.
In fact, there were a number of SDI projects which were under discussion.
The most important one was the Trans-Kunene project. This would be a
communication link basically through central Angola, central Namibia down
to the Trans-Kalahari route. This would, if completed, provide the shortest
route between the DRC and South Africa by road or rail.

In terms of the framework of the Angola-Namibia-South Africa alliance,
which we have been developing, we have commissioned a most gifted
technician on these matters who will be doing some scoping work to present
to the governments of the three countries. We hope that we can co-operate
and push this very important corridor programme further forward. Thank you.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Minister, all of us embrace the
strategic importance of developing trade and agricultural opportunities and
relations in Africa. We are also aware of the current Economic Partnership
Agreement, EPA-driven threats to the existence of both Sacu and SADC as
economic development zones, which might in the process defeat the
objectives of South Africa’s involvement in Nepad and SADC.

Could you please qualify and quantify for us the current trade benefits for
the South African economy derived from intra-Africa and intra-SADC trade?
Also, could you please give specific reference to the business sectors and
product categories that are affected? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Deputy Speaker, the member will have to
put that question in writing so that we can come with the latest
statistics. But, I can say to him that our trade with Southern Africa and
with the rest of the African continent is very significant and
disproportionately so for our manufacturing industries. We export value-
added products to neighbouring countries, and a very sizable part of our
value-added products go to other countries in Africa.

Generally speaking, there is a trade balance in our favour in our trade
with other African countries. This is not a matter which we are happy
about. We think there should be a narrowing of the trade gap. That is why
we have committed to a process of trying to promote developmental
integration, because we do not believe that the barriers lie wholly in the
existence of tariffs.

As far as SADC is concerned, there are really no tariffs in application for
over 98% of products coming from other SADC countries at this moment in
time.

We think that the problems are underdeveloped production structures and
inadequate infrastructure. That is why we are working quite heavily on the
SDI approach, because we think it is a very important complement in
promoting a more balanced and equitable pattern of interregional trade.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Minister, there is an article that reviews Nepad
titled “Nepad at the Crossroads”. It says:
  Hailed as the hallmark strategy to revitalise the continent, the New
  Partnership for Africa’s Development still retains much of the optimism
  that greeted its launch three years ago. But, it faces an emerging crisis
  of credibility as key supporters question the Nepad Secretariat’s
  strategy and its failure to turn grand intentions into gainful
  initiatives.

I want to ask the Minister if there is any strategy of trying to take this
valuable and very noble project to the lower levels of our society, because
it does seem that it is not owned by the ordinary people in rural areas? I
thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Deputy Speaker, I think the problems
that Nepad faces were the expectations at the beginning that this was going
to attract massive funding from the donor community, and unfortunately
those expectations have not been realised.

But, I think that the fundamental point about co-operating around
infrastructure development remains. We believe that the spatial development
initiatives methodology does offer us a way forward, which does not depend
on all these projects being funded by donor funding. That is why we are
working to try to promote this methodology.

Basically, we started an infrastructure programme and used it as the basis
for crowding in a whole series of investments. We think the methodology has
been fairly successful in a number of cases. We are trying to identify some
of those with potential and those on the West Coast. I think the Trans-
Kunene SDI case is of major significance, and that is what we’re trying to
do. Thank you.

              Plans to avert water crisis at Medupi power plant

239.  Mr J Schmidt (DA) asked the Minister of Public Enterprises:
      Whether she has any plans to avert the looming water crises at the
      Medupi power plant; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
      details?                                                      NO2556E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Deputy Speaker, in answer to the
question, there is currently no water shortage being experienced at Medupi
power station, and that is primarily because Medupi power station is still
being developed. The power station is going to be a dry-cooled power
station, which means that it will have lower water requirements than normal
power stations.

However, perhaps what the member is referring to is that in the Medupi
area, it is envisaged that there is going to be a massive build going
forward, not only by Eskom but by Sasol as well, and there will be
considerable water requirements in order to meet that build.
In view of that the Departments of Public Enterprises and Water and
Environmental Affairs have engaged intensely on doing various development
scenarios about water requirements going forward, looking at what water
augmentation possibilities there are for this matter and also at what risk
mitigation measures there will be, should it reveal that the potential
build is prejudicial to the entire water system.

At this stage, we are not in a position to say what the water augmentation
will be, precisely because there is not yet commitment on the actual build
in that area, but we do acknowledge that water is a crucial component here,
but it is not an immediate issue.

Mr J SCHMIDT: Hon Minister, thank you for the answer. I think you have read
me correctly. From internal Eskom documents addressed to the chief
executive officer, Mr Jacob Maroga, it is clear that there were serious
problems with the whole tender process at Medupi.

To give you a few examples – and I will quote from the document – there
were procurement processes that did not adhere to the supplier pack,
detailed cost estimation was thin, water capacity is constrained, Eskom
committed to detailed boiler specification without coal being succeeded,
and so on. I can go on, Madam Minister.

In light of the above, does the Minister consider appointing a commission
of inquiry to investigate this whole process, as it seems to be another
example of bad management by Eskom?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Deputy Speaker, this is an
entirely new question. It is very different from the question that was
asked. All I can say is that I have no knowledge, and it would have been
preferable if you had posed this question as a separate question. However,
if you do have information to this effect, please feel free to forward it.
I obviously can’t commit to an answer in this context.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, hon Minister. Just in terms of the possible risks,
not only of this particular power station but at other situations like it,
what precautions does the department take to ensure that any possible
crisis doesn’t particularly impact on the surrounding area and the people
in the community, and what are the relevant details? Thanks.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: As I have said, the so-called risk that
one might be potentially exposed to is dependent on what the commitment to
the build is going forward, and that has not yet been established.

So, at the moment we have an extensive engagement with Water and
Environmental Affairs to look at various developmental scenarios, to look
at what ways water can be augmented from other water systems, and to look
at what risk mitigation there is. At this stage, yes, we are on top of
those issues, but we cannot yet fully comment until there is an actual
development scenario that has been committed to.

Mr L W GREYLING: Minister, I think this opens up a broader issue, because I
recently attended a conference on South Africa’s looming water crisis, and
I must say I was shocked at some of the presentations that I heard there.
Of course, there are numerous factors behind this looming water crisis, but
one of the ones that was singled out, in fact, was the continued
exploitation of our coal resources, whether that be from mining, from power
generation or our coal-to-liquid plants.

What I want to know is whether the government has undertaken a strategic
assessment of our water resources in the country, and whether that
assessment has been used to underpin some of the decisions around Eskom’s
new build programme, as well as the issuing of mining licences, because,
clearly, our water resources cannot sustain all of these activities, and
there are some hard choices that need to be made. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I am not the Minister of Water Affairs
at this stage, so you will forgive me if I’m not able to comment
comprehensively on this issue. But, let me say in our engagements with the
Ministry of Water and Environmental Affairs, I think intense attention is
being given to our future build programme in South Africa and what the
consequences for water will be. I agree with you that those are issues that
require very intensive attention from government, and I assure you that
that is taking place.

Mr S M PILLAY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is a well-known fact
that there is a power struggle at Eskom at the moment and, as such, there
are a whole lot of disinformation campaigns and documents going around like
the document here.

In the naivety of not recognising these power struggles and the
disinformation campaign, the opposition has been fooled and is gullible
enough to give a statement which says that the Medupi power station will
lead to irreversible environmental damage and that the power plant will
suck up all the water in the area and the surrounding areas, including the
Hartbeespoort Dam, etc.

It is my understanding that before any project of this nature can be
embarked upon, you would need to do an environmental impact assessment.
During the assessment you have experts who’ll look at this thing and give
an expert opinion. You also have public participation during that process.
All I want to ask the hon Minister is that before this Medupi power plant
was commissioned, was there EIA approval or not? Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: No build on this scale can be done
without an EIA and, certainly, yes an EIA was done, and Medupi is being
built. [Applause.]

    Guidelines on remuneration packages for top officials of parastatals

235.  Mr N J J van R Koornhof (Cope) asked the Minister of Public
      Enterprises:

      (1)   Whether there are any guidelines on  remuneration  packages  for
           the top officials of parastatals; if not, why not;


     (2)    whether she will consider appointing a remuneration committee to
           set guidelines and to make sure that these remuneration packages
           are more moderate in future; if not, why not; if so, what are
           the relevant details?        NO1827E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Deputy Speaker, the question is whether
there are any guidelines on remuneration packages for the top officials of
parastatals. Yes, there are remuneration guidelines. These were approved by
Cabinet in 2007 and apply to both the remuneration of senior executive and
non-executive members of the board.

The Minister of Public Enterprises is responsible for the appointment of
board members and, in turn, the board appoints members of board
subcommittees as may be necessary, including the members of the
remuneration committee. The board and that remuneration committee must
ensure that the remuneration of executive and non-executive directors is in
line with those remuneration guidelines.

However, we have moved on in this world since 2007, and the debate about
executive remuneration has become an international debate. So, a further
comparative benchmark and exercise has been conducted and is in the process
of being conducted to update the guidelines since 2007, and the report will
be presented to the oversight committee before being submitted to Cabinet
for approval.

Mr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. Thank you
very much, hon Minister, for that reply. In terms of the report by the
Commission on Growth and Development, one of the strategies they have named
for successful countries that have achieved growth of 7% each year for 25
years, was that they had capable governments that held public agencies to
account.

Now, could I ask the Minister whether she would consider when she proposes
the new guidelines to Cabinet, not paying any bonuses if there is no
performance by these parastatals?

Secondly, could the Minister remind some of these officials that although
they, obviously, can be appropriately remunerated, they are performing a
public service. Somebody must remind them that they cannot ask for the same
bonuses as the private sector.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Deputy Speaker, I think the member is
asking important questions that are part of the national discourse at the
moment. I cannot comment at the moment on what the recommendations are that
we would come up with. But, obviously, performance-based bonuses are based
on performance and we would expect that that is adhered to. So, I will
await the outcome of those matters.

Whether state-owned enterprises executives should be remunerated on a scale
comparable to that of the private sector, is a difficult issue.

We do understand and we do expect that when people run state-owned
enterprises they are also doing that as part of their public service to the
country. However, we have to be realistic – we are competing for very
scarce skills in this country. And if that means that we have to provide at
a scale that is similar to that of private enterprises, then we must
consider that - if it means that we can’t employ the people who have the
requisite skills.

But let me say that the issue of remuneration is an important issue. Eskom,
for instance, has stopped all bonuses for this year pending the outcome of
the interim results, because they feel so strongly about this matter – and
I must congratulate them on that.

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Thank you, hon Minister, for that
response. I would like to know if this House could have sight of the
approved remuneration guidelines, because as we peruse the annual reports
of departments, I think there will be many questions.

Talking about questions, I would like to know, Madam Minister, who decides
on these bonuses that are paid? Because I have a document in my hand which
is an extract from an SOE – and I will not mention which one it is – where
the executive remuneration guaranteed for one official was R4 million for
the year, and the bonus for that same year was R2,825 million.

Now, when people earn something like R7 million to R10 million per year,
they are either superhuman or really super capable to earn that kind of
salary. We would hope that this new package will deal with these issues.

Further, I would like to know if the Minister would make a comment on the
number of board members that should serve on state-owned enterprises and
the packages that they should get, because, in perusing the annual reports,
you find that some of the entities have a number of board members that we
don’t think are necessary for overseeing the affairs of that organisation.
Thank you.
The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you. I am certain that you can
have those executive remuneration guidelines, bearing in mind that they are
going to be updated. I cannot comment on that particular remuneration plus
bonus, because I don’t know which state-owned enterprise it is and whether
it falls in my stable, but if you could forward me the details I would be
happy to receive them.

The question of how many board members per state-owned enterprise depends
on the size of that enterprise and the particular skills mix, and is
established in terms of the articles of association. As you know, most
articles of association have a range number that you can have from, say,
one to 15, and it is up to the Minister’s discretion to decide what the
appropriate skills mix is.

So, yes, we do pay attention to that when we look at appointments to
boards. I think the issue is that of board members that sit on too many
boards, which makes them not able to function properly on any board – an
issue which we are certainly paying attention to.

Mr P VAN DALEN: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Given that the remuneration of
top officials at parastatals is internationally benchmarked, then it is
safe to assume that the standard of service delivery should also be of an
international standard. Clearly, this is not the case. Mr Maroga earns four
times as much as President Zuma, and yet Eskom is failing dismally in
meeting its mandate to provide cheap and reliable electricity to South
Africa.

Various internal Eskom documents have shown that Maroga has been thoroughly
warned about the problems in the parastatal which he ignored and which
ultimately led to the load shedding in 2007 and 2008. The need to triple
the price of electricity over the three years is another result of this
incompetence. My question is: Could the Minister make sure that the
salaries and bonuses of the CEOs ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, there is a point of order. What is
your point of order?

Mr S M PILLAY: My point of order, Madam Speaker, is that I think the hon
member also serves on the committee on Public Enterprises and it is ...
[Interjections.]

Mr P VAN DALEN: What is your point?

Mr S M PILLAY: If you would be patient you would know. It is unfair to
mislead this House and say that we don’t provide the cheapest electricity
in the world. Everybody knows that Eskom charges the cheapest electricity
rates and he knows this. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Pillay, would you allow the member to ask his
question.
Mr P VAN DALEN: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The need to triple the
price of electricity over the next three years is another result of this
incompetence. [Interjections.] My question is: Could the Minister make sure
that the salaries and bonuses that these CEOs receive are coupled with
performance indicators and strict targets and deliverables set by this
government? Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I do not think it is wise to simply
cast aspersions on state-owned enterprises in blanket terms. Please bear in
mind that the issues at Eskom are issues that arise out of a long history
of decisions that were made around Eskom, and that Mr Maroga is not the
only person that has to take responsibility for that. And I think you are
being unfair when you place the entire dilemma of the Eskom build on one
individual.

Secondly, if you do have these numerous complaints and whatever, please
make them available to me, because I think it is unfair for any individual
to be publicly accused in the public domain without having an opportunity
to respond to those kinds of accusations. [Applause.]

Let me say, too, on this notion that state-owned enterprises are just the
worst-performing in the country, that one can take, for instance, SA
Express. Does anyone look at it? It has a woman who is a chairperson; a
woman who is the chief executive officer. That state-owned enterprise has
consistently delivered, performed financially brilliantly and runs with an
incredibly efficient schedule.

Now, you know, just painting state-owned enterprises as these useless
things does not help us in the debate. I think we need to be tackling this
debate in terms of looking at the particular issues confronting each state-
owned enterprise and not just laying it at the door of individuals – it’s a
long-term issue.

Regarding bonuses at Eskom, you might not have heard that at Eskom all
bonuses were suspended pending a review of the interim results. So, they
have taken those proactive steps. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chair, I have a point of order. I want a ruling to be given
to the House on the following matter. Yesterday, when I arrived at the
airport, I saw a board saying: “Welcome to the Republic of Cape Town.” Now
this confirms that we live in two different worlds as far as the DA is
concerned. Could the House be given a ruling on that matter? [Laughter.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Thank you, Deputy Speaker, and thank you, Minister, for
your reply. As far as I understand it, the Department of Public Enterprises
is not a policy department but rather a shareholder in various state-owned
entities. Maybe the department and we as Parliament should look more
broadly than just at the remuneration packages of CEOs of state-owned
entities, and rather engage ourselves in the future about the role and
functions of SOEs, including the funding models and the entities as going
concerns.

We should really determine whether the boards and directors are indeed the
best mechanism; and, regarding the oversight role, determine what the best
practice is for the shareholder and for Parliament to oversee state-owned
entities. That is a broader picture I think we need to engage with in
future. And I would like to ask the Minister whether she agrees with that.
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Deputy Speaker, the issue of
shareholder compacts is extremely important, and I thank the member for
raising this issue. Mr Van Dalen did raise the issue of key performance
objectives. There is, in my view, a need to revise the shareholder compacts
that we have as state-owned enterprises at the moment. We have been in the
process of looking at several of them in the past couple of months. So, I
do believe that shareholder compacts with boards are an extremely important
and valuable oversight tool.

 Contribution of SumbandilaSat satellite to poverty alleviation and economic
                                   growth

272.  Mr E N N Ngcobo (ANC) asked the Minister of Science and Technology:
      How will the SumbandilaSat satellite contribute to (a) the enhancement
      of poverty alleviation and (b) economic growth in South Africa and the
      region?                                            NO2597E

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Deputy Speaker, the answer to the
question is as follows. Remote sensing data is identified as a fundamental
data set for planning and sustainable development, and is especially
important for Africa and developing countries. Remote sensing satellites
acquire and provide data that benefits a very broad user community.

For our satellite, Sumbandila, the information acquired will assist in, but
not be limited to, the following areas: agricultural mapping, health
promotion, air quality management, urban planning, communications, and
water resource management.

The satellite will provide earth observation data for a wide range of
applications in our country and in the region broadly, data which will
ensure that we minimise the current costs of purchasing data from
satellites of other countries.

The successful operation of Sumbandila and of future build missions that
South Africa will undertake, will put South Africa in a position which will
attract international investments that will stimulate and develop our local
space industry.

We believe that revenues, at a minimum, which have a return ratio of around
4:1, will and can be realised in our space industry sector. We will, as a
country, work hard to strengthen our existing technological capabilities
and our space resources in order to create more opportunities in terms of
employment and especially human capital development for the youth of our
country. [Applause.]

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Hon Minister, in advancing the African continent’s agenda
on matters of climate change at the international level, how will the
department use the Sumbandila satellite to enhance South Africa’s
participation in relevant international, scientific and technological co-
operation programmes such as the World Climate Research Programme, the
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, the International Human
Dimensions Programme, the Global Ocean Observing System, the Array for Real-
Time Geostrophic Oceanography, and the International Polar Year? Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon
Ngcobo has a very strong involvement in global matters of climate change,
hence the interest in this aspect of the data we will be able to secure
from the Sumbandila satellite.

We as a country, play a very important role in a number of bodies that are
concerned with issues of climate change. The Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs and the Department of Agriculture, as well as the
Department of Science and Technology have senior officials who serve on a
number of international bodies that are concerned with what is called
geographic earth observation. These bodies look at a range of aspects
relevant to what is now being called global change and, which, in a narrow
reference, would be referred to as climate change.

We believe that the data that we will secure from the Sumbandila satellite
will assist our officials and the leaders of our country in making very
concrete contributions to the geographic earth observation committee
discussions, and advancing the work we are doing in Antarctica – which is
looking at the oceans and the impact of climate change on the oceans – as
well as looking at agricultural and other impacts of climate change.

So, in all, the United Nations, the European Union, the African Union, the
Southern African Development Community and other bodies are concerned with
matters of climate change. I believe that South Africa and SADC will be
well served by the data that they will receive from our latest
technological development, which is this satellite.

Each of these bodies will receive contributions from South Africans who are
better informed, based on real data that we would have collected from our
own instrument. [Applause.]

Ms M R SHINN: Deputy Speaker, could the Minister please state what return
in investment the taxpayer will get from the R26-million investment in this
satellite within the next six months? Would the Minister tell this House by
what scientific methods the performance of this satellite’s earth science
applications will be measured, and which state entities will undertake this
evaluation?

We ask the Minister to report back to this House before the end of the
first parliamentary session next year – that is, before the Fifa 2010 World
Cup kickoff – on what the Sumbandila satellite has achieved for the
socioeconomic development of our land, the value of that scientific
research, and the taxpayer’s return on the investment.

We welcome the Minister’s assurances that the satellite will be used only
for scientific research, but now we want to see research turned into
tangible benefits on the ground. Since 2006, the taxpayer has waited for
payback from the Sumbandila satellite. Its launch was delayed mainly, we
believe, by a dispute with Russia, the launch nation, over the cancellation
of an earlier, shady, multibillion-rand Defence Force deal.

Where have we heard this before – that the citizens’ benefits come second
to the ANC cadre get-rich-quick agendas? We need a return on this
investment in the satellite soon, Madam Minister. I hope you will be able
to give it to us by next year. [Time expired.]
The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon
member spoilt a very good question by trying to be political against cadres
of the ANC. This is often a sad fault of the DA.

We certainly will be ready, I think, to report back in the year 2010, as
the hon member has indicated. I think I can commit to that.

As to what instrument, well, there are various parts of the satellite and I
can’t name all of them now. But I can indicate to the member that we have
had a successful launch. Our satellite is in orbit. The instrumentation is
currently being set to allow us, in around three weeks’ time, to begin to
have the first of the images from the satellite. So, we are very exited
about that.

In terms of what return, I’m reliably informed that, as a country, we
currently spend over R60 million in payments to countries that have
satellites, and from which we purchase data for the work that I have
referred to in agriculture, health and so on.

I’m hoping that when I come back in 2010, I will be able to give you a
definitive report as to the savings that have been made. At this point, we
haven’t as yet been able to provide any department with data to replace
data they are currently securing from other countries’ satellites. But I
hope that when I return in 2010, I will be able to give the hon member and
the House a full report. [Applause.]
Ms S K MOLAO: Thank you, hon Minister. Hon Minister, how much has been
achieved so far in fulfilling the mission of the project, in particular
with providing satellite data for application addressing the needs of
society? Thank you, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Deputy Speaker, I thought I had
answered that question. Let me indicate that a few years ago there was an
attempt by the University of Stellenbosch, through a space company, to
place a satellite in orbit. The satellite was successfully launched.
However, it did not last in orbit and actually, essentially, collapsed.

So we have had several years of reworking the creation, the building of a
satellite by South Africa. The company we’ve used, SunSpace, as well as the
facilities at the University of Stellenbosch, have led to where we are
today – which is that we’ve had a successful launch.

We now have a satellite which has been in orbit for five weeks. We have to
wait a short period in order for us to retrieve the data, because once the
satellite is in orbit, it must remain in orbit. As it orbits, you then
begin setting the various instruments in place to work in order to ensure,
one, that it remains in orbit; and, two, that it is able to use the cameras
set within the satellite and all the various instrumentation that makes it
up. So, all of that is manipulated from a remote site here in Stellenbosch.

Once we begin to gather data, given its quality and so on, and the ability
to transmit it to other departments and to use it ourselves, we will then
have a measure of our success. But the fact that we have a South African-
built satellite, launched it successfully, and that it is staying in orbit
and is currently looking very promising, is in itself an achievement for
this country. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, I think it is
remarkable that South Africa has been able to achieve such great success in
launching this satellite.

I would like to know from the hon Minister whether any thought has been
given to how easily accessible the data and satellite imagery is going to
be, in terms of cost and availability to government departments and to
other users that may want to utilise the information. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, hon Singh. I must say
that the effort has been an effort of government, and in particular we have
benefited from the Department of Communications with technological support
in this particular initiative.

As to how accessible the data will be, well, obviously, the intention has
been to improve both data quality and access for South Africa. So, once we
begin to get the first images, I think departments will then be able to
secure the necessary imagery that they want.

As you know, as the satellite orbits, it is not always orbiting over areas
of the earth or South Africa that we may want information on. So, we would
have to secure from departments their particular needs and then, based on
that, will begin to provide the necessary data.

I am also going to have to examine whether I can make some money from my
department, given what departments were spending on data they were securing
from other countries. But, once we get the first images, I think we should
come back and inform the House of that immediately. And then, as I have
said, on the basis of the hon Shinn’s question, we should come and give a
full report in 2010. [Applause.]

         State funds spent on settling land claims in KwaZulu-Natal

258.  Mr J H van der Merwe (IFP) asked the Minister of Rural Development
      and Land Reform:

      What amount in state funds was spent on settling land claims in
      KwaZulu-Natal in the 12 months before the 2009 general election?
                                                               NO2580E

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Madam Deputy Speaker,
according to information at my disposal, the response to hon Van der Merwe
is that the amount is R794 021 313. Thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, thank you to the hon Minister
for the answer. It is almost R800 million. Could the hon Minister kindly
tell us what percentage that is of the total amount that was spent that
year?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Madam Deputy Speaker,
that’s a good question. I’m prepared to return to the hon member later on.
I cannot provide that information right now. Thank you.

Mr M M SWATHE: Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, what
is the meaning of settlement in terms of the Department of Rural
Development and Land Reform, and how many agreements have been signed with
landowners and fully paid? There are about 1 652 outstanding claims, which
must be settled in KwaZulu-Natal, and the budget for 2009-10 is almost
exhausted. Therefore, where will the department get the money to settle all
outstanding claims? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, we
are on record as having said in this House that the budget for this
financial year to settle restitution has been exhausted. In fact, it was
exhausted during the first quarter. We did report that until we got another
allocation, we would be unable to settle any other claims. Thank you, hon
Deputy Speaker.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, I was also going to
say that since the budget is inadequate, how do we see these outstanding
claims being settled and when will we see them being settled? What are the
current challenges that are being discussed by Cabinet at the moment? Are
we seeing any kind of light at the end of this tunnel? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, we
have been able to look at our own budget in the department with a view to
settling some of the claims which have been processed and signed. We are
working on that, and we will report to this House as to how much we have
done. With regard to how broadly we will deal with the matter, we will deal
with the matter progressively as we get allocations through the budget,
because that is the only way and the only source of funding that we can
rely upon. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

Nk P P XABA: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe ohloniphekile, ngicela ukubuza ukuthi
kule mali eyasetshenziselwa ukubuyiselwa kwemihlaba kubanikazi bawo. Ngabe
yimalini eyathenga umhlaba? Yimalini eyanxephezela umphakathi, endaweni
yokuthola umhlaba Kanye naleyo eyakhishwa njengo xhasomali ukuze isize labo
abafuna ukulima?
Nokho siyazi ukuthi uyabiza umhlaba kodwa babewuthathe mahhala. Siyambonga
ke uhulumeni ohholwa yiANC, uKhongolose, ngokusiza abantu bakithi babuyelwe
ngumhlaba wabo awathathwa nguhulumeni wengcindezelo. Sibonile eBabanangu
KwaZulu-Natal ukuthi abantu bakithi bawutholile umhlaba. Mhlonishwa ngicela
usichazele ukuthi ungakanana umhlaba KwaZulu-Natal ongakabuyiselwa
kubanikazi bawo? [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms P P XABA: Chairperson, hon Minister, if I may ask: What happened to the
money that was used for land restitutions? How much was spent on purchasing
land? How much was spent to compensate the community who did not get land,
as well as that which was paid out as a subsidy in order to help those who
want to farm?

Nevertheless, we know that the land is expensive but they took it free of
charge. We thank the ANC-led government, the congress, for assisting our
people to get back their land which was taken by the apartheid government.
We have seen in Babanango, in KwaZulu-Natal, that the land has been
returned to our people. Hon Minister, will you please explain to us how big
the land in KZN is that has not been returned to its rightful owners?
[Applause.]]

UMPHATHISWA WEZOPHUHLISO LWAMAPHANDLE NOBUYEKEZO LWEZEMIHLABA: Sekela-
Somlomo ohloniphekileyo, ndicela imvume kule Ndlu ihloniphekileyo
nakwilungu elihloniphekileyo ukuba khe ndinikwe ithuba lokuya kucwangcisa
kakuhle iimpendulo zale mibuzo ibaluleke kangaka ukuze ndibuye nazo kule
Ndlu nakwilungu elihloniphekileyo zingaphelanga iintsuku ezisixhenxe.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, I
request permission from this august House and from the hon member to award
me some time to go and prepare the answers for these important questions
and bring them back to this august House within seven days. [Applause.]]

           Measures regarding renewable energy target set for 2013

260.  Mr L W Greyling (ID) asked the Minister of Energy:

      (1)   Whether she  is  considering  increasing  the  renewable  energy
           target set for 2013; if not,  why  not;  if  so,  what  are  the
           relevant details;


       (2)  what progress has been made in reaching this target;


       (3)  whether any measures have been proposed to ensure that the
           target is reached; if not, what is the position in this regard;
           if so, what measures?                              NO2582E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (for the MINISTER OF ENERGY): Deputy
Speaker, the question is whether the Minister is considering increasing the
renewable energy targets set out for 2013. Now, in the short term, the
department intends to meet the 2013 targets, whilst reviewing the Renewable
Energy White Paper to determine medium- and long-term targets.

Beyond 2013 the review process will be consultative, and inputs from
stakeholders and the general public will be taken into account in
determining the next renewable energy target.

The answer to the second part of the question is that since the report of
the Renewable Energy Summit in March 2009, less than 10% has been achieved.
Nonetheless, the Renewable Energy Feed-In Taroff – REFIT – scheme provides
incentives that will increase renewable energy uptake above the 10 TWh
level.

The answer to the final part of the question is yes, measures have been
proposed to ensure that the target is reached. The new-generation capacity
regulations were promulgated in 2009, and will enable the procurement of
power from independent power producers, including those using renewable
energy sources. This regulation defines the institutional arrangement
within which this procurement must be controlled.

The aforementioned regulation is expected to expedite the procurement
process of the independent power producers, IPPs, as well as ensure that
all future electricity plans are streamlined to correspond with the
country’s position on the primary energy mix in general. Clean energy
production is prioritised in that plan.

Furthermore, the department, through Nersa, the National Energy Regulator
of SA, is implementing the Renewable Energy Feed-In Tariff – the REFIT, as
you know – which is an incentive scheme for the procurement of renewable
energy at a very attractive tariff level. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Minister, it is clear why
government is not prepared to increase the paltry renewable energy target
of 10 000 gigawatt hours by 2013. It is because you have not even reached
5% of this target, and it is clear that with the current plans, we won’t
even get to half of it.

This is in contrast to many other countries that are steaming ahead on the
renewable energy front, as they have indentified it as a major growth
industry. China, for instance, has already exceeded its 2020 target for
wind energy and has created thousands of jobs and new industries in the
process.

I often hear rhetoric from government around the need for clean energy, but
unfortunately the facts speak for themselves. The feed-in tariffs don’t
work, because no cost-recovery mechanism has been put in place to force
Eskom to sign power-purchase agreements with renewable energy producers.
The latest National Integrated Resource Plan allegedly also has targets for
renewable energy which will only see us achieving half of our renewable
energy target by 2013. In addition, the new build programme of Eskom has
also made provision for only 1% of it being from renewable energy.

Minister, renewable energy can be more rapidly deployed than either coal or
nuclear energy. Will you therefore direct some of the billions of rand
across to renewable energy? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (for the MINISTER OF ENERGY): Thank you
very much. Let me state – and, I think, I have stated this with Mr Greyling
on many occasions – that government is very committed to renewable energy.
Any country that is not committing to renewable energy is being suicidal
economically.

In terms of Eskom’s build programme on renewable energy, I think the
intention is really that we involve independent power producers in a much
bigger way. There the hon Greyling’s question on the power-purchase
agreements becomes very relevant. I think the ability of an agency such as
Eskom to conclude power-purchase agreements needs to be reviewed. I would
agree with you on that. Perhaps one needs an independent agency, because
one is almost having a conflict of interests. These are matters that we are
taking up with Eskom in that regard.

We are very encouraged to see that Sasol is now making a major investment
in clean energy, and we are encouraging other independent power producers
to join in.

But bear in mind that the feed-in tariffs are very expensive, and if Eskom
were to do that to that agreement, Eskom would be purchasing power at a
much higher rate than they could sell that power. That places Eskom in a
very difficult position.

I do fully endorse your concerns and that of the Minister of Energy around
renewable energy, and we do sincerely hope that in the next year we will be
able to demonstrate very decisive action on the clean energy front.

Mr J SCHMIDT: Thank you, hon Minister, for that answer. I would like some
more information on the answer you have just given and also on what the hon
member Greyling said.

As you said, the REFIT 1 and 2 tariffs are considerably higher than the
price that Eskom, as the sole producer, currently pays to buy or gets paid
to produce energy. Therefore, I would like to know if the Ministers see
these REFIT 1 and 2 tariffs as restraining factors in the government
meeting its targets. Alternatively, does the government plan to subsidise
these independent power producers that want to invest in renewable energy?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (for the MINISTER OF ENERGY): Your
observation is correct. I think it would be inappropriate for me to be
commenting on a decision made by the regulator. I don’t want to be seen to
be contesting what the regulator is saying on these matters, but it does
pose problems.

We are back to the issue of Eskom having to provide energy at incredibly
low costs. This prohibits it from being able to purchase from independent
power producers – not only clean energy, but other power producers.

That is one of the realities that we are facing when Eskom approaches Nersa
to request a tariff increase. This is not only because we need to have
independent power producers, but it’s primarily because Eskom has to meet
its operating costs. But, until the issue of the appropriate tariff level
for the purchaser of power is firmly established, there are going be
problems around that.

In terms of promoting the renewable energy industry, there are discussions
with the Department Of Trade and Industry. This is an industry, and we need
to seize the possibilities there for creating jobs and going forward. So,
yes, there is that kind of engagement, but the tariff issue is a problem.

Mr G J SELAU: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. The ANC supports the Minister
in her endeavour to change the lives of the people of South Africa through
the energy mix. We believe it is not proper to stand back and criticise
when we all have interests as members in the people of South Africa.

The ANC manifesto reads:

   Our priorities will specifically target the needs of the youth, women,
   workers, the rural poor, the elderly, and people with disabilities.

Hon Minister, how will the renewable energy targets, as outlined in your
response, impact on this? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (for the MINISTER OF ENERGY): There are
many ways in which renewable energy impacts in a very positive way on any
country. Firstly, it reduces the level of carbon emissions, and that has a
considerable consequence for climate change.

Secondly – and, I think, very importantly for poor people who often live in
the areas that are most polluted – it does impact on their quality of life
in terms of environmental pollution.

Finally, in terms of the economy, it is extremely important that this
country follow a very committed path to renewable energy. This world is
changing very fast. With Copenhagen coming into effect, any country that is
not cognisant of the damaging purely economic consequences of not being
seen to commit to renewable energy will face the economic consequences
thereof. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, hon Minister. A lot of what you have said has
taken care of my questions, because we hear government talking clearly
about prioritising renewable energy and that is encouraging, but then again
we see how slowly the process is moving. So there are obvious blockages and
obvious challenges. You have elaborated on some of those challenges and
perhaps you could elaborate some more.

When it comes to the independent power producers, what incentives will
drive this process and get it happening? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (for the MINISTER OF ENERGY): Deputy
Speaker, my firm belief is that independent power producers will come in
when they believe that, firstly, there is a market for their product; and,
secondly, that they will be able to secure a purchase agreement for their
energy that covers their operational and other costs. Until such time that
that power-purchase agreement is able to be sealed, the coming in of
independent power producers will always be prohibited.

That is why this debate about the cost of our electricity and the costs
that we are requiring Eskom to pay to purchase power from independent power
producers, which costs are way above what they are selling that power for,
becomes a critical strategic issue. Thank you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I intend moving on behalf of the DA:

   That the House –

    1) debates the state of dereliction and unkemptness of many of our
       national and local monuments and other important tourist sites in
       South Africa; and


    2) proposes urgent solutions to this state of affairs for implementation
       well before the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day of the House:

   That the House-


   (1)      notes that the theft of luggage at our airports should be
        regarded as a matter of national importance, seeing that South
        Africa will be hosting the Soccer World Cup in 2010 and will want to
        leave a positive impression on our visitors;


   (2)      notes that the disclosure by the Acsa airport operations
        manager, Bongani Maseko, that 30 bags are stolen or tampered with
        daily at the country’s biggest airport until recently is a matter
        that deserves urgent attention by the government;


   (3)      therefore calls on the Department of Transport and the
        government, in general, to introduce legislation in this regard.


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Can I just say that we will take advice on the
last notice of motion, to see if it’s a notice of motion or not.

Mr W M MADISHA: Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I shall move on the next
sitting day of the House:

   That the House, noting that –

       1) cable theft in Kwa-Thema and Langaville in Ekurhuleni has reached
          a crisis point;


       2) the health, welfare and livelihood of ordinary people are being
          seriously compromised owing to the interruption of electricity,
          rail and telephone services; and

       3) the estimated direct cost of cable theft in South Africa as a
          whole exceeds R500 million per annum

      calls on the government to intensify police efforts to prosecute all
      those buying stolen cables, tighten legislative measures ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, a notice of a motion is a notice for
something to be debated at the next sitting.

Mr W M MADISHA: Exactly, that is why ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then don’t elaborate. Thank you.

Is there another notice of motion? No. We then move to motions without
notice.

               VISIT OF PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA DELEGATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that a People’s Republic of China delegation visited the
        South African National Parliament to strengthen ties between the two
        nations on Tuesday, 3 November 2009;


   (2)      further notes that the First Vice-Chairman of the Standing
        Committee of the 11th National People’s Congress of China, Wang
        Zhaoguo, and his delegation interacted with Parliament’s Presiding
        Officers from 3 to 4 November 2009;


  (3) recalls that the official visit stems from a Memorandum of
        Understanding signed in 2006 between the two legislatures,
        committing the two nations to exchange views and update each other
        on the implementation of agreements between the two governments;

   (4)      acknowledges that trade between the two nations stood at about
        R118 billion last year with South Africa’s exports accounting for
        about R35 billion; and

   (5)      believes that this strategic partnership with the People’s
        Republic of China will assist in consolidating the African Agenda,
        as well as strengthening South-South relations.

Agreed to.

                       INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR TOLERANCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –

    1) notes that 16 November will mark the 14th annual International Day
       for Tolerance, an initiative originated by Unesco in 1995;


    2) further notes that the core purpose of this initiative is to build
       tolerance and trust in diverse communities mainly through education;


    3) recognises that intolerance is often rooted in ignorance and fear of
       the unknown and of the “other”, such as other cultures, religions and
       nations, and that intolerance is also closely linked to an
       exaggerated sense of self-worth and pride as well as notions taught
       and learned at an early age; and
    4) acknowledges that the promotion of tolerance should be the priority
       of not only the government but also that of every citizen and that in
       order to promote tolerance public awareness should be generated with
       emphasis on the dangers of intolerance.

Agreed to.

   ACCIDENT INVOLVING DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS AND HER DRIVER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:


   That the House –


     1) notes with regret the accident involving the Deputy Minister of
        Human Settlements, Zoe Kota-Fredericks, and her driver, Mr
        Sikhumbuzo Nqamqele, on Sunday, 1 November 2009;

     2) further notes that the Deputy Minister was on her way to Cape Town
        after attending an O R Tambo lecture in Beaufort West, when the car
        in which she was travelling, collided with a bakkie, 20 km outside
        Leeu-Gamka;
     3) recalls the tragic death in the accident of a father and a son who
        were on their way to Beaufort West from Cape Town when the accident
        happened;


     4) acknowledges the news that the Deputy Minister is recovering from
        minor injuries in a hospital in George;

        5) wishes the Deputy Minister a speedy recovery; and

     6) extends its condolences to the family of the father and son who
        died in the accident.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:08.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1. Calling of Joint Sitting





   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT

   The Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr M V Sisulu, and the Acting
   Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Ms T C Memela, in terms
   of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
   Parliament for Tuesday, 10 November 2009 at 14:00 to debate the
   preparations for the FIFA 2010 World Cup.


   M V SISULU, MP                 T C MEMELA, MP
   SPEAKER OF THE                 ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE
   NATIONAL ASSEMBLY   NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

The following report replaces the report published in the ATC on 28 October
2009:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
    consideration of a shortlist of candidates for appointment to the Board
    of the South African National Space Agency Board, dated 28 October
    2009:

      The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having considered
      the shortlist of candidates for appointment to the South African
      National Space Agency Board in terms of section 7(1)( c ) of the SA
      National Space Agency Act (Act No 36 of 2008), referred to it on 7
      October 2009, reports as follows:


      The committee held meetings on 21 and 28 October 2009 on the above
      subject. The department received 94 applications and shortlisted 25 of
      the candidates.


      During the committee’s deliberations on 21 October 2009, members
      raised their concerns about the lack of shortlisted candidates who
      fall within "vulnerable groups with special needs", such as persons
      with disabilities. The committee subsequently requested the
      department, in future, to consult organisations working with persons
      with special needs to identify potential candidates for inclusion in
      the shortlist.


      Subsequent to the meeting of 21 October 2009, the following
      transpired:
       a) Ms Justine Limpitlaw, a shortlisted candidate, withdrew her
          application due to personal circumstances.
       b) The department approached the organisation Disabled People South
          Africa, who recommended the following candidate for inclusion on
          the shortlist: Mr Vincent Gore.


      The committee subsequently agreed to include Mr Gore on the shortlist.
      The committee therefore recommends that the House approves the
      following shortlist:


   1) Mr Francois Anderson
   2) Mr Leeandran Annamalai
   3) Mr Themba Buthelezi
   4) Prof Gideon de Wet
   5) Mr Zola Fihlani
   6) Dr Elizabeth Gavin (Adam)
   7) Ms Joy-Marie Lawrence
   8) Mr Vincent Gore
   9) Mr Rudolph Louw
  10) Mr Maurice T Magugumela
  11) Mr Potlaki Maine
  12) Ms Nomfuneko Majaja
  13) Dr Jan Göttlieb Malan
  14) Captain Mpho Mamashela
  15) Dr Lee-Anne McKinnell
  16) Ms Louisa Mogudi
  17) Mr Nepfumbada Mbangiseni
  18) Mr Tsheko Ratsheko
  19) Dr Robert Scholes
  20) Ms Rosey Sekese
  21) Ms Simangele Sekgobela
  22) Ms Carla Sharpe
  23) Dr Kwanele Benett Siziba
  24) Ms Vangile Brenda Titi
  25) Mr Mthobisi Clyde Zondi

   Report to be considered.

