---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 10 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-11-10
---

WEDNESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 15:26.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT

      Water pipeline from Democratic Republic of Congo to South Africa

7.    Ms E C van Lingen (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether, with reference to his reply to Question 5 on 17 September
      2009, he has any details available in respect of the water pipeline
      from the Democratic Republic of Congo to South Africa to resolve the
      water shortages in the country; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                 CO216E
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members and hon E C van Lingen, in
my reply to question 5 on 17 September this year, I indicated that piping
water from neighbouring countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo,
DRC, may be one option that we could look at to address our water supply
problems.

There are, however, no plans or discussions at this stage to pipe water
from the DRC to South Africa. The government’s current strategy, the
National Water Resources Strategy, NWRS, is to exploit our own resources by
looking at options such as desalination, re-use of water, better management
and use of current ground water, and to further our partnership with
Lesotho in the Lesotho Highlands Water Project, LHWP. I thank you.

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson and hon Deputy President, I was wondering if
you actually meant to refer to the pipeline from the Congo, because it is
very far. Having been on various tours all over South Africa as NCOP
members, we’ve noticed that there are still a lot of rivers flowing full-
bore into the sea, like in the eastern part of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-
Natal.

We were wondering what plans there are for dams to be built on our own soil
in the near future, rather than a pipeline from the Congo.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That question is actually relevant to the
Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs, but it’s all right. If the
Deputy President would like to respond, I will allow that.

Remember, if you put questions to the President and the Deputy President,
those questions must be of a national nature.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, as I have said, the NWRS is what guides
us as a country, and that covers conservation of water, etc. There’s a
whole build programme for dams in several areas without the possibility of
endangering the ecology of the country. Thank you.

  Particulars regarding Bi-National Commission comprising South Africa and
                                  Swaziland

8.    Mr R A Lees (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)    Whether  South  Africa  has  a  Bi-National   Commission   with
           Swaziland; if not, why not; if so, (a) who are  the  current  SA
           members of this commission and (b) how was each of these members
           (i) selected and (ii) appointed;

       2) (a) what are the details of the current mandate given to the SA
          members of this commission and (b) what are the matters currently
          under discussion by this commission?

      CO217E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I would like to inform hon Lees that
South Africa does not have a binational commission with Swaziland but has a
Joint Bilateral Commission for Co-Operation, which is at ministerial level.


The bilateral commission was established in terms of an agreement between
the two countries signed in 2004. The following departments are involved in
the bilateral commission: International Relations and Co-operation; Home
Affairs; Defence and Military Veterans; Higher Education and Training;
Justice and Constitutional Development; Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries; Tourism; Trade and Industry; Public Works; Water and
Environmental Affairs; the SAPS; and, lastly, the Department of Energy.

The selection of the departments involved is determined by the nature of
the co-operation projects between the two countries. As provided for in the
agreement establishing the joint commission, the mandate of the South
African government departments participating in the joint commission is to
promote economic and social development between South Africa and Swaziland,
focusing on the jointly identified fields of health, science and
technology, trade and investment, education, arts and culture, migration,
agriculture, security and multilateral co-operation. I thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon Deputy President
for answering my question. May I ask what the involvement of the KwaZulu-
Natal legislature is in this joint bilateral commission that was
established, and in terms of what legislation that joint bilateral was
established, if not in terms of the standard binational commission to which
I referred?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Lees, I’m really not aware that the legislature
in KwaZulu-Natal is in any way involved in this binational commission; as I
said, it is at ministerial level, so I wouldn’t be able to shed any light
on the involvement of the KwaZulu-Natal legislature. Thank you.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, I would just like to
know: Did we benefit from this bilateral since 1994? And I noticed that you
didn’t mention anything about global warming. We do have an agreement with
Swaziland as well. Thank you, sir.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon member, one of the departments that
is involved is Water and Environmental Affairs, but  in the fields that
were jointly identified, obviously within the SADC region, there is co-
ordination with regard to our positions on  climate change - not so much
global warming - particularly now in preparation for the impending
Copenhagen Conference. There are exchanges at that level. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All right, I see your hand, hon member; I am
just looking for other people.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, the relationship with
Swaziland has always been a good one; however, there is a concern about
democracy and I was wondering about the mandate. The mandate you said was
to promote economic and social development. In that bilateral commission,
is there any mandate at all to promote democracy in Swaziland?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Which binational are you now talking about, Mr
Lees? I just want to be clear because the Deputy President said he is not
aware of the binational between KwaZulu-Natal and Swaziland. Which one are
you talking about?

Mr R A LEES: Mr Chairperson, I am referring to the joint bilateral
commission, which the Deputy mentioned, the ministerial one.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, the relations between sovereign
countries are governed by principles of the recognition of each country’s
sovereignty and the principle of noninterference in the domestic affairs of
any country.  The question that you are raising, therefore, which I am
quite glad to respond to, is actually not a follow-up question in that it
relates to the system of governance of Swaziland.

Development in Swaziland can only be influenced by the fact that we are
neighbours and the fact that we have relations, that we have people-to-
people relations and contact, that our people are able to move freely
between the two countries and that over time, or in the fullness of time,
if the citizens of Swaziland so desire they will no doubt find a way of
crafting their constitution in a manner that permits the kind of democracy
that we subscribe to.

At the moment it is a constitutional monarchy, and that is what we live
with.  Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, please do not rule me out of order. I just want
to say that Swaziland has a very special place in my life, as I spent my
honeymoon there many years ago. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It will be good if you go back. Go spend
another honeymoon there! [Laughter.]

        Involvement of traditional leaders in drafting of legislation

9.    Prince M M M Zulu (IFP) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether our democratic dispensation provides traditional leaders
           with sufficient powers or adequate opportunity to be involved in
           the drafting of  legislation;  if  so,  what  are  the  relevant
           details; if not,
      (2)   whether any steps will be taken to enhance  the  involvement  of
           traditional leaders in  our  democracy;  if  not,  what  is  the
           position in this regard; if so, what steps;


      (3)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         CO232E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, His Majesty, Prince M M M Zulu, I
believe our democratic dispensation does provide traditional leaders with
sufficient powers and opportunities to be involved in the drafting of
legislation.

Traditional leaders, like any other citizens of South Africa, can draft
legislation and request a Member of Parliament to table it as a Private
Member’s Bill. Alternatively, a traditional leader can request the National
House of Traditional Leaders or a provincial house to table a Bill for the
relevant Minister or MEC to process.

The Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act goes further than
this and makes it obligatory for any Bill that pertains to customary law or
customs of traditional communities to be referred by the Secretary to
Parliament to the National House of Traditional Leaders for comment. Thus,
Parliament cannot pass a Bill dealing with customary law or traditional
communities without the National House of Traditional Leaders having had
the opportunity to make an input into the Bill.

I firmly believe that traditional leaders have been given an enhanced role
in our democracy. As far as the law is concerned, traditional leaders have
ex officio representation on municipal councils. They relate to provincial
legislatures through provincial houses of traditional leaders and to the
national government through the National House of Traditional Leaders. In
addition, traditional leaders are consulted regularly by national,
provincial and local government on a number of pertinent issues.

We are endeavouring to increase the capacity of traditional leaders through
the National Programme of Support for the Institution of Traditional
Leadership that was introduced in 2007. The roll-out of the capacity-
building programme will commence before the end of this year and will
continue throughout 2010. I thank you.

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo wakuleNdlu, Phini likaMongameli wezwe,
angikwazi ukukusho lokhu, ngikusho ngenxa yokungabi nalo ulwazi lokuthi
kuhamba kanjani. Ngiyakubonga okushiwo yiPhini likaMongameli, njengendoda
eyafundiswa ngogogo ukuhlonipha, kufuneka ngihlale ngikuhlonipha lokho.

Kodwa kuyiqiniso elimsulwa elingephikiswe phambi kukaNkulunkulu ukuthi
yonke imithetho eshaywayo eqondene namaKhosi, ishaywa yithina osopolitiki.
Akuwona amaKhosi okuhlalwa nawo phansi kuxoxiswane ukuthi kungasetshenzwa
kanjani ndawonye. Ngisho ngoba nginolwazi lokuthi kuyenzeka. Kumanje
imithetho ekhona ethinta ubukhosi, amakhosi akhulume ngezwi elilodwa onke.
Kodwa Phini likaMongameli angiboni ukuthi thina njengosombusazwe sicishe
sifike lapho amakhosi acabanga afike khona.

USIHLALO WOMKHANDLU KAZWELONKE WEZIFUNDAZWE: Nginethemba lokuthi uMntwana
ubebeka umbono nje, ubengabuzi umbuzo wokulandelela odabeni. Kodwa ke
ukuchaza kancane njengoSihlalo Womkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe. Inqubo
iyasho ukuthi omunye nomunye umthethosivivinywa oza kuleNdlu kufanele
siwuthumele eziNdlini zamakhosi zonke, zezifundazwe kanye nale enkulu
kazwelonke bakwazi ukuthi bahlabahlabe nabo, bese bebuyisela kithina
sicubungule lokhu abakuhlabile, sithathe lokhu esikuthathayo, lokho nina
eningakuthathi ningamakomidi ningakuthathi. Ihamba kanjalo inqubo. Kufuneka-
ke uma ngabe asiyilandeli, siyilandelisise impela. Bengithi angikuchaze
lokho, ngoba imigomo yethu isho njalo. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Hon Chairperson and hon Deputy President of the
country, I cannot say this. Hence, I am only saying this because there
seems to be a lack of knowledge on how this should be done. I appreciate
what has been said by the Deputy President, since as a man who was taught
respect by my grandmothers, I should always respect that.

But the simple truth is that it cannot be disputed before God that all
these Bills that are being passed with regard to the chiefs are passed by
us as politicians. The chiefs themselves are included in the discussions on
how we can work together. I am saying this because I know that it is
happening. With regard to the current legislation pertaining to
chieftainship, all the chiefs spoke with one voice. But, hon Deputy
President, I don’t think that as politicians we come close to the chiefs’
level of thinking.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I trust that the hon Prince was just making a
statement, and not asking a follow-up question. I would just like to
clarify a few things as the Chairperson of the NCOP.

The procedure states that each Bill that is brought to this House should be
forwarded to all the Houses of Traditional Leaders, and then back to the
NCOP so that they can go through it and make recommendations. It is then
brought back to us for further deliberation on their recommendations. We
then adopt whatever we need to adopt and the committee rejects whatever
they want to reject. That is the procedure. If we are not following it, we
need to follow it to the letter. I thought I should clarify this because
our policies state that. Thank you.]

 Means to minimise state expenditure relating to geographic distance between
                    location of Executive and Parliament

10.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:
      Whether there is any consideration by the government to move
      Parliament outside the Western Cape or finding means to minimise state
      expenditure relating to the geographic distance between the location
      of the Executive in Pretoria and Parliament in the Western Cape; if
      not, what measures is the government putting in place to minimise
      expenditure in respect of (a)(i) air and (ii) ground travel costs, (b)
      accommodation and/or (c) housing costs; if so, (aa) what is the
      process thus far and (bb) what are the considerations?
      CO233E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon Ntwanambi and hon members, as hon
members should know, a task team has been established by Cabinet,
comprising Ministers Gordhan, Chabane and Baloyi, to investigate and
identify areas where wastage and inefficient spending by government can be
reduced and to present these recommendations to Cabinet. This task team has
very difficult terms of reference because it must propose cost-cutting
measures or savings that will not impact negatively on the economy’s
ability to grow and create jobs or on service delivery.

The main considerations for this cost-cutting exercise are: One,
reprioritising; two, reducing wastage and inefficiency; three, eliminating
corruption; and four, getting more value for each public rand spent. The
task team has submitted a preliminary report to Cabinet but their work is
continuing.

In general, unnecessary extras have been reduced. Specific actions and
policies related to the items identified by the hon member, namely, air and
ground travel, accommodation, housing, etc, will be identified in the
context of this entire exercise. We are, for example, eliminating
unnecessary catering; reducing official delegations to the bare minimum
required; travel to Cape Town, except for top officials, and to the rest of
South Africa is in economy class; and, where possible, officials seek
accommodation in reasonably priced hotels.

Going forward, the task team has identified other longer-term saving
possibilities, for example, revising the Ministerial handbook and other
possibly wasteful and low-impact policies; and reprioritising expenditure
to programmes that yield greater benefits.

The task team will continue to scrutinise departmental budgets with the aim
of identifying and eliminating wastage, leakages and corruption, including
the type of corruption that makes government pay more than they should for
goods and services. To effect this, an interdepartmental working group has
been established to strengthen compliance with the Public Finance
Management Act, PFMA, as well as preventing fraud and corruption in the
procurement process. There will be no sacred cows. If we need to look at
the location of Parliament, we will certainly look at that as well. I thank
you.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Chairperson, I would like to know if the hon Deputy
President would agree with me, firstly, that Gauteng is the neighbour to
almost seven provinces; secondly, that if Parliament were to be relocated
to Gauteng there would be a reduction in wastage that would lead to cost-
cutting; and thirdly, the Houses of Parliament would be much closer to that
of the executive and, as a result, there would be enormous savings of
resources to the fiscus for delivery.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I’m not too sure whether the question has got
anything to do with Parliament moving to Gauteng. I think you’ve been
taking a very big chance. [Laughter.] Deputy President, I don’t think
that’s a follow-up question, but my general thinking is that I should not
deprive the executive of an opportunity to answer if they wish to do so.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, it really sounds like a lobby for
Gauteng. [Laughter.] Thank you.

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, Deputy President, I would just like to ask the Deputy
President whether the scope of the task team which has the task of rooting
out wasteful and inefficient expenditure will extend to the R3,6 million
spent per year by the government on security for the ANC Youth League
president, and the R50 million spent so far this year on flashy cars for
Ministers.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am also not too sure whether or not that
really is a follow-up question, Mr Harris. The general question is about
the task team investigating wasteful expenditure. I don’t know why you
should get into the specifics.

Mr T HARRIS: I’m asking about the specific scope of the task team’s work.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, as I said, there will be no sacred cows.
The intention, the terms of reference, is that they should look at the
whole range of wastage and leakages arising from procurement matters right
through to the provisions of the Ministerial handbook with regard to
benefits of public office bearers. So it will cover the whole spectrum.
Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, forgive me if you have
already answered this question, but we are talking about current
expenditure. Does the mandate of this commission – I think you called it a
commission, forgive me if I’ve got that wrong too – include the capital
costs of a possible relocation to a province like KwaZulu-Natal, which
would probably be the best one? [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, that’s not a follow-up question. Is there
any other follow-up question?

Mr Z MLENZANA: Chairperson, my follow-up question is whether or not the
task team would consider the constitutional imperatives of the separation
of powers of the executive, the judiciary and the legislature. Also, will
the history and/or heritage be considered when dealing with this matter?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Which matter specifically? I didn’t get the specifics
of the question. I don’t know whether it relates to the location of
Parliament or not.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are you repeating the question about the
location of Parliament again? But I have ruled that out. If you are
referring to that, I’m ruling that out. Can we have the last follow-up
question on this matter none? We proceed to Question 11, put by hon
Ntwanambi to the Deputy President.

  Reconsideration of number of members of NCOP and provincial legislatures

11.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether  the  government  or  any  structure  of  government  is
           currently  holding  discussions  to  reconsider  the  number  of
           members of the National  Council  of  Provinces,  NCOP,  or  any
           provincial legislature with the possibility of increasing  them;
           if so, what are the relevant details; if not
      (2)   whether, in light of the renewed emphasis on enhancing
           governance in the provinces, particularly at the local
           government level, the government will consider  proposals to
           enhance the role and number of members of the NCOP and/or
           provincial legislatures; if not, why not, if so,  what are the
           relevant details?                                  CO234E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson and hon members, there is no discussion
by government to reconsider the number of members of the NCOP or any
provincial legislature with a view to increasing the number of members. A
discussion of that kind will have to involve various institutions of state
beyond government and will also have to involve the broader society.
Parliament in general and the NCOP in particular will have to play a
leading role in such a discussion.

Government is currently finalising a policy review of provincial and local
government. While Cabinet has not yet received a formal report on this
work, the review is expected to reflect on key governance lessons of the
past 15 years as they relate to the role and performance of provincial and
local government and the implications of these lessons.

It is quite possible that issues related to the role and size of provincial
legislatures may emerge from the review that may indeed have an impact on
the NCOP. However, this policy review will need to be discussed thoroughly
by Parliament itself. I thank you.

    Position regarding government officials and/or public servants having
                companies building government-provided houses

12.   Ms M C Dikgale (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the  government  has  information  regarding  government
           officials and/or public servants who  have  companies  that  are
           currently building government-provided houses  for  communities;
           if so,

      (2)   whether those government officials and/or public  servants  were
           all authorised by the government to build the  houses;  if  not,
           what is the position in this regard; if so, how  many  of  those
           government officials and/or public servants are employed in  the
           national  and  provincial  departments  responsible  for   Human
           Settlements;

      (3)   whether he will consider requesting the relevant Members of the
           Executive Councils, MECs, or the Minister to launch an
           investigation into the matter and forward a report to the NCOP;
           if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             CO235E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon M C Dikgale and hon members,
evidence continues to emerge implicating officials who illegally benefit
from the government’s housing programme. In the main, two forms of
illegality have been detected:

Firstly, we have officials who are benefiting from procurement or tender
processes. These officials either fail to declare their interests in
companies bidding for government work or they, in fact, influence the
outcomes of procurement processes by favouring companies in which they have
a direct interest or companies that benefit their family or friends.

There are also reported instances of moonlighting, which is illegal if
permission to do remunerative work outside of government has not been
requested and granted by the relevant accounting officer.

The second category of illegality manifests itself when government
officials illegally take ownership of government houses meant for the
underprivileged. Recent statistics provided by the Special Investigations
Unit, SIU, in the Department of Human Settlements shows that more than 800
government employees who have illegally benefited from the provision of
government houses have been successfully prosecuted, leading to the
recovery of approximately R20 million.

Close to a thousand cases are currently going through disciplinary
processes. At local government level, about 123 municipal employees have
been successfully prosecuted, leading to the recovery of more than
R3 million.

This demonstrates that there are hundreds of public officials who illegally
benefit from the housing programme.

The Department of Human Settlements currently has additional evidence on
the provision of government houses that requires further investigation.
Thus it has launched a national housing audit to examine, review and
analyse the chronic problems in the delivery of houses. Included in what
the audit must achieve is the facilitation of criminal action; the
institution of civil action; and the naming and shaming of people, both
inside and outside government, who are illegally benefiting from the
provision of government houses.

More importantly, this initiative will help government to uncover the
extent to which companies owned by government officials and employees have
illegally benefited from the provision of government houses.

Our position is very clear: corruption, irrespective of who commits it,
will not be tolerated. We want to reiterate that nobody will be spared if
found guilty of an offence that necessitates instituting criminal or civil
action. I thank you.
Mr S H PLAATJIE: Chairperson, I want to ask the Deputy President whether
there are any national norms and standards that prohibit public servants
who have companies from tendering in government projects. If so, what are
the consequences for deviation?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I missed the last part of the question.
Could the hon member please restate it?

Mr S H PLAATJIE: The last part of the question deals with the consequences
for deviation. If there are norms and standards that prohibit public
servants who have companies from tendering in government projects, what are
the consequences for those public servants who do not abide by such norms
and standards?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, at the moment there is no legislation
which debars public servants from participating in the tender process,
other than the Provincial Finance Management Act. At local government
level, the Municipal Finance Management Act directs municipalities to craft
regulations that would debar councillors and their spouses from tendering
or conducting any form of business or trade with that particular
municipality.

Unfortunately, this is one of the occasions where a good intention has not
been actualised because the mechanism to follow through on it is not in
place. Many of the municipalities have not actually come up with such
regulations.
Of course, in practice, nothing stops councillors from one municipality who
have companies from directing their own companies to tender for contracts
with another municipality in another province. These are reciprocated, as
it were. It is these insidious activities that the review would also look
at, to see how we can ensure that we stamp out this practice of insider
trading, because that is essentially what it is.

It is of course, by law, an offence to tamper with tender processes. If it
is found that an official who stands to benefit, or whose relatives stand
to benefit, tampered with tender processes, charges can be preferred
against such a person and, once convicted, their assets can be impounded.
So those would be the consequences.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Chairperson, I refer to a communiqué from the Minister for
the Public Service and Administration which states that they are currently
looking into having spouses of public officials declaring their assets as
well. Is this process still ongoing or is there an outcome already?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, is the relevant Minister not maybe
better placed to answer that question? On the other hand, hon Deputy
President, if you are prepared to answer the question, please do go ahead.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, at the moment I am not in a position to
give a correct reply to that question.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                           UNPARLIAMENTARY REMARK

                                  (Ruling)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Just before we start our debate, I
would like to make a ruling on a matter that I did promise I would look at.
Hon members, I would like to make a ruling on a point of order raised by
hon Watson against a statement alleged to have been made by hon Ntwanambi
during our plenary on Thursday, 29 October 2009.

The hon member raised a point of order as to whether it was parliamentary
for a member to stand at the podium and accuse “the Premier of our
province”, meaning the Premier of the Western Cape, who is an hon member,
of being a racist.

I indicated that I would study the Hansard records and make a ruling. In
perusing the Hansard records, I did not come across a statement where
reference was made to the effect that the hon Premier was a racist.
However, I came across the following statement – this is what Ms Ntwanambi
said:
  She has really planted racism in our country.

Even though robust debates are encouraged in the House, however, in keeping
with the decorum of the House, which requires us to conduct ourselves in a
manner befitting of the hon office we hold as members of Parliament, I
would like to make a ruling that the said statement should not be
encouraged. Therefore, I rule that the hon member withdraw the statement.
Hon Ntwanambi?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, Chair. I withdraw it.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Hon members, we should start with the debate on the next Order. The
Minister has not arrived yet. I shall ask the direction of the House. I
think we could continue with the second speaker, that is, the chair of the
committee, if you agree. Are we agreed? Then the Minister can, when he
comes, take the platform. That is merely to save time. I don’t know how
long it will take the Minister to come to the House. Hon Bloem?

Mr D V BLOEM: I don’t have a problem, Chairperson, but is it not proper for
the Minister to introduce the said debate, and then the members follow on
after that? I am not against the ruling, but I am asking whether it is not
proper procedure for that to happen?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It is proper. That is why I am asking the
House to give me permission as the Chair. If you say don’t do it, let’s
stop and break for five minutes, I will do it.

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chair ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: By the way, the Minister is in the NA, dealing
with another matter. That is why I am asking for this permission.

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chair, I would like us to break for five minutes and wait
for the Minister, then we can continue. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are we agreed? If you are not agreeing, I am
going to make a ruling. But I wanted to give you a chance.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, no, let’s proceed with the debate, seeing that
the Minister is busy in the other House. Let us proceed with debate.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: OK, let’s break for five minutes and come
back.

Business suspended at 16:12 and resumed at 16:18.

                 NATIONAL HOUSE OF TRADITIONAL LEADERS BILL
       TRADITIONAL LEADERSHIP AND GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK AMENDMENT BILL

               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, you are aware that we have taken
a five-minute break in terms of my decision to allow the Minister time to
arrive.

Minister, may I request in future that your department lets us know when
you will be late so that we can make arrangements. They let us know just
now. We did not receive prior notice that the Minister was in the other
House.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, before we enter into a
discussion, I should like to apologise for the miscommunication and say
that we thought that the message had been conveyed.

We will then clean house and, at the same time, we must take it as a
valuable lesson that we have learned so that in future we are able to
ensure that these activities don’t happen.

We are dealing with the subject matter around co-operative governance, as
well as developing a White Paper on co-operative governance in South
Africa.
Now, we are very excited, Mr Chairperson, and also members of the House,
that we are offered this opportunity of coming back home. It is always nice
when you come back home, because it shows that when we left this home, we
didn’t leave badly. When we left this home, we were given blessings that
said, “Go and represent us with aplomb, as the product of this august
House”.

This institution has played a pivotal role in shaping me, as a person, in
understanding the national body politic in South Africa. We will always
feel very good about it; and I must say that it was taken as a given that
when you are in the NCOP, people don’t go to be part of the executive,
because you are in the House that represents the interests of provinces. In
September last year that myth was debunked, when a person went from here
straight to the executive.

The lessons that must be learned here are the lessons that say nothing is
impossible in life. That is the first lesson. The second lesson is the
lesson that says the sky is the limit, if people work hard. The third
lesson that I would think has to be learned is that the leadership is
watching us with hawk eyes, as if we are here in a theatre, and will always
deploy those who they think are befitting of being given that
responsibility.

As cadres here, we think that we must be able to emulate that. We must be
able to ensure that that is the norm going forward, that it happens and
doesn’t just end at a certain time. Having said that, as a way of repaying
this important House – this is what is called payback time – we will spare
no effort or energy.

We will look at the situation where the section 76 Bills must be introduced
in the NCOP. That will give you time to ensure that you can consult
properly without pressure, so that when there are issues, they are able to
go to the other House, once they have been deliberated and discussed here.

We are solemnly pledging that we will make sure that we engage the powers
that be, the leadership, to ensure that that approach is followed as a norm
and a practice, going forward. We hope that we will be able to achieve that
in our lifetime.

Hon members, let’s come back to the subject matter of the day, which is the
issue around the institution of traditional leadership. We believe, from
our side, that this institution played a pivotal role in the lives of our
people. It forms the bedrock of our young democracy. It is an institution
that, in particular, services the rural communities.

In that respect, we believe that the institution was at the forefront in
the wars of dispossession and became highly instrumental in liberating our
people, led by the oldest revolutionary organisation, not only in South
Africa or Africa but the world over.

It became a spear that pierced through a colonialism of a special type and
was able to ensure that it dealt a serious blow to the apartheid system and
its obnoxious laws. It became a shield that protected the working class and
the peasants - Africans, in particular, and blacks in general.

Therefore, traditional leaders were and still are an important motivating
force in our struggle. It is in this context that the democratic
breakthrough of 1994 came. It came as a result of the contribution that was
made by the institution of traditional leadership.

It is not an accident of history that we have included Chapter 12 of the
Constitution, to ensure that we recognise and appreciate the valuable
contribution that was made by our forbears, the likes of Bhambatha, John
Langalibalele Dube - uMafukuzela, Sekhukhune, Hintsa, Ndlambe, Moshoeshoe,
Shaka-ka-Senzangakhona, Mkabayi-ka-Jama, Sukude Mkhondwane, to mention a
few.

I must share with you that this process was driven by a number of
objectives – amongst other things, to pay tribute to the role played by the
institution in the formation of the people’s movement, leading the fight
for the liberation of the oppressed masses of our people and to acknowledge
and accept that the institution has an important role to play in the new
dispensation, especially in the development of rural communities. We dare
not fail our forbears.

Today we deemed it fit that we converge here to debate these two Bills as a
further arsenal against those who don’t accept diversity as a strength in
South Africa and those who want to impose their values as the only values
in South Africa.

These Bills are aimed at reversing the apartheid colonialism and its
legacy. We are saying that South Africa will never be the same again. Our
people’s movement firmly believes that the institution is critical in
reshaping and consolidating our democracy. We agree that South Africa is
our country with one President and one system that we are aiming to ensure
that it embraces the traditional and modern systems.

We are saying that the two systems must be able to exist side by side,
without any contradictions, without any problems.

South Africa has resolved to put a constitutional and legal framework in
place to ensure that the institution of traditional leadership functions in
a manner that embraces democracy and contributes to the entrenchment of a
democratic culture, thus enhancing their status and their standing amongst
South Africans.

The transformation agenda, though, still has a long way to go. We still
have to do a lot to ensure that the institution is taken forward and is
able to move forward. 

The Bills that we are presenting here are a stop-gap measure. They are a
temporary arrangement. Next year we will be making a comprehensive
assessment of the laws. We will be presenting Bills that we think must be
radical and revolutionary. We must ensure that these Bills will endure and
be sustainable.

That process is being led by the Deputy Minister for Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs, Yunus Carrim.

We believe that the NCOP must be able to engage in this process at a
formative stage. It must be able to ensure that this process is at the
cutting edge of the rural communities. In either way, it is development.

We want to see a situation where the voice of traditional communities is
heard in policy development, the passing of laws and their implementation,
planning for the country, budgeting, human resource development and service
delivery to ensure that rural communities take charge of their own destiny,
as people of this country.

We believe that it is in our interest, as the Department for Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs, to ensure that councillors and
traditional leaders are able to work together harmoniously, because they
are serving the same constituency. There is no reason for them to have
conflicts, and we believe that we will be able to ensure that we deal with
this issue in our lifetime.

I must also hasten to add that, going forward, we believe that we will be
interacting with all departments, such as the Department of Rural
Development and Land Reform, where we must be able to ensure that land
allocations happen in earnest. We must also be interacting with the
Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries around food security, as
well as the Department of Health, where we must make sure that, as South
Africans, we accept that there is a platform for these matters, that our
people ...

... bayakwazi ukushaya amathambo, bahlole impinge. [... can assess the
situation, and get to the problem.]

Those values must be accepted. We must ensure that we don’t undermine or
look down upon them, as issues of culture, religion and the importance of
development.

I must hasten to add that the other part of the Bill is the Bill that deals
with the issues of the recognition of the institution of traditional
leadership.
As we go forward with the commission’s term, that is the Nhlapo Commission
- its term ended at the end of October. We have extended its lifespan until
the end of January -. by February next year, we must have another
commission, a commission that is going to be driven at a provincial level
and co-ordinated at a national level.

I don’t understand why, in the first place, this institution allowed a
situation where the Nhlapo Commission marginalised the role of provinces. I
don’t understand this, because traditional affairs are a concurrent
function. You could not allow a commission that investigates to look into
disputes that involved provinces. I don’t understand how the institution of
the NCOP passed a Bill that excluded it.

To me, that structure was a structure that violated the Constitution, where
you find that people who were saying, “Let’s participate in this issue,”
were not involved and were undermined. I spoke to the former MEC of KwaZulu-
Natal, MEC Mabuyakhulu, who requested to do the work of the province
because they understand the province. They have anthropologists. They have
researchers. They can do the work for Prof Nhlapo and give it to him to
decide. The Nhlapo Commission refused and did not allow them to be involved
in this process. It still baffles me. I think research needs to be
undertaken, and it means, going forward, the NCOP must be vigilant in
looking after the interests of provinces, in ensuring that this mistake is
never repeated, in ensuring that things don’t happen in this way.

From our point of view, we believe that the new commission is going to have
fewer commissioners at a national level who are going to actually be co-
ordinating and ensuring that they supervise the work that is done in
provinces. We believe that premiers and MECs at a provincial level must
prepare themselves to ensure that they appoint provincial committees that
are going to be running these things. We are going to have a situation
where, in all nine provinces, at the same time, the issues are being looked
at, from the principal traditional leader, senior traditional leader, to
headmen and women, in order to take this process forward.

From our point of view, we believe that the process is going to be speeded
up, because we want to conclude the issues of the recognition of
traditional leaders within a period of four years. What the Nhlapo
Commission has failed to do in five years, as they dealt with only 12
cases, we want to get done in the shortest possible time, because of the
provinces.

We want to thank the National House of Traditional Leaders, led by hon
Kutama, with its provincial houses and the organs of civil society, the
public, in general, for their contribution to the two Bills. We also want
to extend our appreciation to the chairperson of the select committee and
the team for his good leadership, as well as the leadership of the NCOP for
their support at all times.

As much as we want to thank the select committee members for their incisive
input and dedication to the task at hand, we say that you can only grow. We
also want to thank the MECs from provinces. I can see that Madam Dube is
with us. We are saying thank you, also to the delegates of the provinces
for their contribution.

I also want to thank the department, under the leadership of Mr Elroy
Africa, for their hard work and availability at times when required. I also
thank the Deputy Minister for the sterling work that he has done in
processing the Bill to its conclusion.

I am saying to him in his absence that this is his first achievement on the
tasks given to him. We hope that he is going to take this lesson to be able
to emulate the process going forward.

I also want to thank my family for their solid support and say to them that
they are the bedrock of my work. Without them, we wouldn’t have been able
to achieve what we have achieved. Thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

USIHLALO WOMKHANDLU KAZWELONKE WEZIFUNDAZWE: Ngqongqoshe, lento oyikhulume
la ibalulekile. Bangishiyile kuhlu lwezikhulumi, kodwa bayazi ukuthi
ngibuya ebukhosini. [Uhleko.] Bekufanele ngikhulume kulolu daba ngoba
ngikuzwa kahle ukuthi uthini. Angazi noma laba abanye bayakuzwa kahle yini.
Kodwa-ke, ngoba bangishiyile sengiyokhuluma ngelinye ilanga. Kulungile,
kodwa ngiyayithanda lento oyikhulumile. Ngiyabonga kakhulu. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Minister, what you said here is very
important. They excluded me from the speaker’s list and yet they know that
I am royalty. [Laughter.] I was supposed to speak on this issue because I
fully understand what you are saying. I am not sure whether other people
fully understand you. But, because they excluded me from the speaker’s
list, I will speak some other day. It’s right, but I like what you said.
Thank you very much.]

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson of the House, hon Minister, the MEC, provincial
delegates, members of the committee and members, let me take a brief moment
to remind you that it was in 1936 that the land legislation displaced
African kingdoms, in particular, and blacks in general. It was intended to
suppress what colonialists called “rebellious elements” of traditional
leadership.

It went on through various tribal wars of resistance, and as the Minister
has stated, in terms of the Bambatha Rebellion, towards the formation of
the ANC, where these traditional leaders, together with religious and the
intellectual leaders of the time, sat down together and agreed that there
was a need for an organisation that would unite the Africans, in
particular, and blacks in general, against colonialism. This was as a
result of the formation of the Union of South Africa on 31 May 1910.

Therefore, what we are bringing here is as a consequence of the history of
decades and centuries of the struggle by the African people to restore
their dignity. When the ANC was unbanned or even before it was unbanned, in
1986, the legal section of the ANC wrote constitutional guidelines that
were geared to defining the role of traditional leadership during the time
of taking over power. You would remember that ever since the Union of South
Africa was formed the traditional leadership was nowhere. They did not have
access to water, roads, clinics or anything, as a result of disputes. They
could not even plough because they were given infertile land. In fact, they
were chased onto infertile land. Therefore the House will see the passion
and the need of this Parliament to restore the dignity of the traditional
leadership. [Applause.]

The House will further note that after writing those constitutional
guidelines in 1986, with the Harare Declaration it put more pressure on
apartheid leaders to go to the negotiations. The Codesa talks did not
escape having to talk about the role of traditional leadership and its
definition and status; hence, after the Codesa agreement, when the interim
Constitution was written in 1993, there was a clause of recognition of the
traditional leadership for the first time after 100 years of suppression.
What apartheid did in 1948 and the subsequent years was to craft laws that
would control and regulate the traditional leadership. The traditional
leadership did not have powers other than power with regard to
circumcision. For all these other powers, they had to ask permission from
the magistrates if they wanted to do something on their own indigenous
land.

We are the generation that is taking the bull by the horns because we
cannot just say we are free for nothing. We will be free when the
traditional system of governance is also free and entrenched in our
Constitution and democracy, so that the traditional leadership really play
their role as they used to before the colonialist and apartheid government
took over power in the country. [Applause.]

It is important that, as we are taking these matters further with the Bill,
as the Minister has said, we do not tackle something that is new or has a
new agenda. We are correcting legacies of inequality, and we are also
restoring dignity.

I know elsewhere we still have a task and, as the Minister said, we are
still going to engage. That is why we will call upon traditional leadership
not to be reactive. They must also be proactive and write about what they
think could be alternative legislation that can restore their dignity, and
not just respond to what Parliament suggests for them.

I want to appeal to the House that as we engage within the scope of four
years, we also have to engage with what they think is an alternative that
will integrate, not what would become an antithesis, but what will become a
synthesis of the ideas of  Parliament and the ideas of the House of
Traditional Leaders.

I think in that way we will be able to restore the traditional leadership
system, and they will in a way play their constitutional role. Remember,
they are the umbilical cord of the traditional community and, therefore,
there is no way in which they live parallel to the people.

If the needs of the people can be entrenched in the needs of the
traditional leadership, then development will be simple because there will
be no quarrel if a road has to pass through somewhere. There will be no
quarrel if a pipe has to pass through somewhere or when the municipality
extends sites for settlement because this entire process will be done in a
systematic and integrated manner.

I think we would have a vision wherein the same Integrated Development Plan
that we are talking about would be an integrated development plan that has
a blueprint of the ideas of the traditional leadership.

The only way is by passing this Bill, and no other way. Therefore, the
House should take this Bill seriously. The process of engagement is really
involving us in the sense that, as members of the committee, we have learnt
what the needs of traditional leadership are; equally, traditional
leadership has learnt about the legal implications of certain things, and
they had to accept the views of Parliament.

We want to congratulate the two Houses, the provincial House and the
national House, on the manner in which they engaged in the process leading
up to the arrival of these two Bills. We need to congratulate them on that.


The process indeed started on 25 August, when the committee was briefed.
After being briefed on the second Bill, the department came with clarities
and then permanent delegates of provinces were allowed to go back to their
provinces to allow their provincial legislature to run, to hit the ground
running in terms of public hearings.

This is the process of consultation. The Bill was widely consulted upon.
Consultation does not necessarily mean agreement; consultation means
engaging on views and, therefore, what is the consensus would be inscribed
into the Bill that will become an Act, which the other House will be
passing. We had a meeting again that was in terms of the Mandating
Procedures of Provinces Act.

In that forum that is where, indeed, we have seen how vibrant democracy is;
that’s where you would see how permanent delegates and their provinces are
serious about this aspect of the Bill. It does not necessarily mean that
they would just agree. There were worrying issues, but at the end of the
day permanent delegates of provinces had mandates in all nine provinces on
major aspects of the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Bill.

As we talk now, the aspects of the amendments that are in the Bill are all
agreed upon, as proposed amendments that will enhance the dignity of the
house. The object of the Bills, especially the National House of
Traditional Leaders Bill, is primarily really to restore the dignity of
traditional leadership as a custodian of African custom and heritage, to
transform its institutions so that they may be able to play their
democratic role in the country.

The other Bill, as a framework, seeks to put in place all the structures
that were absent to close the gaps and the inefficiencies that the current
legislation provides. I therefore move without question that you adopt
these Bills as progress in the House. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J M G BEKKER: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members of this House and
guests, our leader, hon Watty Watson, is unable to be with us today, but I
know that he is very passionate about the situation in respect of the
Ndebele kings in Mpumalanga.
Traditionally, the Ndebele nation has two kings: King Makhosonke of the
Manala and King Mayisha of the Ndzundza people. The Ndzundza are by far the
larger group in number and claim to have had a recognised king for
centuries, whilst the Manala king was only recognised some years ago.
However, the Nhlapo Commission has now given recognition to King Makhosonke
of the Manalas only, which means that in terms of this legislation before
us, they lose their kingship upon the death of their king:

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, can you use
your microphone? It is procedure, sir.

Mr J M G BEKKER: Thank you, Chair. This dilemma is, however, further
complicated by the fact that King Mayisha has meanwhile passed away and,
whilst a successor has been chosen by the family and crowned by the nation,
he will no longer be recognised by law.

Whilst the amendment before us extends the life of the commission, it does
not allow for matters decided upon by the previous commission to be
revisited. The only recourse for the Ndzundza people is, therefore, a court
of law, and that again presents problems of its own. Chairperson, we
therefore appeal to the Minister to revisit this matter most urgently
because people are now threatening that blood will flow if the problem is
not solved.

Chairperson, I come from the Southern Cape, where names like Outeniqua,
Kouga, Kammanassie, Kango, Baviaans, Gamka, Tsitsikamma, Touws, Gwaing and
Gouritz are daily reminders of a history that we can no longer suppress and
a heritage that is screaming for recognition.

It was at Aguada de Sáo Brás, the present Mossel Bay, where Bartholomew
Diaz landed in 1488. The country was not empty; the indigenous people,
probably from Gouriqua or Outeniqua tribes, fled from Diaz, refusing to
take any of the things he was trying to give them. At one stage, they were
defending their watering holes with stones; Diaz fired a crossbow and
killed one of them. It was at the same Mossel Bay where Vasco Da Gama
landed in December 1497. The festive mood during Da Gama’s visit is
expressed in one of the songs that is part of a musical, We shall declare
his praises, written by a group of young people from George. The name of
the song is December 2nd.

  December 2nd, oh what a day
  When Da Gama landed here in Mossel Bay
  The notes they play
  Some were high some low
  What a harmony they show


  The flutists played
  The bodies swayed
  And all of us were filled with joy
  The sounds were sweet
  We stamped our feet
  And all of us
  Just kept the beat


  We all look out for that perfect day
  When everyone on this earth will say
  Our cups are full
  Peace will be the rule
  Love and joy for all to share!

It was in our area that the last chief of the Outeniqua tribe, Kaptein
Dikkop, died in 1816. After the death of the great chief in 1816, nobody
replaced him as chief of Outeniqua. Their tribal identity had been finally
destroyed.

The municipality of Riversdal is now called Hessequa municipality. It was
so named after the tribe who once had their home from Baviaanskloof, now
Genadendal, all along the Kannakamkanna, Riviersonderend, up to the
Ladysmith area. The priests, called suris, came from this tribe.

The little town, Vleesbaai, was once called Angra dos Vaqueiros, Bay of
Cattlemen, by the Portuguese because of the thousands of head of cattle of
the Gouriqua on the nearby hills. It was indeed a “vleisbaai” where the
seafarers could buy or barter for meat.

The Attaqua tribe, who once lived in the Oudtshoorn area, specialised in
long-distance trade, as far as Delagoa Bay. The earliest national roads of
our country followed these routes.

Chairperson, it is clear that the heritage and history of the descendants,
now called “coloureds” or “bruinmense”, of these and other tribes are
deeply embedded and an indelible part of this country’s history. The
question now is how to accommodate them in the new legislation and how to
identify, if any, the genuine traditional leaders. For generations, there
were no tribal lifestyles, and how does one identify individuals as being
members of a specific tribe?

In the Southern Cape, there are many individuals who now claim to be
traditional leaders of specific tribes, while it is an open secret that
neither they nor their fathers or grandfathers were born in these specific
areas.

During a radio programme on Friday, 6 November, a certain king of the
Koranna was challenged by other individuals who rejected his claim and said
that they represented the true king of the Koranna. All three were adamant
that their king was the true king.

It will be an almost impossible task to revive tribal lifestyles and to
unravel the very complicated cobweb of claims to chieftainship. What we,
however, cannot ignore is that most of our brown people carry in them,
together with the genes of other nations, also the genes of the founding
nation of this country. That they are indigenous, no one can refute.

During the Cabinet meeting of 2004, it was agreed upon that government
would seriously look at the matter of first-nation status and historical
land rights for the descendants of our founding nation. Up till now, no
reports were produced. Thank you. The Western Cape supports the Bills.
[Applause.]

Ms N DUBE(KwaZulu-Natal): Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, KwaZulu-Natal supports the Traditional Leadership and
Governance Framework Amendment Bill and the National House of Traditional
Leaders Bill. However, the hon Minister has mentioned that our young
democracy continues to be the vanguard of change in the lives of our
people, in all the corners of our country.

We have wall-to-wall municipalities, which ensure that our people, wherever
they are, enjoy democracy and delivery of services. As one of the few
countries in the world to do so, we are recognising the institution of
traditional leadership within our Constitution as a key player in the lives
of the developmental people. We do not only recognise, but we talk, and we
walk the talk. The recognition and the respect that are accorded to the
institution of traditional leadership are such that all of us need to
ensure that, as a people, we do not abuse the systems at hand.

Our concern, Deputy Chairperson, on the Bill, as the work in progress, is a
the issue of principal traditional leadership might present some problems
in terms of the scenarios in KwaZulu-Natal. There have already been
elements and floodgates of opportunists who have claimed to be kings thanks
to the framework of traditional leadership in KwaZulu-Natal, which
recognises his majesty, the king, on the basis of the customary law in our
tradition.

We are also concerned about the issue of the acting king. The issue in our
culture is that the king is the king at the present time, and it is only
when the king is no more that a new king can be appointed, on the basis of
traditions, of culture and the custom of KwaZulu-Natal.

We also recognise that there might be differences in terms of the provinces
and in terms of the issues that prevail within our traditional leadership,
but we are saying that we need to ensure that issues of traditional
leadership, as the Minister was saying, really become central to the
development of our state.

The issue of flexibility in terms of the size of traditional councils is an
issue that could be assessed. However, we are saying that we should be
mindful of the fact that in provinces like KwaZulu-Natal, where we have 15
000 indunas, this, if it becomes an institution, might have a serious
bearing in terms of cost and affordability.

Looking at the partnership between the district and local municipalities
and traditional kingship and queenship councils, we are saying that there
is a need to review section 81 of the Local Government: Municipal
Structures Act, Mr Minister, to redefine this relationship in terms of co-
operative governance and in the spirit of co-operative governance. We
believe that the synergy and the partnership that the Minister was talking
about is something that we need to ensure will continue.

We have already, in our province, begun to work around this. We have the
synergistic partnership framework that is already in process, which we work
around, between the different district councils, as well as municipalities.


With regard to the amendment of the long-term title, we think this section
might open a floodgate to all other structures and traditional
institutions, with huge financial implications, as I have mentioned.
Currently we even have a challenge in terms of all the packages and all the
requirements that we are supposed to have, in terms of the public office
bearers Act for the amakhosi in the various Houses and in the various
districts. We therefore need to ensure that the activities, also, of
various structures do not cause conflict and are also clear, so as to avoid
any conflict. Otherwise, Deputy Chairperson, as we have said, we support
the two Bills. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, hon members of the House and the Minister, I
greet you all. This is a Bill that has been a long time in the making. We,
in Cope, are pleased that this Bill has finally reached the stage where we
are debating it.

The Bill is important for a number of reasons. We live in a constitutional
state and it is imperative, whenever a structure of the government is set
up, that it complies fully with the democratic rules and accountability.
That should be done. Likewise, our Constitution requires that a government
structure gives recognition to nonsexism, co-operative government between
the legislature and the House, nation-building, unity and peace among the
House and the traditional leaders and the community.

There is no question about enhancing traditional culture.

This Bill also satisfies another long-standing vacuum, namely giving
serious attention to the plight of rural people in our community.
The establishment of the House allows the participation of this House in
the international and national programmes, which are geared towards the
development of the rural communities.

It will also have the power to participate in the national and
international community to monitor, review and evaluate the government
programmes.

By thus focusing on the developmental needs of rural communities, the House
of Traditional Leaders can only play a significant role in attracting
development in the rural areas. In a world where cultural tourism is
booming, the House of Traditional Leaders can play a very important role in
boosting tourism in the communities there.

The code of conduct in schedule C compels those members of the House to
function in such a manner that they are faithful to the community - no
discrimination - and they must also be transparent.

In fact, the traditional leaders have always exercised authority in their
areas in the traditional manner. That does not mean that our constitutional
dispensation must not be allowed to hold sway.
This Bill requires that a member of the House, if he or she wants to do any
other business, must also be required to disclose any particular attention.

Finally, Chairperson, we are pleased that this attempt is made to address
the misalignment of insufficient resources and also the gaps relating to
House of the Traditional Leaders. We know that it will need a big budget
but at least the government is prepared to do this because they are
reshaping and also revamping the life of our community. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and members, strengthening
institutions of traditional leadership and building the capacity of
traditional leaders has been a key element in our effort over the years to
improve the South African governance system and the quality of life for
traditional communities.

Hon members, in the process a number of important lessons during the
previous term of government were learned. There have been significant
victories and a number of weaknesses that relate to intergovernmental co-
ordination, provincial and local spheres of government and the institution
of traditional leadership.

Based on the lessons of the last 15 years, in the electoral mandate of the
ruling party, the ANC, one of the priorities that has been identified for
this term includes improving the developmental capacity of the institution
of traditional leadership. Our mission is to facilitate co-operative
governance and support the institution of traditional leadership, in order
to achieve improved service delivery.
The institution of traditional leadership is central to our system of
governance in rural areas. Placing the institution of traditional
leadership at the centre of rural development should be our key objective
during this term. Furthermore, it is no accident that the vision of the
Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs is to build a
coherent and cohesive institution of traditional leadership that plays a
central role in rural development.

This optimism creates space and opportunities for the institution of
traditional leadership and our traditional communities to become a vibrant
and active part of this democracy. The National House of Traditional
Leaders Bill and the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework
Amendment Bill were submitted to the Select Committee on Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration and reporting to this
House.

In our committee deliberations, the proposed amendments to these Bills are
aimed at strengthening the role of traditional leaders, as well as
providing for support, recognition, new roles and responsibilities. Members
of this House have to ensure that there is maximum public participation and
consultation in the legislative processes. Provincial hearings were held,
led by the provincial legislatures, to ensure that critical stakeholders
were fully consulted.

Through these proposed amendments we believe the central role of
traditional leadership for rural development is now better appreciated,
together with the need to position the institution of traditional
leadership to partner with government to accelerate development. Building
the institution of traditional leadership, especially its developmental
role as part of our governance system, should be our key focus.

Traditional leaders have a fundamental role to play in rural development
and, as the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs, we will work closely with the National House of Traditional
Leaders to ensure that this role is fulfilled effectively in order to
facilitate a better life for all South Africans.

Hon Minister, we can only achieve the above if this mandate is fully
funded. We have just heard from KwaZulu-Natal that this seems to be an
unfunded mandate, and the department could not clarify this particular
issue. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T E CHAANE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, just by way of
further elaboration and to further amplify and demonstrate how clear and
consistent the ANC has always been on issues of traditional leadership, and
maybe to clear the confusion that might exist in others, I would like to
start my speech by quoting from a statement made by Nkosi Luthuli and
jointly issued by the ANC and the Natal Indian Congress in reaction to
Chief Luthuli’s dismissal by the National Party government from his
position as the democratically elected traditional leader of the Amakholwa
community of Mvoti Mission Reserve, Groutville, Stanger in November in
1952. I quote:

  I saw no real conflict in my dual leadership of my people ... as chief
  and political leader in Congress. I saw no cause to resign from either
  ... I do not wish to challenge my dismissal, but I would like to suggest
  that in the interests of the institution of chieftainship in these modern
  times of democracy, the government should define more precisely and make
  more widely known the status, functions and privileges of chiefs.


  My view has been, and still is, that a chief is primarily a servant of
  his people. He is the voice of his people ... Unlike a Native
  Commissioner, he is part and parcel of the tribe, and not a local agent
  of the government ... It is inconceivable how chiefs could effectively
  serve the wider and common interest of their own tribe without co-
  operating with other leaders of the people, both the natural leaders
  (chiefs) and leaders elected democratically by the people themselves.

Chairperson, we are proud to say that the introduction of the national
framework Act on traditional leadership, the Traditional Leadership and
Governance Framework Act of 2003, which was introduced in the past six
years, recognises and revives the place of traditional leadership
structures in the development of our communities in rural areas.

The Act provides traditional leaders with an opportunity to work together
with government at all levels, especially with the focus on local
government. The Act further ushered in the transformational agenda that is
in line with the Constitution in that women, youth and people with
disabilities must now play a major role in issues of traditional leadership
and community development, more than they have done before.

Chairperson and hon members, the ANC in its election manifesto made an
assertion that in its term of government, it will commit itself to a
comprehensive and clear rural development strategy to address land and
agrarian reform, improvement of the conditions of farm workers and farm
dwellers and to build the potential for sustainable rural livelihoods.

The ruling party acknowledges progress made in the past 15 years, but it
maintains that there are still people who continue to face the harshest
conditions of poverty, lack of access to land and basic services in rural
areas. Chairperson, it is against this background that we advocate for
these two Bills to be passed by this august House, in order to strengthen
the partnership between government and the institution of traditional
leadership to focus on rural development and fighting poverty, while
working together with the government towards a common goal.

This further strengthens the words of Nkosi Phathekile Holomisa, when he
said:


  Let it be necessary no more, in this era of modern democracy, for
  traditional leaders to ask for a definition of their status, functions
  and privileges. Let them continue to be servants of their people, their
  voice, alongside that of democratically elected leaders.


In his address to the national leaders in honour of the former President
Nelson Mandela, President Jacob Zuma called upon everyone to use the
expression that Madiba is fond of, which is, “Let bygones be bygones”. He
called upon traditional leaders to unite, referring to the previous regime
that caused divisions among traditional leaders.

Chairperson, it is through this legislative framework that, as Parliament,
we follow in the footsteps of the President. We speak his language and
contribute towards achieving the goals and targets that he has set for this
government. We are not in any way having doubts that the Bill would go a
long way towards unifying, smoothing and oiling the system of traditional
leaders to function as one of the best on the continent and in the world.
We should join with others within the machinery of government to stand as a
symbol of commitment in our continued responsibility of ensuring that we,
as Parliament, will never divert from the noble cause of social
transformation, within the institution of traditional leadership.

Chairperson, the President mentioned the importance of the institution of
traditional leaders in our system and its operation in many forms. This
comes after the proclamation of the Department of Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs.

The central national challenge facing our country in the traditional
leadership environment is the eradication of the legacy of colonialism and
apartheid that condemned the majority of our people to a material life of
misery. When we pass these Bills, we are saying that the custodians of our
culture, heritage, and identity shall no more be allowed to be eroded by
any form of law or human intention, as they used to be in the past.

Chairperson, as the ANC, we applaud the move and effort made to improve the
system of traditional leadership. The capacity of traditional leaders
should be strengthened with all due necessary staff and support. They
deserve to be able to carry out their duties and to function in a smooth
and welcoming environment. I am pleased to state that there were areas of
contention in the Bill, as has already been alluded to by the chairperson
of the committee, which sparked serious debates from provinces. At some
point, a compromise was reached that in the end was not anybody’s victory,
but it was the democratic process and procedures that prevailed at the end
of the day.

In conclusion, Chairperson, we should not forget that the institution of
traditional leaders is central to our system of governance in rural areas
and is a key to the realisation of government’s goal to achieve the set
targets on rural development.

We anticipate that the work of the commission on traditional leader
disputes and claims will be completed in the next five years, as promised
by the department. As Parliament, we will continue to monitor and conduct
oversight on this matter to ensure that there are no further delays in
resolving outstanding matters. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr S C SEKOATI(Limpopo): Madam Deputy Chairperson, Minister for Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Kgoshi Kutama representing
this house and colleagues, allow me to agree with the previous speaker,
particularly in terms of reiterating what our Isithwalandwe, Chief Albert
Luthuli, said on the occasion of his public address in 1952, just after his
dismissal as a chief, when he refused to relinquish his activities within
the ANC.

Without quoting, Deputy Chair, I would like to subscribe to that quotation
as previously quoted, and I would like to say that his words still ring
true to this day.

The recognition of traditional institutions by the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa bears testimony to the continued support and
recognition of the centrality of the traditional institution in modern-day
democracy. The establishment and strengthening of the traditional house is
yet another milestone in supporting and promoting traditional leadership in
its entirety, as envisaged in the 2003 White Paper on Traditional
Leadership and Governance and thus promoting co-operative governance
between the house, the nation, nation-building, unity and peace amongst the
houses and the traditional communities, as well as enhancing traditions and
culture within our communities.

We also believe that the two Bills have the capacity to strengthen the
traditional house and also create a platform for traditional leaders to
continue to actively participate in the advancement and development of
their communities, within the democratic dispensation.

We support the view that the national government must adopt measures to
support the national House to fulfil its functions through the provision of
infrastructure, finance and administrative systems. The support should also
resonate at all levels, from the national, provincial and local levels. We
further contend that the number of full-time members of the house should
correspond with the magnitude of the work of the house across the country.

We further wish to emphasise that the introduction of new legislation
should take into account the indigenous terminologies used within the
traditional environment and recognition of diverse cultures within the
provinces. As the Limpopo legislature, we have broadly consulted and
debated these important Bills, the National House of Traditional Leaders
Bill and the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment
Bill. The provincial legislature, through public hearings, consulted
broadly with the provincial house, the district and local houses, the
Congress of Traditional Leaders of South Africa, Contralesa, and other
departments responsible for traditional leadership. Our legislature
appreciates the co-operation and meaningful contribution made by our
traditional leaders in consideration of these Bills.

We also appreciate the support of the NCOP members, particularly from our
province and, in particular, the chairperson of the committee, hon Comrade
Matome Humphrey Mokgobi, for the sterling work done. The Limpopo province
is a predominantly rural province, which makes it the home of most of our
traditional leadership in the institution. In our five districts, there is
a strong presence of traditional leaders, with pending confirmation of
kingship status in the district of Sekhukhune, where we hope that within
the next few working months we should be able to find a conclusion to some
of the issues.

We also believe that the traditional leadership and its institutions have
been in the forefront of our struggles for liberation and anti-imperialism.
They have survived with distinction the divisive, corrupt tendencies of the
apartheid regime and contributed immensely to the defeat of this regime. It
is in view of this background that, as a province, we hereby fully support
the adoption of these two Bills. I thank you. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, namaLungu Omkhandlu
Weziphathimandla aqhamuka kwizifundazwe zezwe lethu esilakhele, namalunga
ahloniphekile akuleNdlu. Kuncane engingakusho ngoba inkulumo yakho
inokuthembisa okuthile, kokuthi mhlawumbe lezi zinhlanga zobukhosi noma
lobu bukhosi uzoke ububheke ngendlela okuyona yona.Ngoba kube nezinto
ezithile ezibe yisithiyo kumina enhlizweni. Ngeke ngisho ukuthi akukho
okungenziwanga,ngoba kwakona ukuthi bukhona ubukhosi kwisehluko seshumi
nambili kwisakhiwo sezwe kusho okuthile.

Kodwa uma ubheka ukuthi, uma usuyinkosi wenzani, kungabibikho okuhlinzeka
ngokuthi inkosi iyokwenzani. Bese sikusho nje ngomlomo ukuthi kuyobakhona
ukusebenzisana phakathi kwamakhosi namakhansela. Akengibeke, uma ngibeka
ekhaya, ngibeka ingonyama yamaZulu, uGoodwill Zwelithini kaBhekuzulu, bese
ngibeka amakhansela lapha oSuthu, kuMkhandlu Wezindaba Zesintu wasoSuthu.
Yini kambe ongayisho komdala, uma ungekho umgomo olawulwa umthetho wezwe
ukuthi kuyosetshenzwa kanjani, ngokwenhlonipho yethu njengesizwe.

Ngithe-ke mina, amakhosi ngeke siwashayele umthetho, kuyofuneka kube khona
izinkundla zokuxoxisana nawo njengosombusazwe. Lokhu ngikushiswa ukuthi,
ukhokho ka khokho wami, iNkosi uCetshwayo, walwa impi yokuqala
nabacindezeli abamhlophe, ababeluqale khona la eNtshonalanga Koloni,
belibusa lonke leli baze bayoshona e-Mpumalanga Kapa nakwaZulu, bafike
bathola isibhaxu ngomhlaka 22 Masingana 1879, eSandlwana. Ukhokho wami,
iNkosi uDinuzulu, yaboshwa yaboshelwa e-St Helena. Kwaze kwathi umkhulu
wazalelwa khona lapho, kwakungumzabalazo wamakhosi lowo uqobo lwawo,
ebhekene namakoloni uqobo.

Abesifazane baseVryheid babejojwa ngabamhlophe uma sebesuthi  ukwenza lezi
zinto ababezenza. Kodwa uDinuzulu wakwazi lapho kwaMthashana ukuqondana
nabo,walwa nabo. Kwakungumnikelo wamakhosi elwa, zingekho izinhlangano
zepolitiki. Ngiyazi ukuthi izinhlanga zepolitiki zibe khona ngo-1912. Yena
uDinuzulu uqobo waba umkhoseli wenhlangano ebusayo njengamanje.

Ngithi-ke, ngiyethemba Ngqongqoshe njengoba usho ukuthi kukhona okuthile
ozokwenza ukuze kwenzeke ukuthi kuficwane. Ngoba sifisa ukuthi kusetshenzwe
ngokuhlanganyela ezweni lakithi, hhayi ukuthi kuphikiswane, hhayi ukuthi
kuliwe, ngoba sasicindezelwe sisonke. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu
speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon Members of the
Executive Council from the different provinces of our country and the hon
members in this House. There is very little that I can say because your
speech had some promises indicating that maybe you will look into these
tribal kingships or this kingship in a proper manner, because a few things
have been troubling me. I cannot say that nothing was done because the fact
that Chapter 12 of the country’s Constitution deals with kingship means
something.

But when you look into what you need to do when you become a king, you  find
that nobody prepares you with regard to what the king must do. And  we  only
verbally express that traditional leaders and councillors  will  be  working
together. Let me say this, I install the King of the  Zulus,  King  Goodwill
Zwelithini, the son of Bhekuzulu,  and  then  appoint  councillors  here  at
Usuthu to the Council of Traditional Leaders. By the way, what  is  it  that
you can say to the  king  if  there  are  no  policies  that  stipulate  the
procedures to follow in our country with regard to how we can work  together
in a respectful manner as a nation? I said  that  we  cannot  lay  down  the
rules for the kings; there should rather be platforms where  we  can  engage
with them as politicians.

I say this because King Cetshwayo  fought  the  first  war  with  the  white
oppressors, who started ruling from the Western Cape. They ruled  the  whole
area and went as far as  the  Eastern  Cape  and  even  KwaZulu.  They  were
defeated on 22  January  1879,  at  Sandlwana.  My  great-grandfather,  King
Dinizulu, was arrested at St Helena. That led to my grandfather  being  born
there, which was the real struggle for the kings, coming face to  face  with
the colonialists.

Women  from  Vryheid  were  impaled  by  the  whites  when  they  were  done
satisfying themselves with them. But  King  Dinizulu  managed  to  face  and
fight them at KwaMthashana. That was  the  king’s  contribution  -  fighting
without political parties. I know  that  the  political  parties  came  into
being in 1912. King Dingiswayo himself sheltered this very ruling party.

I believe, hon Minister, as you are  saying,  that  you  will  do  something
about this so that we can be on par. Because we wish  to  work  together  in
our country; we should not oppose or fight each other because  we  were  all
oppressed. Thank you.]

Ms M ROSHO(North West): Madam Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister for Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, hon members of this august
House, members of the NCOP and our honourable chiefs, I must stand in this
august House today as a truly proud South African.

I’m proud because I am part of a society that is charged with the
responsibility to shape the future of this progressive South African
nation, a responsibility that can only be managed by women and men who are
courageous and motivated to serve the masses of our country. The South
Africa that we live in today presents us with a set of laws and policies
that are progressive and geared towards recognising, respecting and
protecting the fundamental human rights of individuals.

As a progressive nation, we have come to understand that all citizens have
a meaningful role to play in building a society that we all like to live
in. Of great importance in building a progressive nation is the recognition
of the role that can be played by the institution of traditional
leadership, which was created by our forefathers many years ago, but which
continues to grow and thrive to this day in changing and influencing in a
positive way the fortunes of this great nation.

Traditional leadership in this country was and continues to be a system of
governance that is based on recognition and respect for human dignity. The
importance of this institution cannot be underestimated, for it is
recognised by the highest law in the country, the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa.

The Constitution not only recognises the institution of traditional
leadership, but it enjoins government to pass legislation that provides for
a role for traditional leadership as an institution at local level on
matters affecting its local communities. The traditional leadership system
is a way of life that the majority of indigenous South Africans hold in
high esteem, want to associate with and are proud to call their own.

It is imperative, therefore, that it must be nurtured and allowed to grow
from strength to strength. This can be achieved through a series of
progressive laws and policy formulation that will strengthen this
institution. The institution of traditional leadership is not only
important in this country but enjoys critical importance on the entire
continent of Africa. I wish to quote from the White Paper on Traditional
Leadership:

  The institution of traditional leadership occupies an important place in
  African life and, historically, in the body politic of South Africa. It
  embodies the preservation of culture, traditions, customs and values of
  the African people while also representing the early forms of societal
  organisation and governance. However, when South Africa adopted the
  Interim Constitution and, subsequently, the new Constitution, the people
  declared the Republic of South Africa to be a sovereign, democratic State
  founded on a number of basic values, including the supremacy of the
  Constitution. This marked the ushering-in of a new era.

As a nation, we, therefore, have to ensure that the traditional leadership
system does not venture into oblivion, but we must continue to enact
progressive laws that will ensure the existence of this system of
governance for the duration of existence of humankind. We are not
surprised, therefore, when we see these two Bills serving before this
House, seeking to advance the course of traditional leadership. This is a
process that started some time ago with the adoption of the White Paper on
Traditional Leadership and beyond.

We must also say that traditional leadership must also continuously
transform to be in line with, amongst other things, the Constitution as the
supreme law of this country. Specifically, the role that women can play as
traditional leaders cannot be ignored any longer. But we are proud as a
nation because today we have the Constitutional Court, a creation of the
Constitution, as the custodian of the Constitution and other laws
applicable in the Republic, including customary law. Out of this court we
have seen some progressive judgments that assist the traditional leadership
system to grow and to align with democratic values.

In particular, the role of women hasn’t progressively been recognised and,
to an extent, enforced by the courts. Much can still be achieved in this
area, and this also requires transformation of our thinking in traditional
communities. We are particularly encouraged to see amongst our traditional
leaders of today women whose birthrights have been confirmed by the
communities and who have ascended to the throne to be leaders of their
respective communities.

This can only point to a bright future for this country. However, we must
indicate that we, in the North West Province, enjoy a co-operative working
relationship with traditional leaders, whom we continue to empower and
capacitate through purpose-built facilities, provision of information
technology equipment and training, secretarial and administrative support
and ongoing training on local government.

We are equipping the traditional councils with financial controls and
systems to manage their own funds. This is intended to comply with the law
and also to help reduce the tensions that are emerging lately in those
committees around funds.

We think that traditional leaders are capable and can play a central role
in the fight against poverty, crime and HIV/Aids in their respective
communities. It is, therefore, imperative that we must provide them with
the tools to do so. These pieces of legislation will help us to achieve
that.

If government is to succeed in delivering in these priority areas, as
stated by President Jacob Zuma in his state of the nation address, then we
must strengthen traditional leadership institutions and work hand in hand
with these leaders for the benefit of our people, particularly those who
reside in the remote rural corners of our country.

Whilst we are not able to reach these people on a daily basis, traditional
leaders are not only able to do so but they also live with them in these
areas. Therefore, it is important to work with traditional leaders to
create self-sustenance in rural communities.

I, therefore, would like to advise the Ministers of Agriculture, Forestry
and Fisheries and Rural Development and Land Reform to pay a visit to
traditional leaders, to be fed with indigenous knowledge and to be helped
to fully understand the role that these traditional leaders can play in the
development of the rural communities.

In respect of the two pieces of legislation, we want to emphasise the
position of the North West Province - that we support the initiative to add
the legislation and that we will see the rebirth of the National House of
Traditional Leaders and the importance of the amendment of the Traditional
Leadership and Governance Framework Act, Act 41 of 2003. We would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the Minister for Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs and his team of hard-working individuals
for the sterling work that they have performed in an attempt to bring these
pieces of legislation to life.
They have traversed the country, seeking inputs and support for these
pieces of legislation, particularly engaging with traditional leaders so as
to bring about a product that will enhance the status of the traditional
leadership institution. Finally, the North West Province offers its support
for these pieces of legislation; our comments, views and the inputs of our
traditional leader have been forwarded through the NCOP. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Monghadi T M H MOFOKENG: Ke a leboha Modulasetulo, Letona, baemedi ba
diprofensi le maloko a Lekgotla la Ntlo ya Diprofensi. Boetapele ba setso
haesale e le karolo ya bophelo ba MaAfrika ho tloha sethathong. Setso sa
rona le moetlo wa rona ke motheo wa bophelo ba rona mme MaAfrika a phemme
ho timela ka baka la matla a setso sa rona. Re sireleditse setso sa rona
kgahlanong le tshusumetso le tshwaetso eo maikemisetso a yona e neng e le
ho ferekanya le ho etsa MaAfrika makgoba a matswantle ho ya ka ho sa
feleng.

Kgaolo ya 12 ya Molaotheo, karolo ya 211 le 212, di nehelana ka
tlhokomediso ya ho thehwa ha boetapele ba setso, maemo le boikarabelo ho ya
ka molao wa setso, le ho ikamahanya le tsamaiso e amohelehileng. Ke karolo
ya nalane ya naha ena hore mengwahakgolo ya ho feta ya kgatello le
kgethollo ke mebuso ya bohanyapetsi, e telletse le ho nyenyefatsa boetapele
boo ba setso. Maemong ao a kgatello e neng e tsheheditswe ke melao ya
kgatello, haholoholo Black Administration Act 38 of 1927, ho ne ho se na
mokgwa oo boetapele ba setso bo neng bo ke ke ba ba mahlatsipa. Mmuso wa
kgatello ka ho leka ho imatlafatsa o ile wa thea mebuso ya oona e neng e
tshehetsana le maano a teng a kgethollo.

Re thoholetsa mmuso wa ANC ka maikemisetso a ho kgutlisetsa seriti sa setso
sa rona mme re ipiletsa ho batho ba fuweng boikarabelo ba ho sebetsana le
taba tsa boetapele ba setso hore ba sebetsane le tsona ka boqhetseke le
nnete hore maemo a kgutlele madulong, ba sebedisane mmoho le mmuso. Re
thoholetsa le maikemisetso a mmuso hore a fane ka ditekanyetso le merokotso
hore diphetoho tseo ba tobaneng le tsona ba tle ba di hlole.

Re etsa le boipiletso ba hore tshehetso e fuwang boetapele ba setso le
marena e se ke ya seha  mpa ka lehare, ba tshehetswe ka ho lekana hore ba
tle ba buse ka toka. Tshehetso eo ba e fuwang re lebeletse hore e ba behe
maemong ao ba tlang ho ikemela, ba etse kuno le phaello ya tjhelete e tlang
ho etsa hore ba nke karolo moruong wa naha ena ka tsela e nang le
boikarabelo. Boholo ba batho ba naheng ena ba dula dibakeng tseo ba welang
tlasa puso ya marena kapa boetapele ba setso.

Khomishene e entse mosebetsi o motle, o babatsehang ka ho fana ka tlaleho e
rarollotseng a mang a mathata a neng a tobane le puso ya setso. Re tshepa
hore diphephetso tse setseng di tla rarollwa ntle le mathata ka
tshebedisanommoho. Polelo e reng ‘morena ke morena ka setjhaba’, e ntse e
nepahetse le kajeno hobane diphephetso tse tobaneng le mmuso wa ANC, e ntse
e le tse tobaneng le boetapele ba setso.

Mobu o taolong ya bona o lokollelwe batho hore ba fumantshwe bodulo ka ho
ahelwa matlo, ho lengwe ho be le kotulo e ntle mme mmoho ho matlafatswe
ntwa kgahlanong le bofuma, ho be le dintshetsopele tse tlang ho tswela
batho molemo, jwaloka ho ahwa ha dikolo, ditliliniki, dipetlele, mabala a
boithapollo, dilaeborari le dikantoro moo batho ba tlang ho fumantshwa
ditshebeletso tsohle tseo mmuso o fanang ka tsona.

Boetapele ba setso bo sebetse mmoho le makgotla a motse ho netefatsa hore
mebila e a lokiswa mme batho ba fumantshwa metsi le motlakase. Karolo ya
bona e tlamehile ho hlakiswa ka ho otloloha mabapi le ntwa kgahlanong le
botlokotsebe, ho kgothaletsa boitshwaro bo botle batjheng, ho nena
thobalano lemong tse tlase le ho ba kgahlanong le ho shobediswa ha bona ke
batho ba baholo ba ba etse basadi, ho lwantshana le tshwaetso ya HIV/AIDS
le ho fedisa tlhekefetso ya bomme le bana, maqheku le batho ba sa
itekanelang.

Boetapele ba setso bo tlamehile ho ikamahanya le dinako le diphethoho mme
bo ananele karolo ya bomme ba tshwarang thipa ka bohaleng. Katleho ya bona
e tlo itshetleha haholo monyetleng oo ba tlang ho o neha bomme hore ba
itshupe bokgoning ba bona mme re tshepa hore molao ona o tla matlafatsa ho
nka karolo ha bona.

Marena a rona a utlwisise hore ke marena ka setjhaba le hore mowakgotla ha
a tsekiswe ebile morena ke kgetsi ya masepa. Re kopa hore ba buse ka toka.
Re lebohisa le ho tlotla tlotla e entsweng ke African Royal Institute ho
ntate Mandela le mekutu e etswang ke Congress of Traditional Leadership of
South Africa ho kopanya marena le baetapele ba setso. Re tshehetsa
sekamolao sena. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho speech
follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Thank you, Chairperson, Minister, representatives of
provinces and members of the National Council of Provinces. Traditional
leadership has been part of the lives of Africans from the beginning. Our
tradition and culture is the foundation of our lives and Africans managed
to survive because of the power of our tradition. We have protected our
culture from the pressure and negative influences that were aimed at
bringing confusion and making Africans permanent slaves of foreigners.

Sections 211 and 212 in Chapter 12 of the Constitution recognise the
formation of traditional leadership and its status, role and responsibility
according to customary law to govern in a fair and acceptable manner. It is
part of the history of this country that many years of oppression and
discrimination by the apartheid government despised and demeaned
traditional leadership. There was no way that the traditional leadership
could have avoided victimisation under oppression, which was supported by
apartheid laws, especially the Black Administration Act, Act 38 of 1927.
The apartheid government was always trying to empower itself by forming new
laws that supported its policies of oppression.

We applaud the ANC government for its intention to restore the dignity of
our culture, and we appeal to those who are given the responsibility to
deal with this matter to do so in an appropriate and honest manner, and to
work together with government, so that things can go back to normal. We
also applaud the government’s intentions to make budget allocations and
funds available in order to address the challenges that lie ahead.

We are also making an appeal that the distribution of funds to traditional
leaders and chiefs should be fair and equal, so that they will be able to
govern fairly. We expect the funds that they receive to enable them to be
independent, earn interest and make profit so that they can contribute
responsibly to the economy of this country. Many people in this country
live in areas that are governed by kings and traditional leaders.

The commission has done a great and commendable job by producing a report
that solved some of the problems that faced traditional leadership. We
trust that the outstanding challenges will be resolved without any problems
so that co-operation may prevail. The words, “without followers, there is
no leader” are still as relevant today as they were then, because the
challenges facing the ANC government are the same challenges facing
traditional leadership.
The land under their control should be given to the people so that houses
can be built for them, and also so that they can plant and have a good
harvest, and together they can strengthen the fight against poverty. There
should be development that will benefit the people, such as the building of
schools, clinics, hospitals, recreational facilities, libraries and offices
where people can receive all the services offered by the government.

Traditional leaders must work together with local councils to ensure that
roads are repaired and water and electricity are made available to the
people. Chapter must be explained thoroughly regarding the fight against
crime, to encourage the youth to behave properly, to abstain from sexual
activities at a young age and to be against forced marriages to older men,
to fight the HIV/Aids infection and to stop the abuse of women and
children, elderly people and people with disabilities.

The traditional leadership must be transformed and must accept the idea of
independent women. Their success will depend on the opportunity they give
to women to show their capabilities, and we trust that this law will
strengthen their participation.

Our chiefs must understand that they are who they are because of the people
and we all make mistakes and that the chief is the one who takes all the
responsibility. We thank and applaud the African Royal Institute for what
they have done for the honourable Mandela and the Congress of Traditional
Leadership of South Africa for their efforts in bringing together kings and
traditional leaders. We support this legislation. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you. Order! There was a bit of confusion
with the speaker’s list. Mr Mokgoro, are you speaking? Do you know that you
are speaking? All right, I will call you, then, if you know. I thought you
didn’t know. Otherwise, I wouldn’t have called you. Yes, you can take the
platform.

Rre G G MOKGORO: Modulasetulo, Tona ya lefapha, Rre Shiceka, le maloko a
Ntlo e, rona re le ba Kapa Bokone re batlile re tingwa puo. Ga ke itse gore
bothata e ne e le eng gore leina la rona le be le seyo mo lenaneong. Fela
ke leboga Modualasetulo gore a bo a mpiditse gore le rona re tle go ntsha
maikutlo a rona a Kapa Bokone. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr G G MOKGORO: Chairperson, Minister of the department, Mr Shiceka, and
members of this House, the Northern Cape almost lost the opportunity to
speak. I don’t know what the problem was that led to our name not being
included in the programme. However, I thank the Chairperson for giving me
an opportunity to voice our opinion as the Northern Cape.]

We feel that the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs, under the leadership of Minister Shiceka, has proposed amendments
to the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act of 2003, in June
2009. The result was the coming into existence of the Traditional
Leadership and Governance Framework Bill, which is currently undergoing
rigorous parliamentary processes.

The Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs department seeks to
improve traditional leadership by designing a workable framework that will
improve good governance within the traditional institutions and traditional
communities.

The department further contemplates addressing leadership claims and
disputes by reconfiguring the Commission on Traditional Leadership Disputes
and Claims into a user-friendly and functional entity. Moreover, the
department wishes to assign roles and responsibilities to the institution
of traditional leadership such as traditional councils, local councils,
provincial and national houses of traditional leaders as part of co-
operative governance.

It is also incumbent upon the department to introduce the fourth level of
traditional leaders in order to reinstate the African indigenous
traditional structures in addition to key senior traditional leaders and
headmen and headwomen.

The department has introduced the following amendment: principal
traditional leaders. This forms a fourth category of traditional leaders.
The category comes after queenship, since it is the second highest, after a
king. This category is reported to have existed within some traditional
communities in Africa, prior to the advent of colonialism.

The Commission on Traditional Leadership Disputes and Claims will now
report to the Minister instead of the President. The commission will now
operate both at national and provincial levels. At provincial level, the
commission will deal with the traditional leadership disputes and claims
before referring them to the national structure. The term of office of the
commission will be five years.

The Northern Cape Provincial House of Traditional Leaders agrees fully with
the amendment, although the issue of paramount leader does not affect it.
However, it is envisaged that the status quo may change following the
forthcoming recognition of traditional leaders from the Khoisan community
in the near future. The Northern Cape endorses the amendment as proposed.
Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, we must express our appreciation and gratitude for the time
that has been taken and the level of preparation for this debate, as well
as the contributions that have been made. At times we take everything for
granted, like the air that we breathe; we believe that it will always be
there. We believe that it is important to appreciate that the views
expressed can only enrich us so that we can do better.

On the issues that I would like to share, I would think that it is
important and imperative that this House is able to call upon departments
to come and tell it, as a House, what they have done in the implementation
of laws that have been passed by this House. Linked to that, I think we
must have a project that looks at the laws that we think are critical, that
have an impact on our people, in order to check how far we have gone in
executing those tasks.

I can tell you without any fear of contradiction that departments are not
implementing many of the laws that are passed by Parliament. Equally,
Parliament is guilty because it does not make these departments account for
their actions. Parliament passes a law and they forget about it. Nothing is
being done to check how far the department has gone in the implementation
of the law. The other thing from our side is that we are going to do things
differently. It can’t be business as usual; there must be change and
continuity.

Firstly, amongst other things that we are going to do, is to recognise the
officials that have worked hard. And the spectators in the gallery, who are
supposed to be seated here, are going to be demanded to present me with an
implementation plan of these laws, before they go on their Christmas break
this year.

It means next year you can call us as the first department to come and
present our plan for the implementation of the laws, with timeframes, not
just theory that is not followed and can’t be measured. We believe that we
have a role to play, particularly, on concurrent functions that we think
are important; we are supposed to ensure that people are able to pay for
that.

The second issue is that of the kings and queens. One of the things that we
have agreed upon, on the issue of all the kings and queens in South Africa,
is that the commission must give a report to the department by the end of
this month, November 2009. We are not going to accept many excuses. We want
to see things being done, because our people are waiting. We believe that
the issues of dispute are just a distraction and are just side-tracking us.


Our task and historical mission is to deliver services to our people and to
ensure that the quality of our people’s lives is improved, and we are going
to do exactly that. One of the issues that has been raised, which is a
mystery to me, is that the system of government of this country has, for
the past 15 years, never recognised the Khoisan people as a people who are
in South Africa.

The question that we must be asking ourselves is where the NCOP, as an
institution, was when these things happened. We must begin to use the fact
that we are public representatives. We must use our oversight quite
vigorously and vociferously in the way we do things. Having said that, when
we came in, in the interim we had said that the Khoisan people must be
represented at national level and in provinces, but that was a stop-gap
measure. That’s why we are saying in the coming year we are going to come
with a comprehensive piece of legislation that is going to ensure that
people are recognised and that they enjoy their status.

The Khoisan people were the first people to be in this country. You can’t
marginalise indigenous people and keep them out of the system. We believe
that these matters must be taken up. Going forward, we think that we must
begin to look at family trees. There is a campaign that will be undertaken
at some point when we are ready, that every person must look at their
family tree. What is a family tree? You’ll begin to trace your roots and
understand yourselves.

We know that in South Africa other people were calling themselves
Grootboom, and so on, because of the past laws, but you find that in
reality it’s Mthimkhulu. [Interjections.] Others were calling themselves
Windvoël, and you find that in reality it’s Sibanyoni. [Interjections.]
[Laughter.]

Now, it is important that we begin to look at these things and look at
reversing them, so that people can go back to their roots. People must be
proud of their own heritage; they must be proud of their own culture; they
must be proud of where they are coming from. You find that some people in
urban areas no longer want to remember and recognise that they come from
rural areas, that they have their roots in rural areas. They want to be
from the townships. They don’t recognise where they come from.

We must be able look at the issue of protocol of the traditional leaders.
We must develop the policies on those issues, so that we are able to ensure
that people are following these things.

Equally, the issue of funding of the institutions is an issue that has to
be taken up. It’s a matter that must be taken up with the National
Treasury, because the issue of funding of these institutions was not
recognised, because it was not there or was inadequate. However, as a
department, we will be establishing a department with a director-general,
standing on its own, a Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs that is going to ensure that it looks at these matters.
[Applause.]

The other thing that I think we must be able to do is to say, when
investors come to a traditional community and want to invest, they must not
subjugate and undermine traditional leadership by making them part of BEE.
Traditional leaders own the land. No development can take place without the
land. [Applause.] They must own major shares; they must be part of the
shareholding system in those areas, so that the people of traditional
communities can benefit.

We are going to make sure that these matters are addressed; we stand
foursquare behind traditional leaders going forward, as much as the issues
that have been raised - which I want to clarify here - by the Congress of
Traditional Leaders of South Africa, Contralesa. Contralesa raises an issue
that says we are going to have a Soccer World Cup, a soccer extravaganza,
that will never happen in our lifetime again, as we are here, all of us, on
the shores of this country.

They say if the Soccer World Cup is an African World Cup, what are the
elements that must show that it’s an African World Cup? They say, in terms
of the building of the stadiums in this country, when you have finished
building something, you are able to ensure that you anoint it, and the way
of anointing and appreciating is to slaughter, and other people are raising
an issue with this, and they don’t want it.

I am going to meet with Contralesa and engage them on this question. But I
believe that, as South Africans, we must accept diversity and take it as
strength. Because you don’t look like me, I must not look down upon you. I
must accept that people must practise their own things, as long as they
don’t trample on the affairs of others.

Therefore, in our point of view, what we are saying is that the issues of
traditional matters are going to be taken seriously with vigour and verve,
and we are going to ensure that we stick to them going forward. I would say
that on other issues raised by the members, we have recorded them.

The officials are here, and the Chairperson of the National House of
Traditional Leaders is here. He is also recording. I have also recorded. We
will be able to take them up and ensure that going forward they shape our
implementation strategy because we believe that, collectively, we must be
able to move forward.

We believe that when you are given a responsibility, you are not given more
brains. You are not cleverer than others. The fact that you are given a
responsibility means that the brains that you have that make you cleverer
are the collective around you.

You must be able to listen to other people, because they can only enrich
you. You must not be afraid of criticism, because criticism also builds.
Therefore, in that way, from our side we believe that your contributions
and views will be able to take us forward. And we believe that together, we
are going to be able to change this country. Thank you very much,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister, we appreciate your
response. I can assure you that some of the things that you have said are
already in our framework plan for the whole five years, particularly the
implementation of the legislation and vigorous engagement of the
departments. Your progressive support to the NCOP and your willingness that
we start with your department is noted, so that other Ministers can see
that it is doable and I can assure you ... [Interjections.] Order! Louis,
hlala phansi! [Louis, be seated!] [Laughter.]

We will make sure that our chairpersons in the strategic plans have got all
that you have mentioned in their plans and it’s recorded in the Hansard,
and the Minister could actually check and follow up whether we are doing
those things. We promise you, we will do it.

Asihlabi kuphela ezitediyamu, kufuneka ithele nempepho phela, ukuze iBafana
Bafana iphumelele. Asibetheli, yingakho bengaphumeleli, kufuneka sibethele.
Yisintu sakithi leso. Siyabonga kakhulu-ke mhlonishwa. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We are not only slaughtering in stadia, but we need to burn impepho
[traditional incense] as well so that Bafana Bafana can win. We do not
perform traditional rituals for strengthening the stadia and warding off
evil in the stadia, and that is the reasons they are not winning - we must
do it. That is our culture. Thank you very much, hon Chairperson.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the National House of Traditional Leaders Bill be agreed
to.
That concludes the debate. I shall now put the question. The question in
respect of the first Order is that the Bill be agreed to.

As the question is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain if all delegation heads are present in the House. Are
all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please insert their
cards in the machine. I see there are new delegation heads; please show
them how to do it.

Before I call the vote in, please press button 1 to confirm your presence.
There should be lights flashing. If not, the Chamber staff will assist you.

We shall now commence with the voting. When I call the the name of the
province, the delegation head will vote by pressing button 4 for those who
vote in favour, button 2 for those who vote against and button 3 for those
who abstain.

Have all the provinces voted? If any of the members have pressed the
incorrect button, please press the correct button now. The voting has
closed. The staff will now present the results to me.

I now have the results. All nine provinces have voted in favour of the
Bill, but we will not record Mpumalanga’s vote because they didn’t send a
written mandate. You are aware that in terms of the law and the Rules, when
we pass a Bill there must be a written mandate. In other words, eight
provinces have voted in favour and therefore the Bill is agreed to in terms
of section 65 of the Constitution. [Applause.]

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

National House of Traditional Leaders Bill accordingly agreed to in
accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Bill
be agreed to.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question in respect of the
second order. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision
is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain if all delegation heads are present in the Chamber. You are all
present.
In accordance with Rule 71 I shall now allow provinces to make their
declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province who wants to do
so? None. We shall now proceed to the voting. You now know what to do.

Have you all voted? If any member has made a mistake, please correct it.
The voting has closed and the staff will give me the results.

Mpumalanga, let me correct that. Once we have received your mandate in
writing we will record it in the records of the NCOP.

An HON MEMBER: Mapumalanga did submit it in writing but I’m not sure what
happened to it.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That is fine. You can rectify it but we want
to see it. The Bill is still passed; there is no problem about it. Limpopo,
can you assist the staff please?

The result is: Eight provinces have voted in favour and therefore the Bill
is agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution. [Applause.] When
Mpumalanga’s mandate comes, we’ll record it.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal,
Limpopo, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment Bill accordingly
agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 18:04.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 6 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Communications


          a) South African Postbank Bill [B 14 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 32673
             of 6 November 2009.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Communications of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations for consideration and report:

        a) Accession to the revised Cotonou Partnership Agreement:
           Agreement Amending the Partnership Agreement between the Members
           of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, of the
           one part, and the European Community and its Member States, of
           the other part, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

        b) Explanatory memorandum to the Accession to the revised Cotonou
           Partnership Agreement: Agreement Amending the Partnership
           Agreement between the Members of the African, Caribbean and
           Pacific Group of States, of the one part, and the European
           Community and its Member States, of the other part.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
    Development on the Declaration of an Amnesty in terms of Section
    139(2)(a) of the Firearms Control Act, 2000 (Act No 60 of 2000),  dated
    04 November 2009:

    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
    considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Declaration of
    an Amnesty in terms of the Firearms Control Act, 2000 (Act No. 60 of
    2000), recommends that the National Council of Provinces, in terms of
    section 139 (2) (a) of the Act, approve the Declaration subject to the
    following amendments:


    1.      That the words “No details of the person who hands in the
       firearm will be taken down, if the person wishes to utilise the
       anonymous process for amnesty“ in paragraph “(a)” of the Declaration
       be deleted.
    2.      That the words “Proper audit processes must be put in place to
       ensure the auditing of the records of all firearms, surrendered
       anonymously in terms of this amnesty” that appear in the second last
       paragraph of the Declaration also be deleted.


    The Select Committee is of the view that an anonymous amnesty process
    will be open to abuse.


    Report to be considered.


                          TUESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development


          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 32652
             of 20 October 2009.]


             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
             Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, and
             referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

   1. Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following NCOP members have been appointed to the Joint
       Standing Committee on Defence:

       ANC


       Montsitsi, Mr S D
       Dikgale, Ms M C
       Mofokeng, Mr T M H
       Maine, Mr M C
       Nzimande, Mr L P M

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the President’s Fund for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 254-2009].

     (b)    Report on the Government’s Progress on the Implementation of the
        Truth and Reconciliation Commission Recommendations for 2008-2009.

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     South African Revenue Service (SARS) – Response to the Joint
        Report of the Standing Committee on Finance and the Portfolio
        Committee  on Economic Development on Budget Vote 7 – National
        Treasury (Including SARS) and the 2009/10  –  2011/12 Strategic
        Plan of the South African Revenue Service.


    (b)     Government Notice No R. 975  published in Government Gazette No
        32630 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1386), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).

    (c)     Government Notice No R. 950  published in Government Gazette No
        32616 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/62), in terms
        of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
    (d)     Government Notice No R. 951  published in Government Gazette No
        32616 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/320),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (e)     Government Notice No R. 952  published in Government Gazette No
        32616 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/321),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (f)     Government Notice No R. 953  published in Government Gazette No
        32616 dated 09 October 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/649),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
    (g)     Government Notice No R. 941  published in Government Gazette No
        32601 dated 02 October 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/60), in terms
        of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (h)     Government Notice No R. 943  published in Government Gazette No
        32609 dated 29 September 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/61), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (i)     Government Notice No R. 932  published in Government Gazette No
        32593 dated 23 September 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/59), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence [JSCI] on the
appointment of the Inspector General of Intelligence Services in terms of
Section 7(1) of the Intelligence Services Oversight Act, 40 of 1994, dated
10 November 2009:

The request by the Minister of State Security for the National Assembly to
recommend a person for appointment as Inspector General of Intelligence
Services was referred to the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence on 7
August 2009.

Advertisements calling for nominations were placed in both national and
regional newspapers on 11 September 2009. Due to limited number of
applications the Committee decided to extend the process by readvertising
in both national and regional newspapers on 9 October 2009 with the closing
date being 19 October 2009. This included the adverts broadcasting on radio
stations from 12 October 2009 to 3 November 2009.

A total of 74 applications were received. The following five candidates
were subsequently short listed on 4 November 2009 and interviewed on 10
November 2009:

    1.      Mr Barry Phillip Gilder
    2.      Mr Silumko Solomon Sokupa
    3.      Mr Joseph Kotane
    4.      Adv Faith Doreen Radebe
    5.      Mr Dennis Thokozani Dlomo

After deliberating the Committee recommends that the following person be
considered and approved by the House for the appointment by the President
as the Inspector General of Intelligence Services:

Adv Faith Doreen Radebe.

The Committee wishes to thank all the applicants for the positive response
to the advertisement. It is especially appreciative of those who made
themselves available for the interviews.

Report to be considered.

NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

CREDA INSERT PAGES 1576-1588


