---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-11-05
---

THURSDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

House Chairperson (Ms N W Magadla) took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr C J DE BEER: Hon Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council –

   (1)      notes that on 27 October 2009, the Minister for Co-operative
        Governance and Traditional Affairs, the hon Shiceka, informed this
        House that he had found some destitute households without water and
        proper sanitation in the Western Cape;

     2) further notes that some of these households had their water supply
        cut, were constantly harassed and threatened with letters of demand
        simply because they were poor and unable to pay for their
        constitutionally enshrined right to water;


   (3)      further notes that-


        (a) during the debate on the annual address by the President on 29
            October 2009, the Premier of the Western Cape, the hon Zille,
            persistently denied that the City of Cape Town had cut the
            water supply to several households across the Cape Town Metro
            and challenged the Minister to investigate this issue further
            so that the DA-led municipality could be absolved; and


        (b)      that Minister Shiceka has since established a task team to
             investigate water cuts and other related claims in the metro;


     4) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible terms
        the Mayor of Cape Town, Dan Plato, for threatening legal action
        against the Minister;


     5) calls upon all the people of the metro who had their water supply
        cut and who were persistently harassed by the City of Cape Town to
        take part in this important initiative and submit any information
        that will enhance our government’s fight against the victimisation
        of the poor and the violation of their constitutionally enshrined
        rights;

   (6)      further calls on the Minister to ensure that the report of the
        task team is tabled in this House for debate and further
        consideration by the relevant committee of the Council, in line with
        our mandate to represent and protect the interests of the people in
        the provinces.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, on a point of order: I ask you to give a ruling
on the validity of that motion. The Rules of this House state very clearly
that a draft resolution may not be tabled in this House if, in substance,
it is the same as a matter discussed in the House in the preceding six
months.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Hon member, I’ll look into the
matter and respond later.

Mr Z MLENZANA: Hon House Chairperson, I shall move at the next sitting of
the House:

   That the Council –

      1) notes that Unicef South Africa has released the 2008 Unicef South
         Africa Annual Report, which outlines the challenges and
         achievements of the past year;

      2) further notes that –

          a) the results reflected in this report indicate maximum co-
             operation between the government of South Africa, UN sister
             agencies, bilateral organisations and civil society
             organisations, including private sector, media, academic
             institutions and child rights organisations; and


          b) the report shows that South Africa has made significant
             progress towards the realisation of children’s rights but much
             remains to be done; and


      3) welcomes the publication on “Testimonies on Child Friendly Schools”
         from the field in which participants share experiences on the
         positive impact of the friendly schools programme in the Eastern
         Cape and KwaZulu-Natal; and


      4) resolves to continue supporting Unicef South Africa, particularly
         this year, 2009, which is the year in which Unicef South Africa
         celebrates the 20th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights
         of the Child.

Mr O DE BEER: House Chair, I shall move on the next sitting day of the
House, on behalf of Cope:

   That the Council debates Judge Siraj Desai’s acceptance, as the chairman
   of a prisons advisory body, that public confidence in the parole system
   has been dented with a number of recent paroles and particularly with the
   release, on medical parole, of convicted fraudster Schabir Shaik.

Mr S H PLAATJIE: Chair, I shall move on the next sitting day of the House,
on behalf of Cope:

   That the Council –

      1) abhors what is happening in Ward 14 of Ditsobotla Municipality in
         the North West Province, where the village water pump is being
         denied to some members of the village who are in disfavour with the
         nominated keeper of the pump; and

  (2) requests a debate on the use of common government property for the
        benefit of all irrespective of personal differences.

                        ALLAN BOESAK’S RETURN TO ANC

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes the immediate resignation of Allan Boesak as a member and
         leader of Cope in the Western Cape province, as well as a member of
         the Western Cape provincial legislature;


      2) further notes that during his resignation, Allan Boesak gave a
         short political obituary of Cope by indicating that from the very
         beginning Cope structures were characterised by faction fighting,
         strife, pitched battles for political supremacy and duplicity and
         that party continues to be in disarray; and


  (3) takes this opportunity to welcome Comrade Allan Boesak and many more
        former members of Cope who continue to return to the ANC in many
        parts of the country because they know and have witnessed that in
        the era of political confusion that beset our nation a year ago and
        in the wilderness of a penchant and hunger for power by those who
        misled them to leave a movement that they served for a greater part
        of their lives, the ANC lives and remains the only route to the
        advancement of the needs of the people of South Africa and the
        dismantling of the legacy of apartheid settlement in our
        communities.
Mr T HARRIS: No, Madam Chair, I object. Madam Chair, on a point of order:
the member spoke of a Mr Watkins. I’m not sure who she is speaking about.
Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I want to correct myself. I meant the
hon Watson.

There being an objection, the motion without notice became a notice of
motion.

                        REMEMBRANCE OF ARMISTICE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I wish to move without notice:

   That the Council -

     1) notes that 11 November 2009, which is Wednesday next week, is known
        worldwide as Armistice Day or “Poppy Day”, named after the poppy
        flowers on the fields of Flanders in France;


     2) this day commemorates all fallen soldiers in the various World Wars;
        and


     3) the hostilities ceased at the 11th minute of the 11th day of the
        11th month in 1918 and that we remember the millions who died to
        further democracy. “With the going down of the sun we shall remember
        them!”

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

               REMARKS BY SPEAKER OF WESTERN CAPE LEGISLATURE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


     1) notes with utter disdain the racial undertones and stereotypes made
        by the Speaker of the Western Cape, the hon Mr Shahid Esau, who told
        a group of about 70 staff members of the Western Cape Legislature
        that there were too many black women in the legislature and that he
        will go as far as the Northern Cape and Limpopo to get those he
        classified as “boere” to come and work for the legislature; and

   (2)      takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible
        terms this racial insult and calls on structures charged with
        protecting our people from such racial bigotry, such as the Equality
        Court and the Commission for Gender Equality, to rise up to the call
        of duty and ensure that the staff members of the legislature are
        protected from such despicable utterances, which are intended to
        project the Western Cape as an independent island by those who are
        bent on holding us fast to our divided past.

Mr T HARRIS: We object to that motion.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): In light of the objection, the
motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become
a notice of motion.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. You have not ruled
on the first motion on Allan Boesak. We had an objection to it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): I now declare that in light of the
objection the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become a notice of a motion.

        COSTS OF INTEGRATED RAPID TRANSIT SYSTEM IN CITY OF CAPE TOWN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I want to move a motion without notice:
   That the Council –


     1) notes the steeply rising costs of the construction of the first
        phase of the Integrated Rapid Transit System, IRT, in the DA-led
        City of Cape Town;

      2) further notes that –

          a) the IRT, which was hailed as one of the biggest infrastructure
             development projects ever undertaken in the city by the then
             Executive Mayor and now Premier of the Western Cape, Helen
             Zille, was projected to cost R1,4 billion and has doubled to
             R4,5 billion with tenders coming in higher than expected and
             start-up costs significantly more than initially modelled; and


          b) ratepayers will bear the brunt of the ballooning costs of the
             City of Cape Town’s R4.5 billion public transport system and
             the expected R99 million operating shortfall, by paying higher
             property taxes, parking and fuel levies, paying steep prices
             for permits to use the city’s roads or by contributing to a
             new local business tax;


     3) recognises that since this blunder, and as part of its desperate
        attempts to conceal it from the public, the City of Cape Town has
        proposed a reduction of the size of its bus fleet for the 2010
        shuttle service and scrapped the reserve service; and


  (4) takes this opportunity to call on the former Mayor of Cape Town and on
        the DA to stop hiding behind administrators and take full
        responsibility for this blunder that has embarrassed our nation and
        the community and to apologise to the people of the Western Cape and
        South Africans at large.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Hon member, your time has expired.
Your motion will be printed in full in the Order Paper.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, firstly, I object to that motion and I ask you to
rule on whether it’s acceptable for a member of this Council to mislead
this Council, because she referred to the taxes of the taxpayers in Cape
Town and that is government money. That is not rates and taxes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Hon member Watson, I haven’t asked
if there was any objection. [Interjections.] Is there any objection to the
motion? Yes, there is. In light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of
motion.

                        REPORT OF ERASMUS COMMISSION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Madam Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council notes that –


      1) Ebrahim Rasool, former Premier of the Western Cape, wishes to take
         urgent steps to stop the report of the Erasmus Commission from
         being publicised;


      2) if he and the government formerly under his administration had
         nothing to hide from the public, then he would not obstruct the
         publication of the report; and


   (3)      the hon Helen Zille, Premier of the Western Cape, is absolutely
         right to inform the public of the report of the Erasmus Commission
         and that the public’s interest will be defended and secured at all
         times in how taxpayers’ money is being spent.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Is there any objection to the
motion? Yes, there is. In light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of
motion.

               GAUTRAIN NOT READY BEFORE 2010 SOCCER WORLD CUP
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr O DE BEER: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council notes that the legislature of Gauteng is misleading the
   people of Johannesburg and South Africa by saying that the Gautrain will
   not be ready before 2010 for the World Cup.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Is there any objection to the
motion? Yes, there is. In light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of
motion.

   NONPROFIT ORGANISATION FRIENDS OF THE BLIND RESTORES SIGHT TO 11 BLIND
                                   PEOPLE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr H B GROENEWALD: Mev die Voorsitter, ek doen die volgende voorstel
sonder kennisgewing:

   Dat die Raad -

     1) kennis neem dat mev Sarah Ward, 76 jaar oud, weer die voorreg het
        om haar kinders en die mooi dinge van die wêreld te kan ervaar en
        bowenal weer te kan lees;
     2) verder kennis neem dat hierdie geleentheid – die verwydering van
        haar katarakte – moontlik gemaak is deur die Vriende van Blindes,
        ’n nie-winsgewende organisasie;


     3) verder kennis neem dat 11 persone hierdie liefdesdaad deur Vriende
        van Blindes te beurt geval het; en


     4) erken dat dit ’n prysenswaardige stap deur Vriende van Blindes is,
        en sy waardering teenoor die Vriende van Blindes uitspreek.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr H B GROENEWALD: Madam Chairperson, I move the following motion without
notice:

    That the Council -

      1) notes that Mrs Sarah Ward, 76 years old, can once again have the
         privilege of experiencing her children and all that is beautiful in
         the world and, above all, is able to read again;


      2) further notes that this occasion, the removal of her cataracts, was
         made possible by the Friends of the Blind, a nonprofit
         organisation;


      3) notes that this act of love fell to 11 people by way of the Friends
         of the Blind; and

      4) acknowledges that this is a commendable deed by them and conveys
         its gratitude and appreciation to the Friends of the Blind.]

Motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Chair, I want you to rule on the motion that was
moved concerning Gauteng and the Gautrain because it was a motion without
notice. That motion has been deemed a notice of motion and is going to be
printed on the next Order Paper.

My problem is that the content of the motion itself is not correct, because
the Gautrain trials have already begun. We saw the premier of Gauteng
taking a trip on the Gautrain.

So, in light of the fact that the motion is not in the spirit of promoting
the truth, I would like you, Chairperson, to make a ruling on that motion.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): I have given a ruling on the motion
already, so I am not expecting any deliberations on it.

 TELECOMMUNICATIONS OPERATOR NEOTEL CONGRATULATED ON GRADUATION OF STUDENTS
                              FROM ITS ACADEMY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

     1) notes that last week, South Africa’s first converged
        telecommunications operator, Neotel, which was launched in 2007 in
        response to South Africa’s continued skills shortage in the
        telecommunications industry to bridge the gap between what the
        industry is delivering and what is truly needed in terms of skills
        development, announced the graduation of 24 students from its
        academy; and


     2) takes this opportunity to congratulate Neotel for this important
        initiative and the learners for their achievement; and

     3) calls on Neotel and other telecommunication entities to expand
        initiatives such as this one to their parts of the country,
        particularly in the rural areas and previously marginalised areas.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

             SANTOS BEACH AND HARTENBOS AWARDED BLUE FLAF STATUS

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Mev die Voorsitter, ek doen die volgende voorstel
sonder kennisgewing:

   Dat die Raad-

     1) kennis neem dat twee strande in Mosselbaai, naamlik Santos strand en
        Hartenbos, blou vlag status ontvang het;

     2) verder kennis neem dat me Marie Ferreira, uitvoerende burgemeester
        van die Mosselbaai Raad, op 10 Desember 2009 die vlae op die twee
        strande gaan hys;

     3) verder kennis neem dat hierdie twee vlae deur Minister Marthinus van
        Schalkwyk, Minister van Toerisme, op ’n byeenkoms te Muizenberg aan
        die Mosselbaai munisipaliteit oorhandig is; en

     4) erken dat hierdie toekenning bewys dat die Mosselbaai munisipaliteit
        onder DA beheer omgee vir die omgewing en goed regeer word.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Madam Chairperson, I move the following motion
without notice:

   That the Council notes that –


      1) two beaches at Mossel Bay, namely Santos Beach and Hartenbos, have
         received Blue Flag status;


      2) Mrs Marie Ferreira, Executive Mayor of the Mossel Bay Council, will
         be hoisting the flags at these two beaches on 10 December 2009;


      3) these two flags were handed over to the Mossel Bay Municipality by
         Mr Marthinus van Schalkwyk, Minister of Tourism, at an event in
         Muizenberg; and


   (4)      this award proves that the Mossel Bay Municipality under DA
        control cares for the environment and is being governed properly.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Is there any objection to the
motion? Yes, there is. In light of the objection the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of
motion.

       BEST WISHES TO TOURING SPRINGBOKS AND PARLIAMENTARY RUGBY TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr W F FABER: Mevrou, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad -


   (1)      kennis neem dat die Springbokspan gekies is;


   (2)      ook kennis neem dat twee Griekwa rugbyspelers in die span
        ingesluit is;


   (3)      verder kennis neem dat die Springbokke, sowel as die
        Parlementêre rugbyspan, na Europa en Ierland gaan toer; en


      4) al twee spanne die beste toewens.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr W F FABER: Madam Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council -

     1) notes that the Springbok team has been selected;

     2) also notes that two Griqua players have been included in the team;

     3) further notes that the Springboks, as well as the parliamentary
        rugby team, are going on tour to Europe and Ireland; and

      4) wishes both teams all the best.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   JOINT SITTING CALLED TO BID FAREWELL TO CHIEF JUSTICE PIUS LANGA AND TO
                    WELCOME CHIEF JUSTICE SANDILE NGCOBO

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


   That the Council -


     1) notes that the President of the Republic of South Africa has, in
        terms of the Constitution and the Joint Rules, called a Joint
        Sitting of the two Houses for Wednesday, 11 November 2009, at 14:00
        to bid farewell to the Hon Justice Pius Langa, the retired Chief
        Justice of the Republic of South Africa, and to welcome Chief
        Justice Sandile Ngcobo; and


     2) resolves, subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly, to
        invite retired Chief Justice Langa and Chief Justice Ngcobo to
        attend and participate in the Joint Sitting of the Houses on 11
        November 2009.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:

   That Rule 239(1), which provides inter alia that the consideration  of  a
   Bill may not commence before at least three  working  days  have  elapsed
   since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the purposes of
   consideration of the Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Amendment
   Bill [B12 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75) on  Thursday,  5  November
   2009.

Question put: That the motion be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                       (The late Imam Gassan Solomon)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the Council –

     1) notes with profound sadness and utmost sense  of  loss  the  passing
        away of ANC veteran Comrade Imam Gassan Solomon after a long  period
        of illness;


      2) further notes that –


          a) Imam Solomon joined the ANC in 1960 at the tender  age  of  19
             and that he became president of the Call of Islam in 1983  and
             was elected onto the Executive Committee of the  Western  Cape
             United Democratic Front, UDF, in 1984;


          b) at the height of apartheid repression in  1985,  Imam  Solomon
             went into exile and only returned to South Africa  during  the
             unbanning of the ANC in 1990; and


          c) Imam Solomon became an ANC Member of Parliament  in  1994  and
             served on various portfolio  committees  while  being  an  MP,
             including Finance, Justice and Safety and Security; and

   (3)      recognises that Imam Solomon was a true cadre  of  the  ANC  and
        distinguished veteran of the liberation of our people who  dedicated
        his life to dismantling the legacy of apartheid in our nation; and

   (4)      takes this opportunity to -


          a) dip its head for comfort on  the  shoulders  of  a  nation  in
             mourning and on the chests of so many of our  people  who  are
             mourning with Imam Solomon’s family by virtue of the  life  he
             dedicated to our people; and


          b) extend its sympathy and condolences  to  the  Solomon  family,
             friends and comrades.

             May his soul rest in peace.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Order! Before the Secretary reads
the First Order of the Day, I want to say that I have been informed that
the First Order should be amended by the inclusion of the words: “working
together to ensure the delivery of quality services to communities”.

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES PROVINCIAL WEEK REPORT –
 WORKING TOGETHER TO ENSURE THE DELIVERY OF QUALITY SERVICES TO COMMUNITIES

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Chairperson, I would like to point out
that, in terms of the speaker’s list, I have 12 minutes allocated to me,
but here I see 10. Oh, that has been corrected.

House Chairperson, special delegates from provinces, Members of Parliament,
ladies and gentlemen, under the theme “Working together to ensure the
delivery of quality services to communities”, the NCOP embarked on its
annual programme known as the Provincial Week, from 7 to 11 September 2009.


Members of the NCOP visited all nine provinces, meeting with various
provincial leaders, including the provincial Premiers, Members of the
Executive Councils and their departments, provincial legislatures,
including the Speakership, the Whippery and Chairpersons of Committees, and
other key stakeholders such as local government leaders and the South
African Local Government Association.

The purpose of the week was to interface with the local communities through
meetings and by conducting visits to various sites in order to monitor
progress on service delivery. This year’s programme was unique mainly
because it was the first one of its kind of the Fourth Parliament, which
makes it historic.

The Provincial Week was established in line with the provision of the
Constitution which obligates the NCOP to ensure that provincial interests
are taken into account in the national sphere of government. The week
provides a forum for the exchange and sharing of ideas on the progress that
has been made around service delivery issues, and of the challenges that
are confronting the provinces in fulfilling their mandates.

Since its inception, it has proven to be successful in informing provincial
delegates about the needs of the people in their respective provinces and
affords delegates an opportunity to keep abreast with developments in those
provinces. It further enables provincial, local, and national governments
to work together as a collective in order to ensure effective and efficient
service delivery.

The NCOP report for the period 2004 to 2009 suggests that there is a need
to ensure that the views of the people, expressed during public
participation engagements, are taken into account and followed up.

One of the justifications for the Provincial Week includes strengthening
the debate with people on the ground. The theme further reaffirms the
position and commitment of the ruling party to co-ordinate efforts towards
working together in ensuring the delivery of quality services to
communities.

The NCOP’s recent strategic workshop resolved, among other things, to forge
co-ordination with the three spheres of government when engaged in our NCOP
activities and in exercising our oversight role. Implementing this decision
will assist us to reach our commitment of speeding up service delivery in
order to impact positively on the lives of our communities.

If one looks at the past and recent activities of the NCOP, it is evident
that we have always sought to do this. However, the challenge to sustain
these relations amongst the spheres of government and in our own
parliamentary operations remains.

Our own experiences indicate that there is a need to find and implement a
co-ordinated approach in our process to oversee speedy service delivery.
The programmes of the NCOP, such as Taking Parliament to the People and
follow-up visits to provinces, have been informed by this approach and thus
include the national, provincial and local authorities.

Over and above this, the involvement of the people at the grass-roots level
has been the cornerstone of these programmes. We continue to strive and
improve our approaches through various public participation mechanisms such
as public hearings and oversight visits to the provinces and communities.

Programme 2009 emphasises the need for provincial legislatures and
municipalities to participate in national programmes of Parliament. It
acknowledges that provinces and municipalities are the cornerstones of
service delivery and serve as important links between government and the
people. The Provincial Week ensures that the Council represents the
interests of provinces and accords provincial delegates to the NCOP the
opportunity to review their mandates by being visible in their
constituencies.

While we understand the importance of co-operative governance as we
implement programmes such as the Provincial Week, we are mindful of the
importance of co-ordinating our work within the precincts of Parliament.
For example, we understand that we need to ensure that the work of the
Committees of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces,
with particular reference to oversight, is intertwined. There is no need
for the two Houses to summon before their committees the same entities to
report on a similar issue. Instead, an effort should be made that the
committees either sit jointly or communicate the areas of concern as a
collective. Reports of such briefings of oversight activities could then be
shared by the relevant committees. Our co-ordination should begin with us
so that, by the time we interface with the provinces, municipalities or the
national spheres, we are ready to take forward the issues that affect our
people the most, without any duplication or confusion.

This matter has been raised not only by the NCOP, not only by the
municipalities, but in actual fact by provinces themselves during our
strategic planning session. Provinces felt strongly about the issue of
duplication, a view that was repeated by the Deputy President when he
addressed us on how we as Parliament could best ensure that we avoid what
he termed “an oversight stampede” in the provinces.

For example, the list below indicates some of the issues that our people
across the provinces raised during the Provincial Week as challenges they
face on a daily basis: In all the provinces, our people said that they have
a problem with water shortages. In some provinces this is exacerbated by
river pollution caused by sewerage and pesticides. They experienced
problems caused by the impact of migration on the infrastructure and
quality of services rendered to the community.

They experienced problems caused by high rates of unemployment, by
sanitation problems and by budget constraints endured by local
municipalities. These all hamper service delivery.

They experienced problems around housing, caused by the nonavailability of
land for housing purposes. This is a matter whose solution should seize the
NCOP and Parliament. It is quite a challenge now and is a very difficult
problem. We have heard from the Department of Human Settlements that it is
very expensive to get land because of a deliberate attempt by those who own
the land to frustrate government in its attempts to secure land for human
settlement.

Then there was the issue of the shortage of hospital personnel – a matter
that was frequently raised.

Lastly, the question of HIV and Aids was raised as a matter that needs
urgent attention. Of course, we know about some of the practices that our
people engage in.

These challenges cut across all our provinces. Seen in this light, it
presents our committees, together with our provincial legislatures and our
municipalities, with opportunities to develop programmes that are clearly
co-ordinated in terms of content and in terms of us doing our oversight
work.

If we do call upon departments, we are able to refer to a report and thus
we, as committees of the NCOP, need to reflect on that report to ensure
that we engage with some of the issues that were raised by our communities.


There are, of course, also positive things that we have observed during the
Provincial Week. For instance, in Limpopo, in the Sekhukhune district,
there are projects and co-operatives led by women. One such project is the
Ikageng Ga Masha co-operatives, led by Mrs Elizabeth Moraswi, which forms
an umbrella co-operative within the province.

The co-operative produces potatoes, tomatoes, spinach, and so on. What is
fundamental here is that this project has about eight casuals and ten
beneficiaries, all from the neighbouring communities. The project of course
receives assistance from the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries. It has received numerous provincial awards for outstanding
achievement and compliance.

In our debates about fighting poverty and unemployment, I think these are
some of the things that provinces need to take into account. We should give
support to such initiatives in our respective provinces.

These initiatives include, for example, projects that are led by young
people, including young women, especially in the rural provinces. These are
some of the things that I think are quite important for NCOP to be
concerned about and support.

I am also elated by the input and reflections put forward by the
delegations suggesting further follow-up. Indeed, this was a good start for
us and we hope to improve over the course of the following programmes.

I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to all the staff involved
in the programme for their commitment and dedication. We know how
supportive they were in this particular programme as well as in the
development and drafting of the report.

In conclusion, allow me to say that, for the first time, one of the
highlights of the programme was the level at which the media gave attention
to it. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Hon Chairperson and honourable House, firstly, allow me
to commend the hon Tau on his comprehensive speech or report. It was
impressive. Thank you. The National Council of Provinces represents the
provinces in order to ensure that the provincial interests are taken into
account in the national government’s programme of action.

In order for this mandate to be effective, it is imperative that the NCOP
go out to the provinces to gauge how government action is impacting the
provinces. The provincial week, therefore, is instrumental in the NCOP and
provinces examining problems and establishing collaborative approaches in
seeking solutions and devising mechanisms to address the needs of the
people of South Africa.

Do we have problems that need solutions? To answer this question, let us
consider the fact that South Africa probably has more social protests than
anywhere else in the world. On average, there are 16 protests taking place
daily. What is that? What does it mean? It says that the problems are
mounting. It warns that time is running out. Meanwhile, the price of
electricity is climbing, jobs are vanishing, people no longer have
patience, and we no longer have time.

We began our provincial week programme by visiting the Molemole
Municipality. When we arrived there, we found that only R3,7 million had
been spent on the building of 200 units. This shows that the communities
were not given the services they deserve.

Cope condemns this. It is unacceptable. Worse still was the deplorable
condition of the house we went to. It was the house of a Mr Tau – not the
hon Tau that we have here. We found that the house that was built was
appalling, and the delegation ordered that the house be taken down and
rebuilt. With regard to the Sibaila family’s house, we found that the
foundation was laid in 2004 but no house was built. The MEC also confirmed
this. What a devastating admission. The government is being robbed left,
right and centre. All the tenders are there, but then the tenderers just
vanish.

In the Eastern Cape on the 8th, it was found that the problem that had been
raised during the visit of the NCOP had not been resolved. They were still
sitting on it.

In conclusion, Cope wants to ask the government to please step up and start
working. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T HARRIS: Hon Chairperson, hon colleagues, the DA strongly supports the
concept and programme of provincial weeks. They are a very effective way
for us to perform oversight targeted at specific crosscutting issues
between the local, provincial and national spheres of government.

Last week President Zuma said, “The NCOP provides a national forum for
public consideration of issues affecting the provinces.” It is clear that
the Provincial Week programme is one of the best embodiments of that
constitutionally defined responsibility.

We do, however, have several concerns about the way Provincial Weeks were
run this past September. The first is the general principle of following up
on issues that arise from provincial weeks. My more senior colleagues tell
me that there has long been an issue of concerns being raised and not
effectively dealt with. I hope that this, the first Provincial Week of the
Fourth Parliament, is different, and that all the concerns that were raised
are effectively dealt with, by this House and by the legislatures.

The second concern is an administrative issue. The ATC of yesterday
published a version of the Provincial Week report that includes a theme
that is completely different from the theme we used to conduct proceedings
and therefore incorrect. In addition, the report included from the only DA-
run province is not the version signed off by my provincial delegation. I
understand that the reports of other provinces may also appear incorrectly.
I hope these errors are corrected urgently - in fact, they must be
corrected urgently. They reflect poorly on the NCOP.

My third concern is that the partisan attack the governing party in the
Western Cape was subjected to in the provincial legislature is repeated in
some form in this House. In my experience the NCOP tends to rise above
party-political differences and collaborate on improving delivery and
service, but in case any concerns are raised in the debate to come, allow
me to make a few points about how the DA-led administration ran their
Provincial Week. I will speak from the perspective of my role in the NCOP
and the visit I went on up the West Coast.

Despite unwarranted criticism, the planning process was relatively open and
consultative. I personally, as the provincial whip, consulted the Chief
Whip on the draft programme in good time. It is true that her suggestion of
a change of destination was not taken on board, but that was the
prerogative of the ruling party in that province. How many other provinces
even consulted the opposition parties in their provinces on their draft
programmes?

The DA-led Western Cape was one of the only four provinces where the
premier of the province personally met with and addressed the delegation.

Chairing of consultative sessions on the trip I went on was shared between
the DA and the ANC and between the legislature and the NCOP. During
hearings, the NCOP delegates and members of the legislature from all
parties made no mention of party politics and interparty relations were
excellent.

The issues that were dealt with during the site visits were critical.
Certainly, I don’t think you could find more important issues than the
decline of fisheries, land reform and agriculture on the West Coast of the
Western Cape.

Critically, the municipalities visited in the DA-led Western Cape were
politically balanced. By my count, of the seven site visits in the
province, three relevant municipalities are run by the ANC or ANC-led
coalitions and four are run by the DA or DA-led coalitions – you couldn’t
be more balanced if you tried.

My fourth concern is an issue that the hon Watty Watson and the leader of
the DA in the NCOP has already taken up. On 16 September 2009, he wrote a
letter to our Chairperson, which reads as follows:

   The DA caucus of NCOP delegates, at a meeting held today, considered the
   successes of the visits to their respective provinces.

   By and large, the sentiments recorded at the programme committee meeting
   this morning were echoed by our members. A common factor was, in contrast
   to this, the sad state of local government in many of the provinces. This
   would indicate that we really need to spend much more time on oversight –
   particularly where we detect early warning signs.


   Two very disturbing occurrences were, however, reported, which I would
   like you to investigate.


   1. In KZN, the delegates were advised by SMS at 21h00 on Wednesday
         evening 09 September 2009, that the programme for the following
         day, Thursday 10 September 2009, had been cancelled because ANC
         delegates had to attend an ANC workshop. This left the DA and IFP
         delegates high and dry for the day.


   2. A similar occurrence took place in the Eastern Cape when the events of
         Friday 11 September 2009 were cancelled to allow the ANC delegates
         to attend the ANC provincial congress.

   The first event was also referred to by hon Lees in his speech today and
   the second confirmed by way of the motion presented by hon Qikane as an
   ANC delegate of the Eastern Cape.

   The time was allocated and the funds provided by the NCOP for oversight
   and interaction with provincial leadership, and certainly not for ANC
   events. I await your comments.

The Chairperson has responded by acknowledging receipt of the letter, but
no action has been taken yet, as far as we know.

Now, we understand that from time to time, urgent party business means that
a member, or even several members, may have to excuse themselves from NCOP
proceedings; but for the entire programme of the Provincial Week to be
suspended in not one, but two provinces is an indictment of this
institution.

Noting that the attendance of delegates in the provinces for Provincial
Week was paid for by Parliament, we hope that, at very least, the party
concerned will reimburse Parliament for this wasteful expenditure.

These four concerns necessitate legitimate reform of the way we conduct
Provincial Weeks from now on, but Chair, we are only presenting them
because we believe so strongly in the Provincial Weeks as the embodiment of
our constitutional duties in this House. We trust that, once they have been
addressed, the oversight and co-ordination work of this House will go from
strength to strength.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N ABRAHAM-NTANTISO (Eastern Cape): Hon Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP,
members of this august House, special delegates from the provinces, we as
the Eastern Cape provincial legislature appreciate the NCOP initiative
which demonstrates Batho Pele, especially the principle of not only taking
the NCOP to the people but also following up on issues raised by the
people. As a province ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Chairperson, I rise on a point of
order: I want to know whether it is procedural for an hon member to
interface with you directly – in the manner in which the hon Prince is
doing – while you are presiding, because it obstructs the House.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): You may continue, hon
member.

Ms N ABRAHAM-NTANTISO (Eastern Cape): As a province we take pride in having
hosted such prestigious interactions which brought together a variety of
stakeholders in order to ensure quality service delivery to the people.

During the programme that took place in the Chris Hani district, at the
Emalahleni Local Municipality, some of the issues raised were of national
competence, some were provincial but some belonged to the local
municipality. This is the first time that this important House has made
such follow-ups to demonstrate interest in people. It brought together
various spheres of government and talked to issues of co-operative
governance in action.

The Emalahleni Local Municipality had areas that they responded to as a
local municipality, but they had limitations that included resources. What
we appreciate, however, is that they had some initiatives. The Bhengu
multipurpose centre is a case in point. Owing to budgetary constraints, the
Chris Hani District Municipality had also not moved that much in addressing
areas that are in their competence. However, they did raise some concerns
on areas like unfunded mandates, local equitable share and
intergovernmental relations.

With regard to health care and specifically the Glen Grey hospital and the
Philani Clinic, district maintenance teams stepped in to assist with water.
In some cases the ruralism of the province contributes to the distances
being a challenge. Incentivising rural employees and the definition of
“rural” also need to be addressed.

On the issue of education, the MEC declared that the R981 million that is
afforded to this department was not sufficient. For example, in the case of
the Freemantle Boys High School, where so much has happened, the department
has allocated some funds for the school, but it is still not enough. The
same goes for the primary and secondary schools that were visited by the
team from the NCOP.

The departments of social development, housing, local government, safety
and liaison, as led by the premier, also had some issues they responded to
that were about the competence of the province. But we must note that with
regard to the responses, the national departments had not responded
sufficiently and effectively.

The Emalahleni Local Municipality is in an area which is supposed to be
doing coal mining. Therefore the feeling in the province is that national
departments have to assist that area in order to ensure its success.

It should be borne in mind that the area visited in the Chris Hani District
is representative of the broader Eastern Cape areas like Cacadu,
Ukhahlamba, O R Tambo and Alfred Nzo. This area has a high rate of
unemployment and is also drought-stricken. People who reside there survive
by farming and a shortage of water is therefore a life-threatening issue.
This area needs vigorous programmes to deal with the effects of climate
change.

The NCOP programme has assisted in highlighting the plight of other areas
in the province. Seventy per cent of the province is rural, poverty-
stricken and offers no job opportunities. The NCOP still has to go back to
such areas for a variety of responses and work with the province and
districts on issues of co-operative governance. The key thing for us now is
to work on substantial issues that were raised, upon which our efforts as
the ruling party will be judged.

The communication between the various spheres of government has also been
highlighted. Other issues that have been raised by both the premier and the
executive mayor include the backlog in electricity supply. Infrastructural
challenges generally impact on service delivery across departments.
Budgetary issues need the influence of all members, especially when it
comes to the province’s department of safety and liaison, which has a
minimal budget.

Once more, the Eastern Cape provincial legislature greatly appreciates the
initiative by the NCOP and hopes that we have more programmes like these in
all areas in our country. The Eastern Cape supports the report. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr J J VISSER (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, it is a privilege for me to
be invited to speak in your assembly. The Western Cape provincial
government recognises the important role the National Council of Provinces
plays in the processes of government. We appreciate the fact that the NCOP
makes time available for all its members to be able to liaise with the
different spheres of government.

On 8 September and 9 September 2009, the NCOP undertook a visit to local
governments, together with the Western Cape parliament members. The group
split into two because of the number of people involved, and to be able to
cover as much ground as possible in the allocated timeslot.

One group went to the Southern Cape and the other group went to the Western
Cape. The group that went to the Southern Cape visited the Eden District
Municipality region and engaged with five municipalities there. The focus
was to talk about service delivery and specifically to focus on those areas
where the municipalities encounter problems and need help, either from
national, provincial government or the NCOP. Local government is the
nearest to the needs of society, and the other spheres of government should
be willing and ready to assist and help.

Unfortunately, it is also a fact that where local authorities take bad
decisions, there should be intervention from the other spheres of
government because we cannot allow a lack of service delivery or a problem
to occur with potentially dire consequences, which could have been detected
in time and prevented with interference in time.

The single biggest problem we found on our trip to the Southern Cape was
the problem of available water in this region. This is a critical problem
at this moment and requires intervention and help from all spheres of
government immediately, or we will see a catastrophe of proportions we
cannot imagine.

It is a fact that people cannot go without water, and the Ministers of the
Western Cape government are doing all they can to prevent this disaster and
put plans in place to solve the problem for now and the future. It seems
that global warming has a bigger impact on water resources than what anyone
anticipated and we should take cognisance of this fact.

The second big problem that exists is the shortage of housing and the
subsequent problem with the delivery of electricity, water, sewage, streets
and everything that goes with a proper, decent township. This problem is
aggravated by the high influx of people into this area, which puts huge
pressure on the municipalities to deliver the needed services. They need
help to cope because, progressively, the growth of the population is higher
than the growth of the tax base, which has to pay for all of this. There
are other areas of concern that you will find in the report submitted to
the NCOP, and which are already under further study, with the
recommendations being acted upon.

The reason for the Western Cape visit was to investigate the land
restitution of the Ebenezer people at Lutzville in the lower Olifants River
Valley. The beneficiaries of this restitution programme are a very annoyed
and unhappy group of people because the project had progressed to a point,
but now, when the land should be transferred or people compensated, nothing
is happening.

The Department of Land Affairs is not entirely honest with the
beneficiaries about the problem. Farms have been allocated and bought, but
transfers cannot take place because the former owners cannot be paid owing
to a lack of money. Also, the beneficiaries who do not want land but want
remuneration instead cannot be paid because of this lack of funds. National
government and specifically the Department of Land Affairs must solve this
problem urgently, because it has already been in process since 1995 and
needs to be concluded.

The second big problem in that area is that of the fishing communities - Mr
Harris indicated that as well. These people are in dire straits because of
fishing quotas that were taken away from them. No alternatives have been
put in place to support the families. These people depend on sea resources
for their livelihood, not just to make money but actually to have food to
eat. These small communities were never a threat to resources in the sea;
they are too small to be a threat. The actual threat is the big fishing
companies, which use big fishing trawlers to fish.

The government will have to address these problems because these people are
practitioners of fishing and nothing else. They are solely dependent on the
sea. Alternatives such as aquaculture farms to replace the depleted
resources and provide income are a solution. The rest of the issues are
covered in a report that is with the NCOP.

I wish to thank the NCOP delegates for their participation and contribution
through the visits. It is, however, very easy to assess a problem, but to
solve a problem takes much more initiative and energy. I want to plead with
this assembly to help and work together so that we can solve these major
issues, which I have highlighted, as soon as possible by working together
in all spheres of government. I thank you again for the opportunity to be
here and address you. [Applause.]

Ms D Z RANTHO: Hon Chairperson, Chief Whip, special delegates of the
provinces, Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, comrades and
colleagues, I am delighted to have this opportunity to address you on
behalf of my organisation, the ANC.

This opportunity reminds me and all of us of the primary objectives of the
national democratic, nonracial and nonsexist, prosperous South Africa. We
should commit ourselves to this revolution and lift our poor people out of
having to live in poor conditions as a result of the legacy left by the
apartheid regime.

The Provincial Week is just an exercise relevant to the mandate of this
House. Therefore, our task is to work together as an activist government.
We are faced with many challenges in our communities that we are aware of,
and we are dealing robustly with them. The ANC government is the first to
recognise disabled people and women as equal partners across all races. We
would like to thank the people of our country for putting their trust in us
once again. Working together as this collective, we can achieve all our
goals and change the lives of our people for the better.

We are a disciplined organisation, and if we continue to be this
disciplined, we will defend the leadership role of our movement and
maintain the victory of our national democratic revolution. To be in a
leadership position is not an entitlement, but, rather, that masses of ANC
followers trusted us. During the Provincial Week, so soon after the
elections, we showed our people what we had promised them during the
elections in that we are led by them and we are committed to doing exactly
what is expected of us.

We also want to acknowledge the people’s plight of not getting service
delivery in certain areas, as expected; the challenges in our
municipalities; the corruption that the opposition party is howling about.
We are the first to acknowledge this, and we are also the first to notice
it, and we have strategies to deal with all corruption, inside and outside
of government. Our leaders came out publicly with strategies, and they said
clearly that they were not going to favour anyone; whether a revolutionist
or not, corruption is corruption.

Our government, as the ANC, has also achieved a lot during the past 15
years. We made progress in the provision of electricity, water and shelter
for our people. During the apartheid regime, our people used to cross
rivers with strings or ropes, but today we are able to cross rivers using
bridges that were built by this government that takes care of its people
... [Applause.] ... because of the three spheres of government working
together.

That regime did not bother itself about people living in rural areas, but
now, when they are campaigning, they tell us that we do not care about the
living conditions of those people. Have they ever thought that those people
were not born after 1994, but were in existence even before they stole our
country? I will repeat this even in my grave, and I will always say: “It is
the ANC and only the ANC that will lead the people of South Africa.”
[Applause.]

Eli lizwe lifuna umbutho ofana noKhongolose okwaziyo ukuthetha nabantu
nowonyusa isidima sabantu, ongakhethi sini, bala nabuntu babantu. Amazwe
aphesheya ayatsho ukuba owethu uMgaqo-siseko ngowona uhamba phambili kwi
hlabathi liphela.
Ngulo rhulumente wethu kuphela owakhela abantu izindlu zamahala,
kwihlabathi liphela. Ngulo rhulumente wethu obonelela mahala ngeenkonzo
ezingundoqo, kwihlabathi liphela. Sikwazile ukususa isiqalekiso sokuqala
esabekwa nguRhulumente ongaphambili ebantwini bethu, sokuzijongela phantsi
njengabantu abangento phambi kukaRhulumente.

Singurhulumente osondeleyo ebantwini nowenza ngokwelizwi labantu. Silwa
indlala ngandlela zonke kuba kaloku sithi: (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[This country needs an organisation like the ANC that is capable of talking
to the people and restoring their dignity, is nonsexist and nonracial in
terms of ubuntu. The international world acknowledges our Constitution as
the best in the whole world.

It is only our government in the whole world that builds houses for free.
It is also our government only that provides people with basic services for
free in the whole wide world. We were able to redress the first legacy of
apartheid, that of looking down upon ourselves as less important peoples
within the government.

We are the government that is close to the people that performs according
to the mandate of the people. We fight poverty in all fronts because we say
...]

“Working together to ensure delivery of services to communities” - that is
our assurance. We, as people with eyes of appreciation, commend our
government for the recognition of areas that were not known before.

Our Minister of Home Affairs is trying to bring back the dignity of our
people by giving them identity documents so that they can be proud of being
South African. In fact, she recently visited a very remote area in
Pondoland, which cars cannot reach, and got there because of the commitment
of the organisation. We reach the unreachable.

The ANC is not an organisation of leadership; it is an organisation for all
people irrespective of race, colour and creed. “Singugalel’ebhayini.” [We
accept everyone as our own.] We live by our mandate and our vision taken
from the time of the drafting of our Freedom Charter to our manifestos,
January Statements, up to the state of the nation address by our President.
We are committed to fighting HIV and Aids in all respects in this country,
as the President said last week at the podium in this NCOP. The campaign of
16 Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children, which will
be launched some time this month, is a clear fact of our fighting this
deadly disease.

Fighting crime is part of our programme. The Police Minister and
Commissioner went and launched community policing in areas where crime is
rife and uncontrollable. The upgrading of police stations and of our
policemen and policewomen who fight crime is also taking place.

It is so shameful to hear a disgruntled member of the opposition party, who
used to be protected by our organisation, today complaining about the
protection of our people.

Sinabantu esivela kungcwaba uthuthu lwabo ababetshiswe ngexesha
lorhulumente omdala, eBhayi. Sibangcwabile kwezi veki ziphelileyo, kuba
babebulewe lolukhozo lwemali elileliny’icala le-DA liyi-National Party, NP,
phofu ke i-DA iseyila NP yangaphambili. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[We have come from the funeral of the people who were burnt during the era
of the apartheid government, in Port Elizabeth. We buried them over the
past few weeks because they were killed by the DA, which is the same coin
as the National Party, NP. Anyway, the DA is still the same NP.]

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, on a point of order: would the speaker be able to tell
us which member of the opposition she is talking about?

Ms D Z RANTHO: We have in the past demonstrated that working together we
can do more. So, education is our priority. I think now it is proper for me
to wish Grade 12 learners good luck with their exams. They are the future
leaders of our country.

Lastly, this shows that the ANC will lead this country forever, and we will
fight for that. The ANC lives; the ANC leads. Amandla! [Applause.]

Mong M P JACOBS: Ho Modulasetulo ya kgabane, Motsamaisi wa Dipuisano,
maloko a ntlo ena a hlomphehang, maloko a hlomphehang a dipalamente tsa
diporovensi, basebeletsi ba puso, bomme le bontate, re leboha tlhompho eo
le re fileng yona, ya hore re behe raporoto ya Foreisetata ka pela ntlo
ena. Raporoto ena ke tshusumetso ya Molaotheo wa rona hore rona re be
leihlo pusong ya porovensi le pusong ya lehae. (Translation of Sesotho
paragraph follows.)

[Mr M P JACOBS: Hon Chairperson, the Presiding Officer, hon members of this
House, hon members of the provincial legislatures, public servants, ladies
and gentlemen, we appreciate the honour given to us to table the report of
the Free State. This report is the constitutional obligation that we should
be the overseers of provincial and local governments.]

We want to assure this House that this report is not sentimental, but will
strike the right chord with our people. It has been prepared with the sole
purpose of trying to address the concerns that have been raised by our
communities during our expedition.

The contents of this report need our profound attention. I will single out
a few issues that were raised and that hamper the provision of service
delivery.

We have discovered that there is centralisation of departmental functions
at provincial offices, which delays the proper functioning of districts,
because even a small issue such as the purchasing of a globe in an office
requires a provincial endorsement.

The challenges raised by the Minister of Health earlier in this House are
challenges that we became aware of during our visit to hospitals.

On the education front, adult education is neglected. Some schools are
“platooning”, although attempts are in progress to build new schools. There
is also a lack of discipline in some schools: teachers arrive late for duty
and the school management developer is not hands-on.

In pursuit of excellence and of doing things differently, we want to assure
this House that we won’t leave any stone unturned in making sure that our
people receive better services.

We want to propose to this House that the NCOP receive feedback from
provinces on how they have dealt with issues that are contained and raised
in our provincial reports. It would be ideal if we could receive these
reports before we embarked on another visit to the provinces.

We are aware that our processes are cumbersome. We were enthusiastically
received by members of communities wherever we went. It is crucial that
that enthusiasm isn’t lost.

Kufanele noma kanjani sisheshe ukuxazulula izinkinga nezidingo zomphakathi.
[We should by all means possible solve the problems of the community and
cater for their needs quickly.]

... because that is the mandate they have given us.

We are worried, as public representatives, about the spate of violent
protest actions that have engulfed certain townships. The blame cannot be
put solely on the doorstep of local government. We must take cognisance of
the fact that these protests took place after we had been to the provinces.
The situation calls upon us to play a more constructive and supportive role
in local government by using parliamentary constituency offices
effectively.

We are pleased, as the Free State, that the number of protest actions has
gone down, as reported by the Salga delegate the previous week. It gives us
hope that we are on the right course.

We would like to wipe out all ills and have 0% protests. We are convinced
that Operation Hlasela, spearheaded by the honourable Premier Ace
Magashule, has become an effective instrument of service delivery. As I
speak, more than 200 people have been employed in an area where I come
from. People will now be able to put food on the table for their children
to eat, and old and dilapidated houses are being renovated. This programme
is not a Reconstruction and Development Programme, but is running
concurrently with it.

These services cut across the whole province. The construction of national
roads between Reitz and Petrus Steyn has been completed; and other roads,
which are linked with the 2010 Fifa World Cup, are in their final stages.
What is left is for us to intensify Operation Hlasela to speed up service
delivery.

We are on the right course and we dare not fail the people of the Free
State and the country, because working together, we must ensure that we
deliver quality services to our people. We support this report. Siyabulela.
[Thank you.] [Applause.]

Ms B V MNCUBE: Hon House Chair, hon Chief Whip, hon members, special
delegates from the provinces, thank you for according me this opportunity
to share with you the challenges, the progress and the plans for Gauteng.
The provincial week has enabled permanent delegates to interact with the
Gauteng provincial legislature’s leadership and various stakeholders, with
the purpose of engaging with targeted stakeholders and communities to
enable delegates of the National Council of Provinces to put community
issues on the legislative agenda.

Oversight visits were undertaken by delegates from the NCOP and the Gauteng
legislature portfolio committees, by SA Local Government Association
representatives, by the Johannesburg Metro mayoral committee and by the
Mogale City Local Municipality to Rietvallei Extension 5 and Muldersdrift
in the West Rand region, and to the Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital and the
Lilian Ngoyi Community Health Centre in Soweto, so that challenges
identified could be noted and addressed by all spheres of government.

There was a briefing by the chairperson of the Gauteng portfolio committee
on health and social development and, with the establishment of the new
Gauteng provincial executive council, the department of social development
and the department of health were merged into a single department. One of
the issues raised is that there is a staff shortage which still persists in
the department, hence the lack of proper service delivery. The dispute in
terms of the provincialisation of health services had impacted negatively
on service delivery, especially the emergency management services and
primary health care services.

The recommendations given by the joint committees were that the health and
social development committee should engage the department concerning the
issue of the closing time of community health centres to enable communities
to have greater access to health facilities.

In terms of the intervention by the government regarding the scarcity of
staff, the Gauteng provincial government has already opened up nursing
training colleges and has recalled retired health practitioners to respond
to the filling of vacant posts, to the skills shortage and to curb the
backlog which impacted negatively on service delivery. The Gauteng
provincial government has developed a turnaround strategy called
Kuyasheshwa: Gauteng Working Better.

With regard to the briefing by the chairperson of the Gauteng portfolio
committee on local government and housing, the department of local
government and housing is a merger between the department of local
government and the department of housing, following the establishment of
the fourth Gauteng provincial legislature.

The observation of the portfolio committee is that migration and
immigration to the province have placed a lot of strain on provincial
government resources, and they are impacting negatively on service
delivery, as the government’s plans are unable to respond adequately to the
demand for services. There is an inadequate provisioning of budget for
municipalities to enable them to perform their developmental function,
which is being responsive to local development and local governments and
community participation.

Part of the challenge in Gauteng is the land scarcity in which some of the
underutilised land is not conducive to human settlement – it is wetlands
and also has dolomite. The transformation of hostels into family units is
under way in some parts of the province. The presentation by the executive
council of Gauteng was informed by the 15-year governance review and the
current priorities of the Gauteng provincial government. The presentation
captured the progress made since the installation of the current political
leadership and outlined a comprehensive programme with timeframes, which
demonstrates that the Gauteng provincial government is on course in meeting
its deadlines of the Kuyasheshwa five-year programme, which puts the
province at the cutting edge of creating a better life for all.

The delegation from the Mogale City Local Municipality was led by the
speaker, and together with a member of the mayoral committee and
councillors they presented to us the challenges and plans for alleviating
and addressing the backlog in housing. There are plans at Mogale City to
build 25 174 houses at Rietvallei, Tarlton, Muldersdrift, Munsieville,
Kagiso and Magaliesburg between 2009 and 2014 so as to address the housing
backlog. The challenge so far that has been experienced with Mogale City is
the purchase of land. The problem is that mine and private owners cause the
land to be expensive and priced out of the market, which causes a problem
for resettling the people.

Another problem is the lack of identity documents. The delegation was
informed that a recent survey conducted by a staff member from the Mogale
City housing division revealed that a substantial number of South Africans
living in informal settlements do not have identity documents. Not having
an identity books starts from not having a birth certificate. A person who
does not have an identity book cannot register for a housing subsidy. In
terms of the intervention by the NCOP, the matter must be brought to the
attention of the Department of Home Affairs so that instructions can be
filtered down to local departments to undertake campaigns in informal
settlements. People in need of identity documents must be assisted. This is
crucial in the formalisation and upgrading of the informal settlements,
otherwise people will continue living in squalor in underdeveloped
settlements. There is therefore a call for an increase in the number of
mobile offices for easy access.

The objective of the Munsieville Urban Renewal Programme is to rejuvenate
the old township by installing storm-water drains and sewerage systems,
creating a healthy and conducive environment. The programme, however, is
running short of funds. The unavailability of land is a problem because
most of the land in Mogale City is not suitable for habitation and is also
full of dolomite.

There is a huge informal settlement at Rietfontein with illegal land
invasions. The rapid growth of the informal settlement threatens the
municipality’s developmental plans. Most of the inhabitants do not have
identity documents, while a large percentage constitutes immigrants from
other countries. Private-property owners often evict farm labourers who
have been residing on the land for many years. These farm labourers do not
have alternative accommodation, and this we condemn in the strongest terms.


There are recommendations on the lack of land. Owing to the lack of land
for poor communities and considering the fact that the local municipality
and the provincial government are unable to buy privately owned land to
resettle communities and build houses in safer areas, a proposal was made
that the willing-buyer, willing-seller policy be reviewed.

The mining companies that are responsible for reckless and unsafe mining
practices should get punitive and heavy financial fines as a form of
restitution to communities and government. The relevant department of the
Gauteng provincial government should speedily intervene in educating former
farm labourers who work for years on the land where they were born and
private-property owners who evict them without compassion for children and
women.

The Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital delegation was led by the hospital
board chairperson and the acting chief executive officer. The Lilian Ngoyi
Community Health Centre delegation was led by the chief director. The
Lilian Ngoyi Clinic is the only clinic that closes at 10pm, and when the
other clinics close at 4pm the patients are referred to the Lilian Ngoyi
Clinic. The Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital is exploring the possibility of
operating 24 hours daily. Organised labour was part of the meeting.

In conclusion, the delegates noted and appreciated the sterling work of Mr
Siphiwe Msimango, who has been volunteering his services at the Chris Hani
Baragwanath Hospital for the past 10 years. Thank you, hon Chairperson.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo walo mhlangano wale Ndlu ehloniphekile,
amalunga ale Ndlu ahloniphekile. Laphaya ngomhlaka-7 ukuya kumhlaka -11
Septemba 2009 kwaba nokuhlangana okuhle phakathi kwethu esimele iKwaZulu-
Natali kule Ndlu noNdunankulu wesiFundazwe kanye namalungu akhe omkhandlu
ophethe kuleya ndawo.

Saba nomhlangano omuhle futhi nozihlalo bozihlalo bamakomidi bonke
besilandisa ngokuthi asebenza kanjani amakomidi abo. USomlomo nePhini
lakhe, noSotswebhu weqembu elibusayo neliphikisayo saba nokuhambisa okuhle
kakhulu kuwo wonke amaprojekthi akhona anjenge -Dube Port nalapho sabona
khona ukuthi isikhumulo sezindiza esikhulukazi saseThekwini siyaphela.

Kwaba ngumkhandlu waseMgungundlovu owaveza ngokusobala ukuthi izinkinga
zawo zingakanani nalapho okufuneka basizwe khona wakubeka kwaba yinselele
ukuthi uMnyango Wezasekhaya waleso sifundazwe kufudingeka ukwazi ukusiza.
Kwaba nombuzo omkhulu mayelana nomasipala weTheku obizwa nge-eThekwini
Municipality njengoba imeya kanye nemenenja yakhona bengakwazanga
ukuhlonipha isimemo sezithunywa sokuthi bazothula umbiko mayelana
nokusebenza kumaMasipala. Kwaba nenkinga enkulu yokubukela phansi
izithunywa ngumasipala waseThekwini ngokubona kwami.

Ngenkathi ngibuka indlela uMkhandlu Wezifunda osebenzisana ngayo namasipala
basekhaya ayaicacisi kakhle ukuthi kumele kusetshenzwe kanjani, njengokuthi
balekelela uma kwenzenjani komasipala abancane basemakhaya. Ngithi-ke
ngokwami isonto lokuvakasha lokubuyela esifundazweni ngalesekela kakhulu,
ngalibuka nokuthi laba nokusebenza okuhle nokuthi kube nokuxhumana nokwazi
izinto ukuthi kufanele zihanjiswe kanjani kuyo yonke into.

Ngithi kunguumsebenzi omkhulu wale Ndlu ukuqinisekisa ukuthi iziFundazwe
ziyakwazi ukuletha kuhulumeni kaZwelonke izikhalazo zazo noma izinto
abafisa zenzeke. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Hon Chairperson of this august  House,  hon  members  of
this House, a meeting was held from 7 to 11 September 2009  between  us,  as
I’m representing KwaZulu-Natal  in  this  House,  and  the  Premier  of  the
province and the members of his council which is in charge of that area.

We had a fruitful  meeting  and  all  the  chairpersons  of  the  committees
explained how they operated. The Speaker,  the  Deputy  Speaker,  the  Chief
Whips of the ruling party and the opposition party worked well  on  all  the
existing projects like the  Dube  Trade  Port,  where  we  saw  the  biggest
airport of EThekwini which was nearing completion.

The Council of uMgungundlovu District shared  with  us  all  the  challenges
that they face. This was done in a manner which  challenged  the  provincial
district to intervene in  their  dilemma.  There  was  a  concern  over  the
absence of the Mayor and the  Manager  of  the  EThekwini  Municipality  who
failed to honour the invitation by the delegates who wanted them to  present
how they operated, which was insubordination in my view.

If you look at the way  the  district  council  and  local  government  work
together, I have observed that there is no clarity in terms  of  their  role
in assisting the small municipalities. I supported the  week-long  visit  to
the province. I also observed that there  was  good  working  relations  and
communication and everybody knew the plan of action.

One of the core functions of this House is to ensure that the provinces  are
able to submit their grievances or things that they wish  to  see  happening
to national government. Thank you.]

Mr L P M NZIMANDE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, special delegates, ladies
and gentlemen, we arise from the province of KwaZulu-Natal, part of the
unitary state of South Africa. We are happy to be a province of South
Africa and not a province on our own, despite having a kingdom that we are
also proud of.

I come from the province of KwaZulu-Natal, but I am a member of the ANC who
is proud to lead KwaZulu-Natal. [Applause.] I am thankful that the voters
voted overwhelmingly on 22 April 2009 in asking the ANC to undertake
commitments as they are contained in the priorities of the manifesto that
was sold to them.

The manifesto included, amongst other things, paying full attention to
rural development and agrarian reform; making sure that crime is attended
to, differently to before; and that the health status of our people’s needs
are attended to by ensuring that there are effective reforms in health
care, that the ground is prepared in the province to deal with the expected
national health insurance, which will assist in making sure that poor
people have full access to health services, and that health services are
enhanced and there is better investment in them.

As we know, as a province we are faced with tuberculosis, with multidrug-
resistant tuberculosis, HIV and Aids and many other health-related diseases
that are also escalated by poverty. Part of the priorities contained in the
manifesto deal with food security matters, and we are worried in the
province by the fact that land reform is not equal to the usage of the
land. We urge the people of KwaZulu-Natal ...

... ukuthi basukume bakhe. [... to start doing something about their
plight.]

We would like to ensure that they are involved and empowered. That is
contained in the manifesto and it was in the provincial address by the
premier in which he gave all of us tasks to undertake and commit ourselves
to.

When the permanent delegates visited KwaZulu-Natal during the provincial
week, we met with the speakership and the whippery on the first day, and we
met with MECs of Co-operate Governance, Education and Rural Development.
For us it was revealing how committed the government is to the people: the
integrity of the leaders of those institutions who briefed us on the work
they are already undertaking and the heads of the departments that they are
employing to do the work.

We also met with the KwaZulu-Natal Local Government Association, Kwanaloga.
For the past few years Kwanaloga and Salga have been receiving qualified
audits. The role of Kwanaloga and Salga in supporting municipalities,
capacitating and guiding them has always been questioned. But at our
meeting with them we saw a turnaround plan when the new CEO of Kwanaloga,
Mr Cele, shared with us how seriously worried Kwanaloga is about the
support for municipalities - human resource-wise and capacity wise.

We also met with the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal and the executive council. In
the briefings with them we were informed about the plans that were in place
and the resources that were available to tackle the issue of service
delivery in the province.

Part of the briefing was about a necessary campaign to tackle food
security. The campaign “One home, one garden” is a campaign that KwaZulu-
Natal has undertaken to ensure that people do stand up and have greening in
their houses. We are starting to tackle the scourge of food insecurity
amongst the people. [Applause.]

Matters that were challenges for us, as raised by the briefings, entailed
the problems around water and sanitation. This, we believe, is a national
problem and the Department of Water Affairs and water service authorities
need to look seriously into water conservation and the problem of water
scarcity. This is because rural development, agrarian reform and food
security are dependent on water, so if we were to honestly tackle them we
need water.

However, we are glad that efforts are being made. For instance, we were
informed of efforts to deal with the problem of Jozini Dam, which is
privately owned and which does not supply water to the surrounding areas –
this dam is on fertile land in KwaZulu-Natal and the communities can’t
access the water contained in the dam. This matter is being tackled and we
hope it will be finalised and that people will receive water from this dam.
This would change the lives of the people around Jozini Dam and on the
Makhathini Flats.

We were also informed of the need for co-ordination between the legislature
and the NCOP, particularly in ensuring that we play our role of monitoring,
evaluating progress and making sure that we assist in removing blockages to
quality service delivery in the province.

We were also informed about the good work of the government in ensuring,
for once and for all, that the problems of supply-chain management in the
procurement of government services or the buying of goods and services by
government would now be addressed. They must ensure that there is no
corruption because it has been found to be a hindrance to service delivery
in the province. Monies get wasted and government is being pickpocketed by
some officials who are working together with businesspeople that are luring
them into this wrongdoing. The plan is to work with the Special
Investigating Unit and other investigating authorities to deal with the
matter of corruption in government procurement.

With regard to the Dube Trade Port, we saw the potential of how it could
contribute to the country and not just to the province. As I have already
indicated, we are a province in the unitary state of South Africa. The
investment of this government in the Dube Trade Port demonstrates its
commitment to economic growth. We hope that in due course it will
contribute to the economic growth of South Africa and ensure that we
compete with all the exporters of the world – and that our rate of export
trade will rise and assist in making contributions to our manufacturing and
thus help the country to fight job losses.

In the province of KwaZulu-Natal we are thankful that the investment in
peace made by the ANC has now yielded fruit. This investment has yielded
fruit because there are indications of peace and stability. We believe that
there wouldn’t be peace and development if there was no social stability
amongst people. Hence, we believe that we are now empowering communities in
conflict resolution amongst themselves as part of the campaign that the
government has undertaken with the people. We support the report of the
provincial week as the KwaZulu-Natal government and province. Thank you,
hon Chair. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Order! I now take the opportunity to
call the hon Masoga, standing committee chair on public participation in
Limpopo.

Mr L MASOGA (Limpopo): Hon Chairperson Tau and hon members, I have the
honour of informing this honourable House that the Limpopo legislature
convened a special sitting on 3 November 2009 to consider the report of the
NCOP that we are considering this afternoon.

In our deliberations the Limpopo legislature welcomed this report as a very
helpful instrument and as a very objective and honest instrument that will
help us in our oversight work.

In considering the report we made certain observations. One of the
observations is about a paragraph contained in the report on page 32, which
says:

   The NCOP delegation of Limpopo has noted the progress made by the
   province to improve service delivery. The province has overcome a number
   of obstacles and met a number of challenges facing service delivery. It
   was noted that the provision of basic services continues to reach people
   on the ground. The Polokwane welfare complex was noted as one of the best
   in the country, with similar arrangements established in Gauteng and the
   Free State.


   In general, the delegation noted the delay experienced in the province
   with housing delivery, the challenges faced with access to water and
   sanitation, electricity and roads and inadequate storm-water drainage
   systems.


   In addition, the condition of schools and the performance of matriculants
   are serious cause for concern, while there is also a need to make serious
   interventions at Philadelphia Hospital.

This summarises the essence of what is contained in the report about
Limpopo. In our reflections we made certain observations, which are
contained in the report. Among other things, we placed strong emphasis on
the areas of housing, health and social development.

One of the concerns that the report notes is that of contractors who leave
RDP houses incomplete. It has been reported and brought to our attention
that all the contracts of all the nonperforming contractors in the province
have been terminated henceforth and replaced with well-capacitated
contractors.

Another concern was around the quality of the houses that are being built
by contractors. It has been reported that all urban and rural projects have
enrolled with the National Home Builders Registration Council for warranty
purposes.

Another concern raised was around the lack of commitment by contractors,
leading to spending without them necessarily completing the houses they
have been building. The Limpopo department of local government and housing
has assured us that they only release payments for contractors that have
completed their work. Payments are only made for work that has been
completed.

A concern has also been raised around the issue of the lack of monitoring
and evaluation of projects. Of course the work that is being done by our
government includes, amongst other things, the joint inspection that is
conducted by the Limpopo department of local government and housing,
project managers together with municipal inspectors, and the NHBRC project
inspectors.

Furthermore, a concern has been raised in the report around the design of
houses that do not necessarily take into account the challenges facing our
people living with disabilities. The department looks at the beneficiary
list in terms of the work it is providing, and if houses are sought for the
benefit of members of the community living with disabilities, particular
adjustments are made to the designs, including the provision of ramps.

There have been reports on the so-called blocked housing projects in the
province. I wish to report to this House that indeed the blocked project
problem in the province is history. That is yesterday’s story. All the
previously blocked projects have been completed successfully. [Applause.]

The problem of contractors that run away, leaving behind projects for which
they have already been paid, is also history because we have tightened the
system and it no longer accommodates such unscrupulous contractors.

The concern that was raised with regard to the standard of buildings
observed in Extension 44 has been dealt with successfully, including the
completion of outstanding projects which were meant to be completed by
December 2009.

We wish to report to this House that the contracts of nonperforming
contractors at Extension 44 have been terminated with immediate effect and
replaced with a well-capacitated contractor. [Applause.]

The hon member Makhubela raised a concern here regarding the Tau and
Sebaila family in GaMaponto. We wish to report to this House that the Tau
family house will be completed, according to the report that we got from
the service provider, by Friday this week. [Applause.] The house that is
meant to benefit the Sebaila family will be completed by next week Friday,
according to the commitment made by the service provider. [Applause.]

Another concern that has been raised in the report relates to the challenge
with regard to qualified audits that our municipalities are continually
receiving. During the month of September the province launched what we call
the “clean audit operation”, which seeks to ensure that, as we move towards
the end of the financial year, we reduce the number of municipalities that
continually receive qualified reports.

Again, in terms of health and welfare, the report noted the strides that we
have made with regard to the Expanded Public Works Programme. The
department of health and social development has contributed to the national
target of job creation by creating 8 482 work opportunities through the
following work programmes of the EPWP: Home-based care created 4 698 job
opportunities; malaria control created 252 job opportunities; the social
development branch created 2 937 job opportunities; the Masupatsela Youth
Pioneer Programme created 275 job opportunities; the Manyeleti Youth
Academy created 220 job opportunities; and the substance abuse programme
created 100 job opportunities. These are some of the interventions that our
government is making to improve the quality of life of our people.

The report raised an observation regarding the Katlehong drop-in centre,
with regard to the issue of the acquisition of land. When we made
investigations, we discovered that indeed the centre does not own the site
on which it is located, and the department, working together with the local
stakeholders, has engaged the local school, Molamu School, which will
provide a piece of land inside the school, particularly in view of the
relationship between the school’s facility and the drop-in centre.

Our department is also making efforts towards helping with the funding of
that drop-in centre. The department will strengthen the current monitoring
and support system for the drop-in centres through the involvement of the
local NGO forums and the local municipalities to ensure that they receive
the necessary assistance.

On the question of the mushrooming of drop-in centres, the department will
be implementing the new Children’s Act. The regulations on the registration
of drop-in centres to curb the mushrooming of centres will come into effect
from 1 April 2010.

The report also raises an issue regarding adoption services. The challenge
around the adoption of children is recognised. The department is not making
significant progress in this regard, because adoption is the permanent
placement of children with families and most African families are still
reluctant to adopt, because adoption comes with added responsibilities for
the family, especially recognising that there are still high levels of
poverty in the province, particularly within the African communities.

The department will intensify the marketing of adoption services through
campaigns so that our communities do understand the importance of this
programme.

With regard to primary health care, the number of clinics that provide 24-
hour services had risen from 74% to 81% by the second quarter of the 2009-
10 financial year. The availability of medicines at clinics stands at 88%,
although it remains a concern to us as the legislature. We still have a
challenge with the distribution of medicine, and the system is being
reviewed.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Masoga, unfortunately your time has
expired.

Mr L MASOGA (Limpopo): The last point is on antiretroviral research, which
we have increased from 64% to 65%. Thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr S P D SKHOSANA (Mpumalanga): Hon Chair Tau, hon members of the NCOP,
representatives of Salga, we, the Mpumalanga provincial legislature, hereby
declare our profound gratitude to be granted this rare privilege and
opportunity to address this esteemed House. Indeed, it is an exceptional
honour to address the National Council of Provinces, and we are highly
delighted.

From the outset, we also want to express our heartfelt gratitude to our
NCOP permanent delegates, namely the hon Boroto, the hon Mashile, the hon
Themba, the hon Nyambi, the hon Watson and hon Sibande, for their dedicated
visit to our province during the provincial week of September 2009.

They came to ascertain, inter alia, the actual causes of the service
delivery protest action that was manifested in the various local
municipalities, particularly at the Mkhondo Local Municipality, to assess
the type and quality of service delivery being rendered in the
municipalities. They also came to further determine the course of action
the Mpumalanga provincial leadership had undertaken to deal efficiently and
effectively with the factors that had given rise to the violent protest
action.

We hereby confirm that the aforementioned NCOP permanent delegates
interacted with various stakeholders in the province, namely the provincial
speakership, provincial presiding officers and the secretary of the
legislature, on issues such as the overview of oversight work between the
legislature and the NCOP. This incorporated, firstly, overseeing the
national departments that are rendering service delivery in the province;
and, secondly, dealing with the matter of section 76 Bills, especially the
issue of timing, when the Bills are referred to the province. This is
critical because many a time Bills are referred on short notice and are
written in English, which really inconveniences the public when they speak
the vernacular.

Over the past few months, the province has experienced a number of service
delivery protests in some of our municipalities. These protests have
challenged the government, but I want to assure you that we have our finger
on the pulse and we are doing everything we can to deal with these
challenges.

It is unfortunate that during these periods of unrest we experience acts of
violence, destruction of property and, in some instances, loss of lives.
The estimates we have received so far puts the damage to state property at
about R90 million. We hope we shall never have to go through this pain
again.

During this period one thing that has been very clear is that we are
committed to working with communities to resolve all these problems - that
we will stay in those communities until these problems have been resolved.

The provincial executive, led by the honourable Premier David Mabuza, has
worked tirelessly to restore calm and order in the affected municipalities.
Today, standing here, it is encouraging to note that we are beginning to
see positive results in dealing with community issues.

I am quite aware that you are very concerned, hon members, about the
situation in the province - and, indeed, if the media reports are anything
to go by, then you have every reason to be worried - but I must hasten to
add that the good stories have not been told; only a negative picture has
been created.

Whilst the gloomy picture is painted of a local government falling apart, I
must tell you that a lot of hard work has been done by the province to
improve our municipalities. Today, as we speak, more than 70% of the
households in the province have access to clean water, more than 71% have
access to electricity and many more have access to basic sanitation and
decent housing.

As we are all aware, the ministerial task team visited all the
municipalities and interacted with different stakeholders. Some of the key
findings of the task teams have indicated the following. There is tension
between the troika plus one; there is factionalism, external influence and
limited political management of oversight by councils; there are high
vacancy rates in critical positions; and there is a lack of critical
skills, such as technical finance, project management and planning. All
these have contributed to the challenges that are faced by our
municipalities.

The performance of such municipalities has not been very good. This has
forced the government to make some interventions as prescribed by
legislation. The MEC has had to institute section 106(1)(a) or 106(1)(b) of
the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, Act 32 of 2000, as well as to
invoke section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa.

The following four municipalities were put under administration: Mkhondo,
Pixley ka Seme, Thaba Chweu and Lekwa. I must state that this was the last
resort after we had tried numerous interventions to assist them. We hope
that we will not have more municipalities put under administration in
future.

The Mkhondo Municipality has been plagued by silent tensions between the
municipal office bearers and its community. That is why our NCOP delegates,
together with us, had to do the site visits. The brewing tensions resulted
in protests organised by the concerned group of the community on 15 June
2009.

A memorandum was subsequently submitted to the municipality, with details
of concerns and allegations that we felt were very genuine. The key issues
raised in the memorandum can be summarised as follows: allegations of
fraud, corruption and maladministration; nonadherence to supply-chain
management policies; abuse of the allocation of credit cards; lack of
service delivery; public-participation processes not being followed; and
nepotism in appointments. Hence, section 139(1)(b) was instituted with
regard to that municipality.

As I conclude, we believe that if all stakeholders really read the report
thoroughly and accepted the 17 recommendations as reflected on the report,
we would succeed not only in normalising the situation but also in
eliminating the causes of poor, or lack of, service delivery.

On 22 April 2009, our people again, for the fourth time, put their
confidence in this glorious governing party, the ANC, the ANC of O R Tambo,
Walter Sisulu and Nelson Mandela, and led today by President Jacob Zuma. We
dare not fail them.

Kindly allow me to quote from the Freedom Charter as adopted at the real
Congress of the People in Kliptown on 26 June 1955, where our forebears
said the following:

   There shall be houses, security and comfort!


   All people shall have the right to live where they choose, be decently
   housed, and to bring up their families in comfort and security;

   Unused housing space to be made available to the people;

   Rent and prices shall be lowered ...


   Slums shall be demolished, and new suburbs built where all have
   transport, roads, lighting, playing fields, crèches and social centres
   ...

   Fenced locations and ghettoes shall be abolished ...

Through these unwavering commitments, which were made 54 years ago, the
human dignity and self-esteem of our people shall indeed be restored and
the frontiers of poverty and inferiority completely eradicated. We support
the report of the Provincial Week as tabled. Hon Chair, I thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Ms A N D QIKANI: Hon Chair, hon members, special delegates and
representatives from Salga, let me join the rest of the speakers in
expressing appreciation for the work of the hon members of the National
Council of Provinces and provincial legislatures during the Provincial
Week.

We are indeed humbled by the amount of information that was gathered on the
condition and progress that provinces and municipalities are making in
delivering services to our people. We are convinced that this information
will enhance our oversight work. We will continue with our commitment of
ensuring a better quality of life for all our people.

For many years, women in South Africa were vulnerable. Women were faced
with negative perceptions that were also coupled with discriminatory
legislation, practices and polices, which restricted their participation
and empowerment in most spheres of life in the country.

The demise of apartheid in 1994 echoed deliberate efforts by the ANC to
systematically dismantle apartheid and create a democratic society, based
on the principles of equity, nonracialism and nonsexism. The ANC remains
committed to ensuring the advancement of the lives of women, particularly
those in rural areas. We remain committed to ensuring that women are also
beneficiaries of programmes and initiatives in all the provinces and
municipalities. We say this because as the ANC we see the advancements and
empowerment of women as the cornerstone of the struggle for equality.

The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa and other pieces of
legislation provide the legal framework for equality and nondiscrimination
of our people, especially in the provision of resources. However, the
Provincial Week report clearly shows that the challenges in some provinces
remain the implementation of these commitments. We are aware and appreciate
the efforts of some provinces and municipalities for prioritising women in
the delivery of services in communities.

We are also concerned that in some provinces and municipalities, women are
left out from benefiting from government services because they are poor,
unemployed, unskilled, lack opportunities and are deliberately ignored. The
ANC is mindful of the fact that, currently, approximately 52% of South
Africa’s total population are women and that half of them, almost 47%, live
in rural areas.

This then says that poor service delivery has a negative impact on women’s
emancipation and empowerment. When councillors do not do their jobs, the
impact on women is felt 10 times more. When communities do not have access
to water and sanitation, it is the women who are largely affected. This
also says that to empower women is to empower our nation. Indeed, freedom
cannot be achieved unless women have been emancipated from all forms of
oppression, neglect and systematic discrimination.

The ANC recognises that education is the driving force for economic, social
and political development and prosperity. We say this because we are aware
that education creates choices and opportunities for people and
communities. It reduces the burdens of poverty, unemployment and disease.
We are also aware that, for many years, women and girllearners have often
suffered gender discrimination, stereotyping and oppression within the
education system. This substantially affected their participation in
various fields and in acquiring certain skills and levels of education.

While we recognise the progress that has been made at a national level to
expand women’s access to education, we are mindful of the distances that
many rural children are still travelling to access education opportunities.
In some rural areas there are no facilities for adult education. We will
continue to ensure the transformation of our education system, and ensure
that more resources are allocated to rural schools and educational
programmes and facilities for women.

We have noted in some provinces that access to land remains a major
constraint for women. Land reform programmes and the tendency to break up
communal land parcels, especially in areas of tribal and customary tenants,
have almost exclusively transferred land rights to male heads of
households.

While women represent a significant proportion of the farm labour force and
subsistence food producers, they have been the last to benefit from
economic and development transformation. The report also indicated that
although rural women are assuming an increasingly prominent role in
agriculture initiatives as producers and providers for food suppliers, they
need more support. Women in rural areas are severely affected by the lack
of marketing facilities for agricultural products. Infrastructure and
distribution channels are not available to market their products.

In conclusion, we are aware that there are still those among us - and
political parties - that believe that the position and role of women is in
the kitchen. We are also mindful of the deliberate efforts of some parties
to undermine the progress and commitment that our nation has made to
advance women. We want to reassure this House that the ANC remains
committed to the advancement of the lives of women. We will continue to
ensure the advancement of the lives of women, irrespective of race,
location and economic status. We will fight to eradicate all discriminatory
laws and practices against women. We will ensure that provinces and
municipalities prioritise women and that their lives are changed for the
better. I fully support the report. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms R N RASMENI: Chairperson, during the course of the Provincial Week, the
North West NCOP permanent delegates conducted a visit to the province in
order to meet with the premier, her executive members, the speaker, the
chief whip of the legislature, the mayors, representatives from the SA
Local Government Association and communities from selected municipalities
such as the Ramotshere Moiloa and Ntsweletsoku municipalities.

The visit by the NCOP permanent delegates took place from 8
September to 11 September 2009. All NCOP permanent delegates to the North
West participated in this visit.

The main purpose of the visit was to afford an opportunity to NCOP
permanent delegates to interact with other spheres of government and the
community in order to gain a fresh mandate for this Council and deliberate
on issues of service delivery.

This visit to the province was informed by the NCOP’s theme: “Working
together to ensure the delivery of quality services to communities”. This
visit was also informed by what President J G Zuma confirmed in his fourth
speech to Parliament, when he said:

  On 9 May 2009, during the presidential inauguration, we made a commitment
  to our people and the world that, for as long as there are South Africans
  who die from preventable diseases; for as long as there are workers who
  struggle to feed their families and who battle to find work; for as long
  as there are rural dwellers unable to make a decent living from the land
  on which they live; for as long as there are women who are subjected to
  discrimination, exploitation or abuse; for as long as there are children
  who do not have the means nor the opportunity to receive a decent
  education, we shall not rest, and we dare not falter in our drive to
  eradicate poverty.

In our first meeting with the premier and the executive council, we
received reports from each member of the executive council. These reports
focused on priorities, programmes, successes, challenges and solutions.

From our interaction with the executive council, there were certain issues
that we observed as the delegation and that needed the attention of the
NCOP. They were: the service delivery infrastructure backlogs, which were
estimated at R13,2 billion over the 2010-11 year, based on recently
submitted infrastructure plans; municipal support experiencing challenges
in areas like financial management capacity, viability and continuity of
technical and management resources; insufficient funding across all
departments, preventing departments from fully implementing their
programmes; scarce skills; the illegal evictions of farmworkers from farms
– a practice that is still prevalent in the province; inadequate
infrastructure, particularly in rural areas; a shortage of educators; and
inadequate training of councillors in order for them to master their
duties.

All municipalities are in dire need of water reservoirs. Demonstrations for
water in the Ngaka Modiri Molema district are a classic example of the
extent of this problem. The rest of the observations are provided in the
report reflected in the ATCs.

The ANC government has unequivocally made its commitment towards service
delivery issues. That is why the Minister of Basic Education, Ms Motshekga,
has recently announced the 10-point plan to address immediate challenges
within her department; that is why the Minister of Health, Dr Motsoaledi,
is also talking about a 10-point plan focusing on health priorities that
need immediate attention; that is why the Minister of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Shiceka, has set up a task team to
establish the challenges faced by municipalities across the whole country.

All these interventions demonstrate that the ANC-led government is
committed to its promises or commitments. We don’t make empty promises; we
stick to our word. If we experience challenges, we go back to the people
through izimbizo, taking Parliament to the people, and other forms of
communication, to inform people of the bottlenecks we are experiencing.

There is no doubt that the ANC-led government is providing leadership at
all times, and that government is in the right hands. We hope that the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement announced by Minister Pravin Gordhan
will offset some of the financial challenges our provinces are experiencing
and translate these into better quality services.

The interaction by the NCOP delegation with communities was highly
appreciated and welcomed in the province. It was the first of its kind. Let
me hasten to mention that the Ramotshere Moiloa and Ntsweletsoku
communities demonstrated a lot of enthusiasm and excitement during
discussions and it was difficult to draw the meeting to a close. My
colleagues here can attest to that.

Out of these interactions with different stakeholders in the province we
have suggested several recommendations that require consideration by each
department in the North West for immediate or later implementation. We will
monitor the implementation of these recommendations by means of our
frequent visits to the province. Through this approach we will be able to
monitor service delivery and its impact. All these interventions will
translate into quality services for the communities.

There are a number of positive programmes that have been implemented
successfully in the North West, such as the opening of an additional health
unit in the Job Shimankana Tabane Hospital in Rustenburg, the selection of
students to study medicine in Cuba, and many other programmes that are
successful.

These initiatives will increase the intake of patients and ease the high
levels of congestion in these hospitals. Training additional doctors means
that the North West government is addressing the shortage of doctors and
providing better quality services to the people. This displays the extent
of the commitment of the ANC to its goals and priorities.

The North West province is proud to be chosen as one of the provinces that
will host the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament. The province is ready
to host this tournament. During the Confederations Cup earlier this year,
we hosted about four successful matches at Rustenburg without major
incident.

The Local Organising Committee, the Departments of Sport and Recreation and
of Arts and Culture and other sister departments are well on course with
their plans. This observation was supported by the LOC nationally when they
recently came to make their presentation to the Select Committee on
Education and Recreation and reassured everyone that it was all systems go.

The challenges experienced during the Confederations Cup will be avoided at
all costs. The province has developed a master plan, which is aimed at
addressing those challenges. All 24 soccer and rugby games to be played in
the province will be used as practice games and will activate all
stakeholders for the implementation of the master plan.

To ordinary members of the community this means they will be able to
participate and play a pivotal role in the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup
tournament by offering their services and becoming volunteers. Our people
will be able to sell their products, such as imibhaco and iinkciyo, to
visitors who will be coming into the country. Our people will be able to
open up their homes and accommodate visitors at a reasonable price. Our
people will be able to sell African cuisine, such as umngqusho, mogodu,
amadumbe, umphokoqo namarhewu. They will be able to market South African
products through which these visitors may develop an interest in our
country and visit again at another time. Only the ANC government can make
all these opportunities possible. Viva to the ANC!

The NCOP provincial week report reflects the material conditions of our
province as a whole. Through our oversight, we will ensure that the NCOP’s
theme is made a reality and the President’s commitments fulfilled. This
report is supported by the province. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr G G MOKGORO: Chairperson hon Tau, the Chairperson of the NCOP, the Chief
Whip of the NCOP, hon members, distinguished guests, I want to enter the
debate by reminding the House of the inspiring words that were uttered by
the former President of the ANC, and the first democratically elected
President of South Africa, Comrade Nelson Mandela, when he said on 20 April
1964 at the Pretoria Supreme Court:

   During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to the struggle of the African
   people. I have fought against white domination, and I have fought against
   black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free
   society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal
   opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve.
   But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.

Madiba is a truly dedicated leader, a servant of the people who worked
tirelessly for his country in the quest to achieve freedom and prosperity.
He laid the foundation for the country’s achievement. As we embarked on the
Provincial Week as public representatives and servants of the people, some
of us were inspired and motivated by these words of the former President.
Indeed, his words are still true, as they were then. It is through this
background that President Jacob Zuma made an earnest plea and a call to the
nation to protect and defend the legacy of former President Nelson Mandela.

We must acknowledge that the Provincial Week programme turned seven this
year, having come into existence in August 2002. We must thank those who
initiated this programme before us, and its relevance is still important in
the life of the NCOP. I would just like to tell the House that the idea of
taking the government to the people emanated from and was initiated by the
Northern Cape provincial government. The idea of the NCOP Provincial Week
is actually a continuation of bringing that idea further down to the
people.

The permanent delegates of the Northern Cape listened to the people of our
province during the Provincial Week by rolling up their sleeves in an
effort to address their needs. The interaction between ourselves, the
permanent delegates, and the Northern Cape province was further entrenched
by the principles of co-operative and intergovernmental relations. Section
40(1) of the Constitution provides that, in the Republic, government is
constituted as national, provincial and local spheres of government, which
are distinctive, interdependent and interrelated. Section 40(2) provides
that all spheres of government must observe and adhere to the principles of
co-operative governance and intergovernmental relations and must conduct
their activities within these parameters.

The Northern Cape province is sparsely populated. As permanent delegates,
we were, of course, guided by the theme: “Strategic mechanisms for
strengthening the representation of the provincial interests in the
National Council of Provinces”. We also underpin the theme with the
following objectives: to enhance dialogue and interaction between the NCOP
and the people of the Northern Cape; to provide an opportunity for the NCOP
to communicate its programme of action and the progress being made; to
listen to the people about problems needing attention - blockages in
implementation of policy areas that may need review; and to enable the NCOP
direct access to what people say and feel about government and service
delivery and to listen to their grievances and advice about the pace and
direction of government work.

During the Provincial Week, we informed our province that since the start
of the Fourth Parliament, no Salga delegates had represented the Northern
Cape in the NCOP. We made this reminder to the Northern Cape government in
order to be able to sensitise Salga to execute their responsibility.

MECs from the province had also not participated in the policy debate on
the budget. We have appealed to the province. Our request is based on the
premise of a closer working relationship between the NCOP and the local
government, given the important role played by municipalities in the
provision of quality services to the people. During our strategic plan
workshop this year at Lagoon Beach, Milnerton, members of this House agreed
that local government is central to achieving the nation’s vision of better
quality of life for all citizens, as it is the sphere of government that is
at the coalface of service delivery.

Our report captures the following challenges, as faced by the
municipalities in the Northern Cape: eradication of bucket system,
electricity, water, indigent policies, waste management strategy, and
landfill sites. The number of households that have access to piped water
has increased to 94%. As many as 87,3% of households have access to
electricity, and 73,2% of households have access to waterborne sanitation.

In conclusion, we are talking about building a developmental state. We need
to develop and implement comprehensive rural development strategies. We say
that we need to uplift the lives of our rural communities. We can
successfully do so, if we have some of the natural resources available.
During our Provincial Week, we were able to identify four possible
developmental points, where there is water, land, people and sun. It is
with these resources that we can strategically plan to engage women, train
them and, with proper management, produce agricultural products for food
security.

In my last debate in this House, I invited the hon Minister of Rural
Development and Land Reform, Comrade Gugile Nkwinti, to visit the Northern
Cape province so that he can see these natural resources and be able to
formulate a clear idea for proper planning. I move that the report of the
Northern Cape be adopted by the House. Thank you. [Applause.]

Cllr G WOLMARANS (Salga): Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
hon Mahlangu, hon members of the House, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen, allow me to convey the most profound apologies from the SA Local
Government Association’s chairperson, Councillor Masondo, for his inability
to attend this sitting. He is abroad at the moment and has requested me to
convey his greetings to the President and to the members of this august
House.

It is indeed an honour and a privilege to address this sitting exactly one
month before we complete a full decade of democratic local government -
since 5 December 2000. The recently conducted Provincial Week gave
permanent delegates to the NCOP and members of provincial legislatures an
opportunity to undertake oversight visits and interact with communities in
order to get first-hand information on the needs and challenges that were
confronting the public. They also visited projects that were implemented by
both national and provincial government in the provinces to ascertain
progress that has been made.

Salga has taken an active part in the provincial week and must register its
appreciation for the manner in which it was allowed to play a constructive
role in the successful execution of this event. We are firmly of the view
that the enhanced interaction between the House and Salga will ultimately
have a beneficial effect on meeting the needs and challenges of our
communities across the length and breadth of South Africa.

The Provincial Week and, indeed, this debate took place and is taking place
within the context in which, firstly, national and provincial government
have committed themselves to supporting and monitoring local government in
terms of the five-year local strategic agenda. Such monitoring and support
took place within the five key performance areas identified by Cabinet,
namely good governance, institutional transformation, finances and
financial management, basic service delivery and infrastructure and local
economic development. The Provincial Week undoubtedly indicated quite
sharply to this House the successes and challenges of implementation of the
five-year local government strategic agenda.

Secondly, the Provincial Week and this debate could not, and cannot, ignore
the service delivery protests that gripped the country until now. The
President, in his recent address in Khayelitsha, in the Western Cape, to
mayors and municipal managers, adequately and aptly captured the current
local government situation. He indicated, firstly, that discussions about
service delivery take place against the backdrop of the impact of the
global economic crisis, which is depleting the resources of municipalities;
secondly, that many municipalities face serious governance challenges owing
to internal political power struggles; and, thirdly, that there is a
glaring need to strengthen the basic administrative system and
institutional capacity of many municipalities.

As a consequence, the third aspect of the context within which this debate
is taking place is the current process in which a turnaround strategy is
being developed for government at local level. We are deliberate when we
refer to “turnaround strategy for government at local level” as opposed to
a turnaround strategy for local government as it is known. Please allow me
to explain.

The Provincial Week has shown very clearly to this House the extent to
which national and provincial government have experienced challenges in the
delivery of services to communities in the areas of primary health care,
housing, education, roads and transportation and the provision of identity
documents. The consequences of such nondelivery are experienced most
acutely at the local level, where communities often take to the streets to
vent their frustration. It should be abundantly clear to this august House
that a focus on a “local government turnaround” could be seriously
misplaced, as it would shift the focus solely to local government as
opposed to the whole of government where all spheres are responsible in one
way or another for the delivery of services at the local level.

The need for a government-wide turnaround strategy is apparent with regard
to the Provincial Week report. I will return to this point later. Please
allow me to restate the point that as we gather on this important occasion,
we are under no illusion that local government faces many challenges, but
we remain optimistic. We know that we can do more, whatever the challenges
that face us: ongoing urbanisation and migration, the need to grow our
economy and create jobs, the extensive service delivery needs, the negative
impact of a globalising world and the many complexities that we have to
grapple with on a day-to-day basis in rural and urban and in big and small
municipalities.

Turning to the report itself, and especially those aspects dealing with
local government, it correctly highlights the internal challenges, as well
as the external challenges being faced by local government. On the internal
challenges, there is pervasive and corrosive presence of corruption, which
robs our communities of the scarce resources desperately needed for
sustainable service delivery. This scourge must be fought with all means at
our disposal, and the leadership of local government and, indeed, organised
local government is unwavering in its commitment to rid this sphere of this
cancer by the sustained implementation of anticorruption policies and
criminal prosecution of those found in flagrant disregard thereof.

A further internal challenge is the ever-growing backlog in the provision
of basic service delivery. Although local government is doing well in the
eradication of backlogs, as measured in terms of the 2001 census,
urbanisation and migration to the cities have placed significant strain on
the resources within those areas.

On the external challenges, the report notes the insufficient funding of
the sphere of local government. Unfortunately, the basis for the allocation
of financial resources to local government is the seriously outdated 2001
population census figures. This external factor has received serious
attention at the recent budget forum, and government has been tasked with
coming up with alternatives that will address this situation.

A second external challenge identified in the report relates to the powers
and functions performed by national and provincial government at the local
level. The provincialisation of health care has had a dramatic downward
impact on the level of service provided to a number of communities, whether
urban or rural.

This situation brings us to the question of how to address the challenges
identified in the report and, more importantly, the role of the NCOP in the
implementation of any strategy aimed at turning around government at local
level. As indicated earlier, the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs is driving the development of a national local
government turnaround strategy. This strategy will focus on turning local
government around in the areas of governance, service delivery and
infrastructure, financial management and labour matters.

A report titled “The state of local government in South Africa” has been
developed, as well as a draft framework local government turnaround
strategy. It must be stressed, however, that these documents are in the
final stages of development and have not yet being signed off by the
national executive.

Hon Chairperson, be assured that Salga and its member municipalities remain
steadfastly committed to finding innovative solutions to achieving the goal
of a better life for all residents and communities across the length and
breadth of South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mong T E CHAANE: Modulasetulo ya kgabane le bahlomphehi ba kgabane,
Modulasetulo, ntumelle ha re diela dikgala ke bue jwaloka Mosotho ke re: Ho
tseba tshotleho ha se ho phela ka ho e bala dibukeng kapa ho qoqelwa
ditshomo tsa yona, empa ke ho phela kahare ho yona. Ka mantswe ao ke rata
hore ANC ke mokgatlo wa tshotleho, mme o tla dula o ntse o lwanela batho ba
sotlehileng mmoho le ba sa sotlehang.

Haele mekgatlo e meng e jwaloka DA ke mekgatlo ya batho ba kgotseng. O tla
dula o lwanela ba kgotseng. Haele Cope yona ke mokgatlo wa mahanapuso a
latswitseng kgora mme ba tla dula ba lwanela ho kgora ba le bang. [Mahofi.]
Ntumelle Modulasetulo ke re: Re le ANC re tla dula re lwanela ditokelo ...
[Kena hanong.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T E CHAANE: Hon Chairperson and hon members, please allow me, as we
conclude, to speak in Sesotho and say: In order to understand suffering one
does not have to only  read about it in books or listen to stories about
it, but one must also experience it. With these words I would like to say
that the ANC is an organisation for the poor, and it will always fight for
people who are suffering as well as those who are not suffering.

As for other organisations such as the DA, they are organisations for the
rich. They will always fight for the rich. As for Cope, it is an
organisation of rebels who have tasted wealth and therefore will always
fight to keep it for themselves only. [Applause.] Allow me, Chairperson, to
say that the ANC will always fight for the human rights ...
[Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is that a point of order, hon Bloem?
Hon Chaane, just hold on. Is that a point of order?

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, do you want me to make a point of order?
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): No, I am asking ...

Mr D V BLOEM: I don’t have a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): So why do you rise and interject in the
manner in which you are doing?

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, he called my name.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): No, hon Bloem. Can we just respect the
decorum of the House? There is nothing wrong with interjecting, but the
manner in which you do it is very important. It will be extremely out of
order and rude to stand up in the House and shout at an hon member, whilst
they are speaking. I just want to warn you not to do that.

Mr D V BLOEM: Let me respond, Chairperson. Can I respond?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Respond to what? Because I am warning
you.

Mr D V BLOEM: No, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I don’t need a response from you. I am
warning you. Could you sit down?

Mr D V BLOEM: No, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Could you sit down, hon Bloem?

Mr D V BLOEM: No, Chairperson. You see, Chairperson ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Bloem, I’m ordering you to sit
down.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, let me respond.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Bloem, I am ordering you to sit
down. Will you sit down?

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, let me respond.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Bloem, I don’t want to say this
will be the last time I say it, but I want to order you to sit down. Could
you sit down? Please proceed with your speech, hon Chaane.

Mr T E CHAANE: Thank you, hon Chair. This year marks the seventh year of
the Provincial Week visit programme since its inception in August 2002.
Since then, our ANC-led government has achieved milestones in terms of
delivering on the mandate of the people. It has indeed never failed on its
promises, despite the challenges that we have had to go through.

One of the biggest challenges of our time remains the unwillingness of the
so-called “minority parties” to work together with the party of the people,
the ANC, to achieve more. Instead, we find the emergence of SMS parties,
founded on the principles of self-enrichment, disguised as alternatives to
the ANC.

True to its founding principles, the ANC, and its government, remains the
champion of the people and the continent, and indeed the world admires it
for that. As a true champion of the liberation of the people from the
bondage of apartheid and its evil deeds, the ANC continues to win the
battles for the poor and the less privileged. It continues to help others
to achieve their goals and realise their dreams. It is the only party so
passionate about the success of the whole nation.

We continue to fight and win not only our battles but also the battles of
others, including those who refuse to be led and those who stay in palaces,
because we know that not all of those who live in palaces are free. Some of
them are still subjected to eating the remnants from the table of their
master.

The ANC, even under the current economic hardships, remains a true
advocate, defender and leader for the poor and voiceless, the father of the
fatherless and mother of the motherless. This we have demonstrated through
our unwavering support for the creation of sustainable quality jobs and the
building of decent houses. This we have done by prioritising health issues
and rural development, by making clean water available to the masses of our
people, by combating crime to make South Africa a safe country, by stepping
up our efforts to root out corruption and by building a nonracial,
nonsexist and democratic nation.

Despite the many challenges that seek to be an impediment to our noble
cause, the ANC continues to fight for the rights and honour of our people
and not for personal aggrandisement, like other parties and leaders are
doing. We continue to be passionate about the welfare, success and
prosperity of less privileged South Africans.

Allow me to set the record straight and leave our opposition friends and
colleagues with a few words of wisdom. The current challenges in the local
sphere of government are not anything new. The ANC, as the chosen and
trusted party to lead the nation as a whole, has realised all these
challenges and investigated their cause. True to itself and to the people
it represents, it was the ANC that first reported all these challenges and,
not only that, came up with clear programmes that are aimed at addressing
such particular problems.

Instead of giving support to the ANC, the opportunistic opposition parties
in this country run around with these problems as if they are good
watchdogs, when their real action is no more than ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is that a point of order, hon member?

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, may I just ask Mr Chaane if he is planning to debate
the topic at all?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): No, no, no. Before you ask him a
question, we need to ascertain first as to whether it is a question. Mr
Chaane, are you prepared to take a question?

Mr T E CHAANE: There is no time, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): He says no. Proceed with your speech,
hon Chaane.

Mr T E CHAANE: ... run around with these problems as if they are good
watchdogs when some of their leaders’ actions are no more than that of
noisy little puppies whose job it is to make a lot of noise to irritate the
bulldog. Today, they continue to make all the wrong noises instead of
heeding the call, and the call is: Working together, we can do more. The
call is for us to work together to ensure service delivery to communities.

This call was made with the clear understanding that even though they are
in the opposition, we do need their support to overcome our problems as one
nation. Instead of making a meaningful contribution to building a better
life for all, they are quick to criticise and steal the show by going
public with ANC-identified challenges.

Interestingly, they are extraordinarily silent when some of their own, such
as the DA, continue to discriminate against women by appointing an all-male
cabinet. They continue to be silent when the DA’s Mr Visser continues to
insult women by saying that their place is in the kitchen. They continue to
be silent when their Speaker makes statements to the effect that working
black women in the legislature will be replaced by male farmers - boere.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is that a point of order?

Mr A WATSON: Chair, I rise on a point of order. The member speaking, or the
delegate speaking, stated that the opposition refers to a woman’s place as
being in the kitchen only. That is not true, and I ask you to rule on that.

Mr T E CHAANE: That is a statement your Mr Visser.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): The way I understood it, the member was
making reference to a statement that was made by a Mr Visser in one of the
legislatures. Please proceed with your speech, hon member.

Mr T E CHAANE: Le mo tshwarele ntate Watson o a tsofala. [We should forgive
Mr Watson. He is getting old.] It is the same DA that today claims it can
do better for our people when they are, in fact, failing to do the basic
things, such as working together with the ruling party. In their minds and
in the minds of those in which their seeds of white superiority and greed
have germinated, it is quite good and commendable to be silent when black
people are used as fronts in companies to have access to state funds. It is
okay when crazy, racially charged people such as Mr Terre’Blanche make
statements such as “The white man in South Africa is realising that his
salvation lies in self-government in territories paid for by his ancestors”
when we are all calling for unity and cohesion.

It is good when a white man mocks and insults a statesman and our
honourable former President, Mr Mandela, at an entertainment venue like Sun
City. To them, it is a joke and craziness when our people leave their homes
in rural areas, which were a creation of apartheid, for the cities in
search of a better life. The DA only sees that as a strategy to flock to
the Western Cape for political gain, instead of realising how urgent and
important it is to develop rural areas so that our people can stay in the
comfort of their homes. [Interjections.]

The question that needs to be asked is: What good will the DA ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): There is a point of order, hon Chaane.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order and a question.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): No. We need to separate the two. If it
is a question, we need to ascertain whether the member is prepared to take
it.

Mr D V BLOEM: It is a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Raise your point of order, hon member.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I want to understand: Is this part and parcel -
Terre’Blanche - of the provincial visit?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): What is the point of order, because you
are asking me a question?

Mr D V BLOEM: This member is out of order. This is not part and parcel of
the provincial visit, because Terre’Blanche was not there when they visited
...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon member, don’t carry on. Hon Chaane,
could you proceed with your speech, please?

Mr T E CHAANE: The question that we need to ask is: What good will the DA
and its newly found coalition with the SMS party, Cope, do for our nation –
what will they do that is different from what they are doing now? When will
their supporters realise that the majority of them are only there for
selfish interests?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): There is another point of order. Hon
Harris?

Mr T HARRIS: This is a point of order. I would like you to make a ruling on
whether it is appropriate for a member to give a speech on a topic without
even mentioning the topic or dealing with it in any way at all?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): What is the point of order, hon Harris?

Mr T HARRIS: The question is: Will you make a ruling on whether it is
appropriate for a member to make a speech that is completely unrelated to
the topic being debated?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): You see, now if you want me to give a
ruling on that matter ... I mean, hon members, this is a debate. He is
speaking on behalf of his party in this debate and I, seated here, cannot
dictate to any member what to say. [Interjections.] It is a debate. It is
only when, in a debate, a member makes certain statements that are
offensive, that are disturbing and that are not parliamentary, and you
raise an objection to them, that I can make a ruling on them. But if you
ask me whether it is correct for a member to make a statement, it is not
for me to decide; it is his way of debating.

Is that another point of order?

Mr A WATSON: It is a point of order, because you are referring to the
Rules. The Rules of this House say that a speaker should stick to the
subject for discussion. He has not once discussed the Provincial Week,
which we are here to discuss. This is not a free-for-all.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Order, hon members! Hon members, I am
saying that I cannot dictate to anybody on how to make or present his or
her point. Hon Chaane, proceed with the debate, please. [Interjections.]

Mr T E CHAANE: Modulasetulo, o ba tshwarele ha ba utlwisise. [Chairperson,
forgive them because they don’t understand.]

In conclusion ... [Laughter.] ... I hope that hon members were listening as
provinces presented the good work that the ANC has done in the country and
the good plans that the ANC has that are supported by everyone. The reality
is that one is not surprised when such orders are called now, because the
reality is that the ANC is a good party. That is a fact, and it is that
goodness that is a source of envy. The results of envy are nothing but evil
deeds, hence the negative influence on our people, infiltration, the
formation of opposition and directionless SMS parties emerging in a bid to
compete with the ANC.

As the ANC, we remain focused on the cause of the struggle. As the leading
party in government, we know that many of our challenges in this country
are man-made. In that regard we are also fully aware that our words are
loaded with power, and that is why the words we speak about our nation are
words that will shape, build and establish national prosperity, unity,
peace, progress and economic stability. We will continue to teach others,
including the opposition. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


          LOCAL GOVERNMENT: MUNICIPAL PROPERTY RATES AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson, hon members and leaders of the provinces that
are with us here today, allow me to take the minutes given to me to submit
to the House the amendments to the Local Government Municipal Property
Rates Act. The Act has not been fully complied with by some municipalities
in this country as a result of the various capacities these municipalities
have. We are introducing here the Local Government: Municipal Property
Rates Amendment Bill, Bill 12 of 2009.

The main objective of this Bill is to request the House to extend the time
of validity of valuation rolls to allow municipalities to further process
valuation rolls for these municipalities. It is very important that the
House allows the extension precisely because you would know that the
current Act lapsed on 2 July, allowing for there to be a vacuum in terms of
the processes that are supposed to deal with property rates issues.

The Bill has only three clauses, with one key clause that requests the
extension for the coming two years. This clause seeks to provide for the
amendment of section 89(3) of the principal Act.

We are appealing for a decision so that once this decision is given the
National Assembly will be able to continue with the processes hereafter. Up
until now the assessment and microscopic analysis of the very same impact
of the Act showed that municipalities were losing millions of rand as a
result of noncompliance with this Act. Therefore to allow municipalities to
access and continue collecting rates in the form of money will make it
possible for the municipalities to eradicate poverty and respond to the
many socioeconomic challenges that our municipalities are facing.

We would also make an appeal to the department that once the Bill has been
passed, there is serious monitoring, evaluation, co-ordination and support
so that we do not come back and request further extensions. Therefore, on
behalf of the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs, I submit this amending Bill to the House.

The rolls of about 13 municipalities are outstanding. In the interests of
oversight by the various delegates of the House, I would mention that in
the Eastern Cape we have four outstanding municipalities; in Limpopo we
have one; in the Northern Cape we have three; in the Free State we have
two; and in the North West we have three municipalities. So this will
assist the permanent delegates, as we do oversight and go back to our
constituency offices, to be able to do follow-up work and assist these
municipalities in adhering to and ensuring that the valuation rolls are
concluded.

The other matter that is not part of the amendment is that in the future we
need to request the committee and the Houses to look at these animals, the
property valuers - in fact, to check on their impact and the tools they are
using in terms of assisting valuation systems. In that way, we will indeed
conform with the slogan of “Working together we shall do more”.

The other thing that is not related to this is that I would want to
congratulate the ANC leadership, which is so serious and passionate
everywhere in this country in all nine provinces, on intervening when the
poor, the weak and the vulnerable do not receive water because the water
supply is cut ... [Interjections.]

Mr D V BLOEM: ... and Cope as well. [Laughter.]

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Cope will need to cope. They would never cope with the
tactics of the ANC, the only organisation that has shown seriousness in the
Western Cape with their interventions. I would like to congratulate our
Chief Whip from the Western Cape on that effort. Let it be done forever and
ever until there are better lives in Gugulethu, Khayelitsha and everywhere
where there are these problems. Amen. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Are you rising on a point of order, hon
member?

Mr D V BLOEM: No, Chairperson. I just want to know if the member is
prepared to take a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): No, unfortunately he has already
concluded his speech.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I shall now put the question in respect
of the Second Order. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all political parties are present in the House to
cast their province’s votes. Are all political parties present?

I shall now allow political parties an opportunity to make their
declaration of votes in terms of Rule 63 if they so wish. Is there any
political party that wishes to make a declaration?

Declaration of vote:
Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, you see this is my declaration ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Bloem, are you as Cope making a
declaration of vote?

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Okay, make the declaration.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, that is our chairperson as Cope: we support that
chairperson and we have done very well over the past few days. We support.


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau)): Hon Bloem, you may sit down.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): We shall now proceed to the voting on
the question. Before I call for the voting, please note all of us must vote
in terms of section 63, all of us, all members in the House. That does not
mean delegation heads only.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PARLIAMENTARY OVERSIGHT AUTHORITY ON PROPOSED
                        POLICY ON PARLIAMENT’S BUDGET

           CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE

Orders disposed of without debate.

Question put: That the Report of Parliamentary Oversight Authority on
Proposed Policy on Parliament’s Budget be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report of Parliamentary Oversight Authority on Proposed Policy on
Parliament’s Budget accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of
the Constitution.

Question put: That the Second Report of Joint Rules Committee be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Second Report of Joint Rules Committee accordingly adopted in accordance
with section 65 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
 DEVELOPMENT – PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION OF MAGISTRATE C M DUMANI, A MAGISTRATE
                              AT GRAAFF REINET

Mr B NESI: Chairperson, hon members of the NCOP, the Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Development considered a report on the
provisional suspension from office of Magistrate C M Dumani, a magistrate
at Graaff Reinet, pending the outcome of an investigation into his fitness
to hold office as a magistrate as required in terms of section 13(3)(a) of
the Magistrates Act, Act 90 of 1993.

Allegations of violence against women that include instances of sexual
harassment, rape and domestic violence which embrace emotional, physical,
sexual and psychological abuse are of a serious enough nature to warrant a
separation of parties to properly investigate the allegations. The
allegations brought against Magistrate C M Dumani are of such a nature that
the select committee, without hesitation, approved his provisional
suspension pending the outcome of the investigation.

The allegations deal with sexual harassment, allegations that as a
committee we cannot condone. To give everyone implicated in this matter a
fair hearing and for the investigation to progress unrestrained, it is
necessary to provisionally suspend Magistrate Dumani until this matter is
resolved. After reviewing the progress report from the Magistrate’s
Commission, we wholeheartedly recommend that the Council approve the
provisional suspension from office of Magistrate C M Dumani. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   DEVELOPMENT - AGREEMENT BETWEEN RSA AND GOVERNMENT OF HONG KONG SPECIAL
 ADMINISTRATIVE REGION OF PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA CONCERNING MUTUAL LEGAL
                       ASSISTANCE IN CRIMINAL MATTERS

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   DEVELOPMENT - AGREEMENT BETWEEN RSA AND GOVERNMENT OF HONG KONG SPECIAL
 ADMINISTRATIVE REGION OF PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA CONCERNING SURRENDER OF
                             FUGITIVE OFFENDERS

Mr A G MATILA: Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I present to
this august House the agreement between the government of  the Republic of
South Africa and government of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of
the People’s Republic of China concerning two matters: one, mutual legal
assistance in criminal matters; and, two, surrender of fugitive offenders.

As tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, the agreement
before the Council seeks to strengthen legal assistance in criminal matters
between South Africa and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the
People’s Republic of China.

We live in a country where our tourism potential and hosting of sports
events mean an influx of people from various countries and cultures. With
our growing economy and increasing business ties with the People’s Republic
of China, our doors are open to a world of possibilities but this also
makes us vulnerable to a world full of abuse.

To strengthen the mutual legal assistance between our countries, it has
become necessary to enter into this agreement so that South Africa is not
used as a safe haven for criminals seeking to escape justice within their
own countries.

After reviewing the agreement and the ramifications for South Africa, we
wholeheartedly recommend that this Council approve the agreements of mutual
legal assistance in criminal matters and the surrendering of fugitive
offenders. I would therefore request the House to adopt these agreements.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on Agreement between RSA and Government of
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of People’s Republic of China
concerning Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Agreement between RSA and Government of Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region of People’s Republic of China concerning Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters accordingly adopted in accordance with
section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Agreement between RSA and Government of
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of People’s Republic of China
concerning Surrender of Fugitive Offenders be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Agreement between RSA and Government of Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region of People’s Republic of China concerning Surrender of
Fugitive Offenders accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
               DEVELOPMENT - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NORTHERN CAPE
Mr T E CHAANE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, I present to this august House
an oversight report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development of the Departments of Police, Correctional Services, Justice
and Constitutional Development, and Defence and Military Veterans.

During our time in the Northern Cape, the committee had very fruitful
interactions with the various departments. We learned first-hand of the
many problems faced by the various departments in the Northern Cape region.
Our recommendations are attached and we will follow up on their
implementation during the course of our tenure.

There is one area of grave concern that is highlighted in the report and
bears mentioning in this House. Central to our conducting oversight is the
building of an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the
needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better
quality life for all the people of South Africa. It is with this in mind
that we highlight the plight of the Khosis community living in the heart of
the SA Army Combat Training Centre at Lohatla.

It is with astonishment that we learned of the live-fire exercise carried
out by the SA Army during its essential training weeks and the difficulties
of managing a no-fire zone in the heart of the training area where women
and children freely roam and run the risk of injury and death.

Members will note that it was at this base that a mechanical failure led to
the death of soldiers during such an exercise. The commander of the base,
Brigadier General Mpaxa, with deep regret informed the committee of the
loss of livestock from the community during another live exercise.

The courts of South Africa have ruled on the plight of the Khosis
community, and as a committee we endorse that decision. We also refer our
recommendation in the Northern Cape oversight report to the Ministers of
Human Settlements, Rural Development and Land Reform, Public Works, and
Defence and Military Veterans to ensure the safety of this community by
finding alternative land and housing. It would be a tragic state of affairs
to find a solution for the Khosis community after a loss of life has
occurred. We therefore recommend the Council approve the report. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 17:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a money Bill:

          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     Hon T E Chaane has been elected Chairperson of the Select
        Committee on Appropriations with effect from 28 October 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Government Notice No R949 published in Government Gazette No
       32621dated 2 October 2009: Amendment of Air Passenger Tax (APT/4),
       in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


   (b)      Proclamation No R.942 published in Government Gazette No 32605
       dated 30 September 2009: Commencement of sections 97 (1) and 98 (1)
       (a) and (c) of Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 60 of 2008).


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

   (a)      Statement on allegations of fraud, corruption or any other
       serious malpractices within Albert Luthuli Local Municipality
       (Mpumalanga) in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local Government:
       Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


       Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
       Traditional Affairs for consideration.


   (b)      Notice of Intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
       the Constitution, 1996, to Thaba Chweu Local Municipal Council
       (Mpumalanga).


       Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
       Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.


   (c)      Provincial Week Report – 7 to 11 September 2009:

CREDA INSERT - T091030e-insert1 – PAGES 1225-1383

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT - T091030e-insert2 – PAGES 1384-1387

National council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT - T091030e-insert3 – PAGES 1388-1454

CREDA INSERT - T091030e-insert4 –PAGES 1454-1455

                          TUESDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    South African Postbank Bill, 2009, submitted by the Minister of
         Communications. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Business Case for the Establishment of the Companies and
        Intellectual Property Commission.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
    Traditional Affairs on the Local Government: Municipal Property Rates
    Amendment Bill [B12-2009] (National Assembly- sec 75), dated 03
    November 2009:

      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the Local Government: Municipal Property
      Rates Amendment Bill [B12-2009] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred
      to it, reports that it agrees to the Bill.

                         WEDNESDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1. Calling of Joint Sitting


                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT


   The Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr M V Sisulu, and the Acting
   Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Ms T C Memela, in terms
   of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
   Parliament for Tuesday, 10 November 2009 at 14:00 to debate the
   preparations for the FIFA 2010 World Cup.

   M V SISULU, MP                 T C MEMELA, MP
   SPEAKER OF THE                 ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE
   NATIONAL ASSEMBLY   NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                          THURSDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 5 November
         2009:


          a) Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Amendment Bill [B12
             – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
    Traditional Affairs on the Traditional Leadership and Governance
    Framework Amendment Bill [B57B-2008] (National Assembly- sec 76),
    dated, 03 November 2009:

      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the Traditional Leadership and Governance
      Framework Amendment Bill [B57B-2008] (National Assembly – sec 76),
      referred to it, reports the Bill with amendments [B57C-2008].


    Report to be considered.

 2. Report of the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
    Traditional Affairs on the National House of Traditional Leaders Bill
    [B56B-2008] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 03 November 2009:

      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the National House of Traditional Leaders
      Bill [B56B-2008] (National Assembly – sec 76) referred to it, reports
      the Bill with amendments [B56C-2008].


    Report to be considered.


