---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 June 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-06-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 JUNE 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I would
like to announce that hon Robert Alfred Lees was sworn in as a member of
the National Council of Provinces. I would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the hon member and wish him all the best in his work as a member of
this House. [Applause.]

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
Council I shall move:

   That the Council –


     1) joins the DA in congratulating its structures on winning no fewer
        than 13 by-elections on 24 June 2009, namely Ward 25 in Msunduzi in
        KwaZulu-Natal; Wards 18, 35 and 36 in eThekwini in KwaZulu-Natal;
        Wards 6 and 9 in Nelson Mandela Bay in the Eastern Cape; Wards 9, 14
        and 73 in the City of Cape Town in the Western Cape; Ward 3 in the
        Overstrand in the Western Cape; Ward 3 in Bitou in the Western Cape;
        Ward 3 in George in the Western Cape; and Ward 24 in Sol Plaatje in
        the Northern Cape; and


    2) notes that this proves yet again and beyond any doubt that the DA is
       the only alternative to the ANC, and undoubtedly the national
       government of the South Africa of the future.

[Applause.]


        CONGRATULATIONS TO BAFANA BAFANA ON THEIR PERFORMANCE IN THE
                             CONFEDERATIONS CUP


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes the sterling performance by Bafana Bafana in the
         Confederations Cup, which is a precursor to the 2010 Soccer World
         Cup;


      2) acknowledges the excellent work done by all stakeholders such as
         the World Cup Organising Committee, the security cluster and the
         tourism sector in ensuring that we use this event as a strong
         global symbol of South Africa’s return to international sport and
         to remain the grand host of major sporting events; and

      3) takes this opportunity to congratulate everyone, particularly
         Bafana Bafana for advancing to the semifinals and wishes them well
         as they take on the Samba Boys, that is Brazil, tonight.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   ASSISTANCE FOR MTHEMBU TWINS OF JOZINI

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council —

   (1)      notes the sad story of twin sisters Bongiwe and Bongekile
        Mthembu of Ohlalwini in Jozini on the outskirts of Zululand, who
        had a rare condition that made it difficult for them to wear normal
        shoes;


     2) acknowledges that their story has reaffirmed the humility and
        spirit of ubuntu of the people of South Africa who have since
        pledged various forms of assistance to the twins;


     3) recognises that since the story made headlines early this week many
        South Africans have since pledged their support for the twins and
        one of the first to come on board was KwaZulu-Natal Premier Zweli
        Mkhize, who undertook to speed up the medical operation needed by
        the twins; and

      4) takes this opportunity to acknowledge the private sector for
         pledging to assist the girls with their medical and household
         conditions and also to call on all South Africans, particularly
         public leaders, including members of this House, to assist the
         Mthembu family in any possible way.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    MURDER OF BUSINESSMAN IN EASTERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Nksz A N D QIKANI: Sekela-Sihlalo, ndiphakamisa ndingenzanga saziso:


   Ukuba eli Bhunga -


       1) liqaphele isenzo sobugebenga esithe sehla eGcuwa, eMpuma Koloni,
          apho kuye kwaxhaxhwa usomashishini zizigebenga endlwini yakhe,
          wasweleka.
(Translation of isiXhosa draft resolution follows.)

[Ms A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


    (1)    notes the criminal act that took place at  Butterworth,  Eastern
        Cape, where a businessman was hacked to death at his home.]


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

             CONGRATULATIONS AND GOOD WISHES FOR SPRINGBOK TEAMS
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

     1) congratulates the emerging Springboks on braving the weather of the
        Western Cape, and particularly at Newlands, in their draw against
        the mighty British and Irish Lions on Wednesday; and


     2) wishes the Springboks, and the Amabhokobhoko all the best for their
        important test match against the same British and Irish Lions at
        Loftus Versfeld in Pretoria on Saturday 27 June 2009.

[Applause.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       APPOINTMENT OF PROGRAMMING WHIP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move:

   That Mr S S Mazosiwe be appointed as Programming Whip.
Question put: That the motion be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.


Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                YOUTH DAY: CELEBRATING A VIBRANT YOUTH VOICE

                                  (Debate)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson of the Council, Deputy
Chair, hon members and comrades, it is a privilege for me to open this very
important debate that is dedicated to paying tribute to the voices of young
people who refused to be silenced at the height and intensity of repressive
suffering that characterised all streets and corners of this country from
16 June up to when we attained our freedom.

We celebrate this day to honour the words and deeds of the young people of
South Africa who faced the armed forces of the apartheid regime and
protested against the brutality and dehumanising nature of the apartheid
system. We celebrate this day to say to the people of South Africa, let us
not forget the voices of the young soldiers who stamped their collective
feet and faced the ruthless aggression of the apartheid state in defence of
our collective freedom. Here I want to include those young white men who,
difficult as it was, defied their parents and the state, and joined
uMkhonto weSizwe. We celebrate this day to pay tribute and homage to the
young people who risked everything in their lives in pursuit of the
liberation of the oppressed masses of our people.

Indeed, some of these young people lost their lives and some went to
foreign lands. We always sing ...

... Mhlalingaphambili, ukuba abantu baye apho kungazi ma nobaba wakhe
khona, kodwa baya. [... Chairperson, that people went to places where their
parents had never been before.]

Others ended up languishing in prisons such as Robben Island, John Vorster
Square, Drakenstein prison - which was called Victor Verster then - and
many other prisons.

Those who remained behind continued to endure the brutality of the
apartheid regime and its policies. They were faced with no prospects of a
better life and had no opportunities. They lived in communities that were
ravaged by poverty, underdevelopment, unemployment and diseases.

There is no doubt that 16 June added a new impetus to youth activism and
the struggle for liberation in this country. It is the day that
characterises the true embodiment of the tireless dedication and
affirmation that drove South Africa’s youth to rise up against apartheid
and its brutal forces. It is the day when the young people of this country
made unimaginable sacrifices so that we could be free today. In so doing,
they freed the oppressors as well.

In celebrating 16 June, we acknowledge with great pride that young people
played an instrumental role in dismantling the foundation of the apartheid
state. We acknowledge that young people defied the apartheid regime’s quest
to maintain the school as a politically protected space that was relatively
shielded from the repressive conditions that were faced by its community.

As we continue our quest to dismantle the legacy of apartheid settlement,
apartheid education, its economy, fragmented health systems and
orchestrated poverty, we acknowledge that young people in our country are
still facing many challenges. With some 39% of society aged between 14 and
35 years, young people in South Africa comprise a substantial part of the
South African society.

However, due to the systematically orchestrated apartheid system, many
young people are still held captive in the intricate webs of poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy, lack of opportunities and poor health. This is
largely so because, for decades, young people in South Africa were
disoriented and deprived of opportunities for growth by a string of
racially orchestrated policies and legislation.

Despite these challenges, the government – and, of course, let me say, when
I speak of the government, I speak of the ANC government, so that I qualify
it correctly – has moved decisively in creating expanded opportunities for
the youth in our country. For the first time in the history of our country,
the aspirations, needs and conditions of everyone are recognised and
articulated through various policies, pieces of legislation, programmes,
structures and institutions.

The establishment of a national youth policy in 1996 provided a
comprehensive framework for youth development in a postapartheid society.
We ensured that the youth were given meaningful opportunities to reach
their full potential for growth and development.

After several years of engagement with the youth, the government
acknowledged the lack of uniform implementation of policies to advance the
needs and aspirations of the youth. We also noted that, despite several
institutions and programmes to expand economic opportunities for the youth,
only a few young people were benefiting compared to the millions that
needed those opportunities. Last year, through the establishment of the
National Youth Development Agency, or NYDA, we made a conscious decision to
address all structural shortcomings and resource deficiencies facing young
people in South Africa.

The NYDA is charged with the implementation of the National Youth Policy
2009-2014, which was adopted earlier this year. It will focus on
intensifying implementation of youth development interventions through
broadening access. It will also strengthen the implementation capacity of
the youth development machinery in South Africa, especially at provincial
and local levels.

I therefore appeal to the youth of South Africa to rise up and ensure that
they seize the opportunities that are before them. Whereas the youth of
1976 used their energies to mobilise and campaign against apartheid, the
youth of today should use their energies to mobilise and campaign against
crime and drugs in their communities. Whereas the youth of 1976 went into
exile to train as soldiers of liberation, the youth of today should go to
school, colleges and universities to acquire skills for their advancement
and the development of our country.

The young people of today must join together to say that as young people
they must not do crime. They must refuse to join criminal gangs and be at
the forefront of the struggle to defeat violence against women and the rape
of children as well. The young people of today must join together to say
that as young people they will not do drugs and abuse alcohol. The young
people of today must join together to say that as young people they will
not succumb to unnecessary actions.

Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to thank the youth of this
country for turning out in their masses on 22 April 2009 to cast their
votes. They made sure that, forever - and I say forever - the ANC rules our
country.

The ANC’s overwhelming victory at the ballot box is clear proof that the
youth of South Africa is convinced that the ANC is the only organisation
that takes them seriously enough to place them high on  the agenda for
broader nation-building and transformation, and to assist them to
participate in shaping their lives and their future.

Our hon President, Jacob Zuma, responded in his state of the nation address
when he said that:

  For as long as there are children who do not have the means nor the
  opportunity to receive a decent education ... we shall not rest, and we
  dare not falter.

I want to say, Chairperson, in the last few seconds I have, that it is on
days like today that we salute Comrade Dan Montsitsi, who was one of the
first to get out of the classroom on that day in 1976. Thank you.
[Applause.]
Mr M C MAINE: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon members of the National Council
of Provinces, the Chief Whip, comrades and friends, we celebrate the
democracy which, together with our mothers and fathers, we have all fought
so hard to build since its attainment 15 years ago, and the democratic
institutions which we continue to strengthen as we mark every progressive
year of the National Youth Development Agency on the South African
calendar.

We need a focused youth that can be trusted with the future of this
important national cornerstone that defines a certain sector of our people.
That South Africa’s future depends on a responsible youth cannot be
contested. We need a youth that is ready to face the challenges without
ever turning or retreating, a youth able to take action in defence of its
people’s freedom, and a youth able to account for such actions. Indeed, we
need a responsible youth that will, in its actions, find the road towards
its own empowerment.

We need to know what constitutes a responsible youth. How do we define and
judge this responsibility? Is this responsibility relative or is it a solid
phenomenon?

History has more often than not proven that the degree of responsibility
that is needed to take forward the revolution can be found in the youth.
One can see this in the success of the October Revolution, the 26th of July
Movement, the 16 June uprisings and many other historical actions that have
distinguished young people as progressive revolutionaries. Among these are
the youth of the 1940s, the Mandelas, the Anton Lembedes and the Oliver
Tambos of this world, who ignited the flame of revolutionary discourse
among South Africa’s young intellectuals.

The advent of 16 June 1976 saw a disciplined youth force emerge to
meticulously plan for what would be one of the most important revolutionary
events in the history of our country. In the entire planning prior to,
during and after the June 16 uprisings, one senses a deep-rooted discipline
in young people ready to take responsibility for a situation in which they
are placed as active participants, defining themselves as actors and not as
spectators.

What lessons do we draw from these historical experiences as we begin to
define the new role which we should play as the youth of today in
safeguarding and strengthening our democracy? The answer lies in taking
responsibility.

Responsibility can be clearly defined by the relative position which the
subject assumes towards the object, impacted upon by the degree of
ownership which the subject accepts over any action undertaken in the
process. Critical in the above statement is defining the relative position
which one holds, thus one’s identity and ownership of the action
undertaken, conscious of the impact thereof on both the subject and the
object.
The subject and object of our economic plan and economic participation
shall not take their cue from the short-sightedness of the planners of the
economy from which Helen Zille and her predecessors benefited. The lie that
they spread in making African leaders believe that a market economy was the
only rational economic system ever devised by man is sickening. In fact,
they have led us to one hopeless economic mess after another, up to the
current economic meltdown, and they are unable to do anything more than to
recommend simple palliatives without regard to future generations.

We are saying as the youth of South Africa, while acknowledging that there
are no simple solutions, we are going to get together to exchange
experiences, and summarise and synthesise the wealth of new knowledge at
our disposal. In order to shake stagnation in the economic development of
young people in South Africa, we shall take the responsibility of ensuring
that concrete and progressive measures are put in place through the
National Youth Development Agency. For this reason we shall be mindful of
not sliding into total economic and political opportunism.

Zille, the youth is saying to you: “Pasop – beware”. Stop attacking our
President as he puts in place progressive proposals that seek to propel us
forward in youth development. These are the defining features of
responsible leadership.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon member is making his
maiden speech, where he should be protected, and then he gets aggressive
and refers to the premier of this province as “Zille”. He has no right to
call a premier “Zille”; if he wants to refer to our premier, she is “the
hon Premier of the Western Cape”.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, can you
allow us to proceed, please.

Mr M C MAINE: Chairperson, these are the defining features of responsible
leadership, the sterner stuff that the youth should be made of, the spears
needed in defence of our democracy and economic participation by the youth.

Ownership of action and the precise definition of the position which one
holds in relation to the recipient of action are not inborn qualities that
can just emerge. Building blocks are thus needed to arrive at this degree
of maturity in human growth. Education, moral standards and identity or
cultural consciousness are the precise building blocks needed in this
regard.

Education plays an important role in equipping our youth with the necessary
tools to define the position they hold when engaging with broader society
and the ability to take ownership of the actions undertaken in that
process. However, this is only the crux of the matter. The manner in which
the youth defines its relative position in society and its identity, also
cultural identity, informs the actual outputs of the education our youth
would have received.

There is a clear relationship between education, opportunity and
consciousness about one’s identity, which forms the necessary condition for
one to be able to define one’s position in any action. I am not a
philosopher; I am just a young person who sees it necessary to relate
experience on matters of responsible leadership and responsible lifestyle
among our young people.

Do we have young people who know where they stand culturally, young people
who are not drunk with an identity crisis or caught up in the business of
cultural dislocation? The latter are better raised within the context of
moral standards, the kind that is necessary when we begin to look at the
degree of responsibility that exists or that is desired in our young
people. This includes economic and development issues, simplified in a
language that the sector understands.

It is the question of education, economic consciousness, morality and
identity that will determine the success of the agenda set by the youth, or
the outcomes of our engagement on matters of national importance, be it
policy-making, engagement and participation in the economy, driving the
political hot seats or many other matters with which we are familiar,
either at local or national level, in our homes, in the communities in
which we live, or in any other social platform. The success of our
engagement should be defined by the responsibility with which we act. This
should include advocacy programmes for youth employment, in-job training,
internships, etc.

Making sense of the National Youth Development Agency, as our President,
President Jacob Zuma, outlined during its launch, will usher in a new era
for youth development. The youth of South Africa should act now for their
own development, lest history judges us.

Just as an addition to the theme of “Celebrating a Vibrant Youth Voice”, I
want to issue a stern warning that actions speak louder than words. Again,
lest history judges us, despite a supportive President, nation, education
system and progressive movement, we say: My ANC, my vision, my future! I
believe that this statement sums up all of the issues I have raised
regarding a responsible young generation.

Those who might now be spurred on by the fear or grief of losing their
fathers, should know that, in time, they shall learn to die both for
themselves and for the millions of our people, just as the class of 1976
did. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon members, the recent elections
showed that the youth of South Africa is dynamic, opinionated and
energetic. The youth have claimed their space in our society, and in doing
so have made a significant contribution to democracy in our country.

Hon Deputy Chairperson, the topic of this debate sounds very good on the
ear, but can the youth celebrate a vibrant voice under such trying
circumstances? The ID believes that we must use their inspiration,
abilities and energy to help us build South Africa’s tomorrow. However, for
this to happen, government must do its part.

The ID welcomes the establishment of the National Youth Development Agency
to tackle economic issues, the consolidation of the youth agenda under the
Presidency, and the establishment of the Department of Women, Youth,
Children and People with Disabilities.

We call on government to ensure that these initiatives do not end up being
as dysfunctional as the National Youth Commission and to investigate
incentives for businesses that employ the youth as first-time job seekers.
These interventions will go a long way in equipping our youth with the
necessary skills and experience which will make them more employable in the
future.

The daily challenges facing our youth and the barriers in the way of their
advancement must become a central focus of this government. The ID would
like to see government focus not only on the economic challenges that
affect the youth, but also on social issues, sports and recreation, as well
as the human development challenges that hinder their progress.

The youth still has the highest infection rate of HIV and Aids, and many
continue to be affected by deaths in the family and the resulting burden of
heading households on their own. There continues to be a huge lack of
sports and recreation facilities that results in idleness amongst our
youth, which results in too many of them choosing a life of crime and
drugs. We hope that the new government will focus on these challenges with
the urgency and importance they deserve.

The ID applauds the fact that greater attention has been focused on
admission into tertiary institutions in terms of transformation, but as
long as so many black students are not completing their studies,
transformation will never have the result we would like to see.

In conclusion, the ID would like the government to look into implementing
more integration programmes to bridge the many divides that exist within
our tertiary institutions. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M G BOROTO: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon members, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen, comrades and compatriots, the ANC-led government was
re-elected in 2004 on a mandate to build a people’s contract to fight
poverty and create work.
This remains our mandate in 2009 and beyond, and the education sector has a
critical role to play to ensure that our youth acquire the skills, the
knowledge, the values and the attitudes needed to develop their own
potential and assist in placing our country on a sustainable and shared
growth path.

Quality education for every one of our learners will only be realised if
government continues to direct resources, whether human, financial or
physical, in a manner that creates genuine equity and redress. Our
teachers, parents and learners should place teaching and learning at the
centre of their lives; we cannot do without these pillars.

Working together within these pillars of education, including the school
governing bodies and other stakeholders, will allow us to attain our vision
which informs our education policies, based on the ANC’s policy of people’s
education for people’s power. This has been emphasised in the January 8
Statement and also in the state of the nation address by the President,
when he spoke about non-negotiables.

This says to us that we have to monitor the implementation of these
policies. We are one, that is why the ANC has resolved that we should
elevate education from being just a departmental issue to a societal issue.
Hence: Working together we can do more.

The South African government has committed itself to ensuring the
eradication of situations where learners have to study under a tree or in
mud buildings, or under any dangerous conditions. Education is central to
giving impetus to the forces of production and is essential for progress.
It is not a cost, but an investment.

Today I wish to ask the permission of the youth league to wear the cap of
the youth league and take me as a youth leaguer in good standing. I say
this, coming from Mpumalanga. I wish to call for a speedy processing of the
establishment of a university in Mpumalanga.

Kubanga amahloni ngempela lokhu phakathi kwazo zonke izifundazwe ukuthi
iMpumalanga ayinayo inyuvesi. [It is really a shame that amongst all the
provinces Mpumalanga does not have a university.]

Realising these goals will reduce the exodus of learners from our poor
rural areas to the urban areas, costing our parents a lot of money. At the
very least, all our schools must have access roads, sanitation facilities,
clean drinking water and other important infrastructure. This must be done
in conjunction with government’s Expanded Public Works Programme. The
Expanded Public Works Programme must prioritise the wiping out of
infrastructure backlogs at our schools. Let us work together to ensure that
this is monitored and implemented.

We should call for the co-operation of the Department of Health and other
antipoverty measures that should be implemented at schools.

As a government we remain committed to assisting young people to acquire
skills that are relevant to the needs of the economy. Thus we are saying
that the burden of education costs must be removed from poor families. It
has emerged from the Youth Parliament’s report that there are problems with
access to bursaries for tertiary education institutions, further education
and training colleges and so forth. Therefore these services and the
transformation of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme become
important and relevant.

To increase graduate output in areas of skills shortages we need to
increase measures to streamline sector education and training authorities
and other institutions to address existing and forecasted skills shortages.
We also need to revive the role of state-owned enterprises in skills
development and training.

The President of the country, in his state of the nation address, stressed
the need to intensify the work under Jipsa as a key skills demand.

Central to this, quality initiatives will have to be improved, such as
access to early childhood development. The government aims to increase the
number of five-year-olds, that is the Grade Rs, in publicly funded schools
by increasing their number from 487 525 to 700 000, thereby benefiting more
children, and to sustain early childhood education. The ANC-led government
will also train tutors for those learners in early childhood centres.

Poverty eradication strategies are an essential component. To improve our
schooling, an important initiative in this respect has been the
introduction of the school nutrition programme, aiming to provide daily
meals for six million learners in approximately 18 000 primary schools. The
ANC-led government intends to make sure that this programme extends to
deserving learners in high schools. [Interjections.]

I do not want to respond to that. We promise and we implement - that is why
we are here.

The Polokwane conference decided that no-fee schooling should be expanded
from 40% to 60% of students and that we should progressively introduce free
education for the poor. This means that this year 60%, or most, of the
schools in South Africa are no-fee schools. This is the initiative of the
ANC-led government.

We have a clause in the Freedom Charter, which was crafted by the Congress
of the People in 1955, which says that education shall be free, compulsory,
and equal for all children, and we are going to make sure that that happens
– 60% and improving.

While we acknowledge the rise in enrolment of learners in primary schools,
we are also disturbed by the high drop-out rate of young learners.

Children with disabilities constitute a significant proportion of learners
not in schools. Very few special schools provide for education beyond Grade
9. This says to us as the Fourth Parliament that we need to ascertain what
progress has been made in inclusive education programmes, and intensify it.
We have White Paper 6. Let us change it from being a White Paper. Education
remains the most significant arena for youth development and emancipation.
This calls for a review of the proposed model for mainstreaming disability
issues within the core business of Parliament.

While we have an aggressive approach to educator training and the
initiatives for a world-class education sector which produces skills to
generate economic growth and create an economy for the 21st century, we
should also promote the status of teachers, ensuring the employment of
adequate numbers and improving their remuneration as an important part of
our drive to ensure that quality teaching becomes the norm rather than the
exception.

We need to improve performance in mathematics, science, technology and
language development. We have to look at the programmes that will assist
educators in terms of content to assist our young people. We need to
emphasise the roles of departmental transformation units within our regions
and provinces.

There is a subject called life orientation. This subject is not taken
seriously. I call for the prioritisation of this subject, because it
provides career guidance, leadership development and socioeconomic
awareness programmes for young people. This subject is able to do that.

In conclusion, today’s curriculum requires that parents should help
learners at home. As a result, the issue of illiteracy among our adults
becomes a problem. So, we need to make sure that the Kha Ri Gude programmes
are taken forward, and illiteracy is eradicated by 2014. That is what we
aimed at and that is what our manifesto promised.

As I conclude, I will quote the President, who said in his state of the
nation address:

  For as long as there are children who do not have the means nor the
  opportunity to receive a decent education ... we shall not rest, and we
  dare not falter, in our drive to eradicate poverty.

Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Madam Chair, I am sorry that I am only raising this now:
We are giving the hon member the freedom of a maiden speech, but we ask
that the time rules be adhered to. The speech exceeded the time limit. So
we call upon you and the other officials to please stick to the time
regulations. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): It is noted, hon
member. The only thing is, she had already said “in conclusion”.

Mr T E HARRIS: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon colleagues, today in this House
we commemorate the sacrifices made 33 years ago by the youth of Soweto when
they stood up against the disgraceful education policies of the apartheid
state. One generation on, my generation is enjoying the freedoms earned by
the class of ’76 but it is still suffering disproportionately from
unemployment and lack of opportunity.

The concern I would like to address today is that this government’s
ambitious new expenditure plans, announced in the face of lower tax
revenues caused by the recession, will pass unreasonable economic costs on
to future generations and today’s youth.

President Zuma speaks of a desire to do more, and indeed this is a noble
ambition, but we are in a deep recession and, given the constraints faced
by National Treasury, we can do more only by spending more.
The problem is, every day new indicators show the depth of the economic
crisis we are in. In the first quarter, our economy shrunk by 6,4%,
manufacturing and production has declined by 21,6% and exports have plunged
by 55% in value terms.

The most urgent consequence of this decline is its effect on tax revenue.
Sars has already fallen R10 billion short in the first two and half months
of this financial year. More alarming, in a briefing to the finance
committee on Tuesday, the Acting Commissioner of Sars announced that tax
revenue is down 11,3%, year on year.

If tax collection continues at these lower rates — and there is reason to
believe the rate might actually worsen, given the fact that corporate taxes
have not been assessed yet — then the tax take for this financial year
could fall short of estimates by anywhere from R40 billion to R100 billion.

Our economic managers have three options when tax revenues decline so
dramatically. One, they could add new taxes to make up the lost revenue.
Two, they could cut back on expenditure to help the budget balance. Or
three, they could run a much bigger budget deficit.

The first option, introducing new taxes in the face of an economic crisis,
would be ill-advised. Taxpayers are already suffering the effects of the
recession, and as Martin Feldstein points out in The Wall Street Journal
last month in relation to the Great Depression of the 1930s, “the tax
increases passed during that decade derailed the recovery and slowed the
decline in unemployment”.

With regard to the second option, government has shown very little appetite
to rein in spending. By my count, neither President Zuma nor any of his
Ministers have so far announced any major cuts in expenditure. The problem
is, unless spending is cut, then option three, bigger budget deficits,
becomes the default position.

Based on the spending plans tabled in February, and considering the lower
tax takes reported by Treasury, the budget deficit for this year could end
up anywhere from 6% to 8% of GDP.

According to a recent study by the International Monetary Fund, this would
take us from being one of the most fiscally disciplined countries in the
G20 to one of the worst budget deficit offenders.

Now, countercyclical fiscal policy, which this government and the
opposition both subscribe to, requires governments to run budget deficits
in times of economic decline. But a deficit of this size would be
unprecedented since the handover of power from the previous regime, when we
were dangerously close to a debt trap. It would also cause a rise in long-
term capital market interest rates due to larger public sector borrowing
requirements. And crucially, it would drive the state’s debt, and debt
service costs, sky-high. Much of these costs would have to be paid by the
youth of South Africa, who make up the next generation.

So you can see, hon Maine, far from being market fundamentalists, the DA
seems to be the only party that identifies the fiscal risks facing the
youth today.

The alarming thing is that the deficit figure I calculate is based on zero
increases in expenditure, but each day new plans are announced by the
Cabinet. In the President’s state of the nation address, he called for more
expanded Public Works opportunities, more rural development, more social
grants and a national health insurance scheme. Other government leaders
have announced state support for struggling industries and bailouts for
parastatals. And then of course we have the cost of six extra Ministries
and eight extra Deputy Ministries and their departments.

Now, many of these are admirable initiatives, although many are not. But
even with extremely conservative costings, these plans would add at least
R6 billion to government expenditure. Alarmingly, much of the expenditure
is current rather than capital expenditure, meaning that future
generations, the youth of today, would not benefit from additional
productive capacity despite the debts they would inherit.

If this government is truly concerned about our youth, they would recognise
the sacrifices required, and would keep countercyclical expenditure to
levels that would not pass on a cost burden to future generations and the
youth. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr O DE BEER: Hon Deputy Chairperson, members of this House and guests, our
youth want to be part of building solutions to the problems facing the
country. In my own political party, Cope, they have branded this drive
“Thuma Mina”, which means “Send Me”. The campaign aims to emphasise the
role of every youth member to build and promote moral values.

We need a better way of celebrating Youth Day or Youth Month. This day can
be used by the youth to make a difference to those less fortunate. The
youth want to celebrate this month by being in mentorship programmes. The
youth want to change the mindset of the growing generation towards public
service. They are saying “Thuma mina ngikuyele”.

Dit beteken, stuur my, sodat ek kan gaan. [That means send me, so that I
may go.]

They want to be an active voice of the true democracy by starting
programmes and youth forums, irrespective of their affiliations. They want
to go out to schools, churches, chatrooms and political parties to spark
debates about real issues facing them.

The youth also feel that agencies and commissions of our government are
used to promote the ANC, thereby neglecting the majority of young people.
For instance, the manner in which the government launched the National
Youth Development Agency is unacceptable. It was launched in Katlehong, on
Youth Day, 16 June, with other parties and formations invited as observers
at this function.

Chairperson, we call on Parliament, as a matter of urgency, to consider
reintroducing the Youth Parliament concept on a permanent basis. This must
be coupled with localised and regionalised programmes in democracy
education.

Parliament also needs to make sure that it puts in place monitoring
mechanisms and performance indicators for the work of the new National
Youth Development Agency. The same must apply to the work of constituency
offices, which need to become key centres for the conveyance of the
principles and processes of representative and participative government.
Parliament must place special emphasis on reaching out to youth ...
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, does the hon member know the
difference between a constituency office and a parliamentary office, so
that he does not confuse the two in the debate?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): It is noted, thanks.
Continue, hon member.
Mr O DE BEER: What really matters in this country is that we must build
streets and wards, and change mind-sets, starting with ourselves. Young
people have fresh minds – it is up to government to put in place inclusive
forums to harness this fresh spirit. If it does not, the young will again
organise what is needed for themselves, and this government will find
itself on the wrong side of the popular voice.

Our youth are finally learning that there is nothing more gratifying than
making a contribution to the enhancement of human capacity, especially with
regard to those with fewer opportunities.

In conclusion, the Thuma Mina campaign and the Cope youth movement have put
the ball in the leaders’ court, to send them where it is necessary to make
a difference. Our Constitution clearly stipulates these aspirations, which
are also captured by the spirit of the Freedom Charter. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Prince M M M ZULU: Madam Deputy Chairperson, hon members of this House,
chief leaders and our officials, I want to start my speech by saying, in
English, that I am from Africa, I was born in KwaZulu-Natal and I want to
use my Queen KaMsweli’s language.

Ngomhlaka 16 Juni ngo-1976, izinkulungwane zentsha yaseNingizimu Afrika,
zamasha zasukuma phansi zimashela ukucindezelwa wuhulumeni wobandlululo
waleso sikhathi, owayefuna ukubafunza ngenkani ulimi olwalungekho
semthethweni olwalusetshenziswa yiqeqebana labantu abathile baseNingizimu
Afrika. Babefuna ukuba balufunde ngenkani, bebafunza lona ngenkani
elokishini lethu labantu abansundu elalakhiwe wubandlululo e-Soweto.

Ngaleso sikhathi lezi zinkulungwane zentsha yethu kwakungabantu abangangami
kanjena ngoba kwakungabantu abazalwa ngo-1958 uma ngicabanga, okusho ukuthi
ngaleso sikhathi babeyizingane ngesikhathi bemasha. Ngaleso sikhathi
amaphoyisa aleli lizwe, okwakukhona nabafowethu kuwona lawa maphoyisa
nodadewethu baphendula ngezibhamu babhekisa izinganono ezinganeni
ezazingaphethe lutho ezandleni, babashaya bababhuqa kwaphetha ngokuthi
kushone izingane zakithi.

Ngaleyo ndlela ngithi njengamanje kuhulumeni wabantu abansundu noma
kuhulumeni wentando yeningi oqale ngo-1994, wakwenza kwaba semthethweni
ukuthi izingane noma intsha yakuleli lizwe yenza umnikelo obonakalayo
kuleli lizwe yingakho kukhona lokhu okuthiwa ngu-June 16. Phezu kwawo wonke
amaqembu akhona ePhalamende ayecindezelwe nayengacindezelwe, akunakwe
ukuthi namakhosi akuleli lizwe khona lapha eNtshonalanga Kapa
naseMpumalanga Kapa, ebuncaneni bawo alwa aboshwa lapho amakhosi abaThembu
amaningi aphuma ko-Eastern Cape aboshelwa laphaya ko-Robben Island.

Uma ubheka iminyaka yabo kwakuyiminyaka eyi-18 okusho ukuthi
kwakungamabhungu ngempela babeqala ukungena ebunsizweni besanda kuthomba
belwa belwela leli lizwe. Okusho ukuthi lezi zingane zango-1976 zazilwela
leli lizwe ngendlela efanayo neyoyisemkhulu bazo ngendlela ezazenza ngayo.

Ngibuye ngingene kwizinselele. Izinselele ezikhona njengamanje noma
umzabalazo osukhona njengamanje sekungumzabalazo wengculazi, leli gciwane
lengculazi elibulala izingane zethu. Sekumele ukuthi nathi njengabazali,
njengoba mina nje nginabafazi abathathu nezingane eziyi-7 ngisaqhubeka
nokwenza ezinye. [Uhleko.] Ngisemkhankasweni wokubatshela abafana bami
namantombazane ami ukuthi kufanele bakwazi ukuzivikela. Bangenzi izinto
ezingasile nangendlela engekho emthethweni. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[On 16 June 1976, thousands of our South African youth rose and marched
against the oppression of the apartheid government of that time, which
wanted to forcefully impose upon them an unofficial language which was used
by a few South African individuals. They wanted to forcefully impose it on
our youth in the black township called Soweto, which was built by the
apartheid government.

These thousands of our youth who were people of my age because they were
born in 1958 - if my memory serves me well - marched when they were still
very young. During that time, the police officers of this country, which
included our own black brothers and sisters, responded with guns and shot
at unarmed children; they went on a rampage and that resulted in the death
of our children.
In that way I now want to say that the black government, or rather the
democratic government, which started in 1994, recognised the remarkable
sacrifice our children or the youth of this country made for this country,
by officially declaring June 16 Youth Day. All the parties in Parliament
that were oppressed and those that were not, the chiefs of the Thembu
people of the Western Cape and the Eastern Cape, fought and were arrested.
Most of these Thembu chiefs from the Eastern Cape were arrested and sent to
Robben Island.

Many of them were 18-year-olds which means that they were real lads in
their late teens who were about to become young men, right after reaching
puberty, and already fighting for this country. This means these children
of 1976 fought for this country the same way their forefathers did.

I would like to touch on the challenges. The challenges that we experience
right now, or rather the struggle that we have at the moment, is the fight
against the virus that causes AIDS, which is killing our children. As
parents we must be vigilant. I have three wives and 7 children and I am
continuing to bear more. [Laughter.] I am on a mission to tell my boys and
girls that they must be able to protect themselves, and that they should
not engage in silly and unlawful activities. Thank you.]

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, I will forever be
grateful for the opportunities that are presented to me by Parliament in
order to be able to address the House and the nation on this particular
subject, which is very close to my heart.

I am also very humbled by the current youth for continuously granting me
permission to share in their platform. My generation was tasked with the
responsibility to participate in the national democratic struggle, whose
objective was to eradicate apartheid and all its vestiges.

All generations of youth have their challenges laid down for them. By way
of illustration: In the 1940s you had the formation of the youth league,
with its own programme, which was very dynamic. You had the leadership of
the ANC Youth League, in the form of Comrades Kathrada, Mandela and Sisulu.
All of them were activists as young people.

In the 1950s you had the Defiance Campaign. The young people of that time
were tasked with the responsibility of defying all apartheid legislation.
They were supposed to break the law by entering any public amenity that was
white or designated as white. In the 1960s, you had the pass campaigns,
Rivonia and the formation of uMkhonto weSizwe, MK.

What this means, in essence, is that all young people, of any epoch, have
their challenges. Most fortunately, the South African youth never turned
away from the challenges; they always came forward to be counted.

In 1970, again, they were charged with the responsibility to dismantle the
pillars of apartheid. Bantu education, as we knew it, ceased to exist in
the townships. Local government structures were also demolished. These are
but some of the contributions which young people were able to make during
that time.

We applaud the National Youth Development Agency. It has been launched as a
development agency during the celebrations of June 16 this year, 2009. A
consultative process of two years finally gave birth to this agency when
the President of the Republic signed the National Youth Development Agency
Act, Act 54, on 23 December 2008.

The main objectives of the National Youth Development Agency are: To ensure
that the youth is able to access resources, in order to kickstart small
enterprises; to create a space for job opportunities in the private and
public sectors; and to open up internship programmes on a national scale.

Much as we welcome the establishment of the youth agency, we also want to
say that it is critical for the structure to establish a small monitoring
committee, which would be essential in order to keep track of the delivery
process, as well as legitimate concerns which could be raised by the youth
community. It cannot therefore be business as usual if there is a deluge of
problems raised which are not attended to.

The President of the Republic, Comrade Zuma, says: “All hands on deck”.
This means, in essence, that positions in the National Youth Development
Agency are not positions of entitlement; they are, therefore, positions
which have been allocated to members of the youth agency in order to serve
the youth of South Africa.

I just want to share a very short story with hon members. This was a long
time ago. I was a youth but already grown up. In 1977, I had the honour of
attending a sod-turning ceremony. It’s a ceremony where they bring a shovel
and they start to turn the soil in preparation for the building of whatever
structure. I attended this one as an uninvited guest. We got word, as the
leadership of the Soweto Students’ Representative Council, that the late Dr
Connie Mulder would be turning the first sod in Soweto for the building of
another Bantu education school, as we perceived it at that time.

When he took the podium to speak, I grabbed the microphone, not from him
but from the master of ceremonies, and addressed the gathering. I grabbed
the spade that he was supposed to use to turn the sod and threw it away.
After addressing the crowd, we shouted “Amandla!” [Power!] and ran away
before the police came.

Today, in our new-found democracy, I am working side by side with his son,
the hon Mulder, the Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries.
We are jointly using the same spade that I threw away earlier in order to
build our democracy and deliver to our people, both black and white.

The principle of nonracialism is a principle on which the ANC will never
compromise. If any member from any political party crosses to the side of
the ANC and happens to be a white opposition member, we treat you like a
South African, because that is what we see. We treat you like a member of
the ANC, because that is what you are; we treat you as a comrade. We are
able to embrace those who are now members of the ANC in the spirit of
nonracialism, because those are policies that the ANC has engendered over
the years. My colleague here spoke about the Freedom Charter. He said:
“South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white ...”

My colleague from the DA is quite perturbed about the high rate of
unemployment, which also affects white youth. We have to be objective about
this. The economic meltdown is hitting the rest of the continent and, in
fact, the whole world. In the past, jobs were reserved simply because of
the job reservation laws, where Africans would not be able to do certain
types of jobs and whites would be privileged to do them. We are saying the
job reservation laws have been done away with. Whatever problems we are
going to experience in our democracy, we are all going to experience them,
irrespective of whether we are white or black.

Let us give the South African economy a chance. It is true that inflation
was a little high. Some time ago, the figure was 8,5%; it has gradually
dropped to 8%. Food prices are gradually coming down, but some of the big
companies continue to collude in order to raise food prices. You have a
situation right now in which the Competition Comission is battling with all
these companies, such as Premier Foods, Atlas and a number of other
companies which sell bread. This collusion is actually meant to benefit
those particular companies – the price of bread would go up at the expense
of the poor.

All that we are saying is: Give the South African economy a chance.
I concur with Nkosi and our colleague here. I am not sure what “Thuma Mina”
[Send me] means. If I knew, I would be able to speak on it. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

               APPOINTMENT OF MEMBER TO PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the following member be appointed as a member of the Pan-African
   Parliament:

   Ms M N Matladi

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    APPOINTMENT OF A MEMBER AND ALTERNATES TO THE MAGISTRATES’ COMMISSION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council designates the following member and her alternate to
   serve on the Magistrates’ Commission:


   Ms T Memela and Ms A N D Qikani as her alternate.


   Further, that the Council designates the following members as alternates
   to the members currently serving on the Magistrates’ Commission:

   Mr F Adams (as alternate to Mr O de Beer)
   Ms M G Boroto (as alternate to Ms R N Rasmeni)
   Mr M P Jacobs (as alternate to Mr S S Mazosiwe)


Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in terms of section 3(1)(a)(xi)of the
Magistrates Act, 1993.

The Council adjourned at 15:34.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           WEDNESDAY, 27 MAY 2009
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
        Division of Revenue Bill for 2010-2011, tabled on 26 May 2009 in
        terms of section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations
        Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997) [RP 92-2009].


                              THURSDAY, 28 MAY

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1. National Railway Safety Regulator Amendment Bill [B 32B – 2008] –
         Act No 69 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 20 May
         2009).

      2. Civil Aviation Bill [B 73B – 2008] – Act No 13 of 2009 (assented to
         and signed by President on 25 May 2009).

      3. National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 66D – 2008] – Act No 14
         of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 25 May 2009).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on
        Restitution of Land Rights for 2008-2009 [RP 39-2009].


                            TUESDAY, 2 JUNE 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

The following members have been appointed to the Committees below:

Select Committee on Education and Recreation

Member                 Province              Party

Rantho, Ms DZ          Eastern Cape                ANC
Moshodi, Ms ML         Free State            ANC
Mncube, Ms BV          Gauteng               ANC
Magadla, Ms NW         KwaZulu-Natal         ANC
Zulu, Prince MMM       KwaZulu-Natal         IFP
Mashamaite, Mr TA            Limpopo               ANC
Boroto, Ms MG          Mpumalanga            ANC
Makgate, Ms MW         North West            ANC
Rasmeni, Ms RN         North West            ANC
Plaatjie, Mr SH        North West            COPE
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Northern Cape               ID
De Villiers, Mr MJR          Western Cape                DA
Mahlangu, Mr MJ (Alt)  Limpopo               ANC
Chen, Ms SS (Alt)            Gauteng               DA
Mofokeng, Mr TMH (Alt) Free State            ANC

Select Committee on Social Services

Member                 Province              Party

Rantho, Ms DZ          Eastern Cape                ANC
Moshodi, Ms ML         Free State            ANC
Mncube, Ms BV          Gauteng               ANC
Magadla, Ms NW         KwaZulu-Natal         ANC
Zulu, Prince MMM       KwaZulu-Natal         IFP
Mashamaite, Mr TA            Limpopo               ANC
Boroto, Ms MG          Mpumalanga            ANC
Makgate, Ms MW         North West            ANC
Rasmeni, Ms RN         North West            ANC
Plaatjie, Mr SH        North West            COPE
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Northern Cape               ID
De Villiers, Mr MJR          Western Cape                DA
Mahlangu, Mr MJ (Alt)  Limpopo               ANC
Chen, Ms SS (Alt)            Gauteng               DA
Mofokeng, Mr TMH (Alt) Free State            ANC

Select Committee on Economic Development

Member                 Province              Party

van Lingen, Ms EC            Eastern Cape                DA
Mnguni, Mr BA          Free State            ANC
Chen, Ms SS            Gauteng               DA
Gamede, Mr DD          KwaZulu-Natal         ANC
Dikgale, Ms MC         Limpopo               ANC
Nyambi, Mr AJ          Mpumalanga            ANC
Maine, Mr MC           North West            ANC
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Northern Cape               ID
Sinclair, Mr KA        Northern Cape               ANC
Adams, Mr F            Western Cape                ANC
Moshodi, Ms Ml (Alt)   Free State            ANC
Ntwanambi, Ms ND (Alt) Western Cape                ANC
Feldman, Mr DB (Alt)   Gauteng               COPE
Montsitsi, Mr SD (Alt) Gauteng               ANC

Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations

Member                 Province              Party

Mazosiwe, Mr SS        Eastern Cape                ANC
Mnguni, Mr BA          Free State            ANC
Bloem, Mr DV           Free State            COPE
Montsitsi, Mr SD       Gauteng               ANC
Zulu, Prince MMM       KwaZulu-Natal         IFP
Makhubela, Mr MW       Limpopo               COPE
Mashile, Mr BL         Mpumalanga            ANC
Chaane, Mr TE          North West            ANC
De Beer, Mr CJ         Northern Cape               ANC
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Norhern Cape                ID
Harris, Mr TD                Western Cape                DA
Feldman, Mr DB         Gauteng               COPE
Mokgoro, Mr GG         Northern Cape               ANC
Ntwanambi, Ms ND       Western Cape                ANC

Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
Member                 Province              Party

Nesi, Mr B             Eastern Cape                ANC
Mokgobi, Mr MH         Limpopo               ANC
Mofokeng, Mr TMH       Free State            ANC
Matila, Mr AG          Gauteng               ANC
Nzimande, Mr LPM       KwaZulu-Natal         ANC
Makhubela, Mr MW       Limpopo               COPE
Watson, Mr A                 Mpumalanga            ANC
Chaane, Mr TE          North West            ANC
Faber, Mr WF                 Northern Cape               DA
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Northern Cape               ID
Bekker, Mr JMG         Western Cape                DA
Bloem, Mr DV (Alt)           Free State            COPE
Montsitsi, Mr SD (Alt) Gauteng               ANC
De Beer, Mr CJ(Alt)          Northern Cape               ANC

Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs

Member                 Province              Party

Qikani, Ms AND         Eastern Cape                ANC
Worth, Mr DA                 Free State            DA
Mabe, Ms BP            Gauteng               ANC
Zulu, Prince MMM       KwaZulu-Natal         IFP
Mashile, Mr BL         Mpumalanga            ANC
Mokgobi, Mr MH         Limpopo               ANC
Plaatjie, Ms S H       North West            COPE
Mokgoro, Mr GG         Northern Cape               ANC
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Northern Cape               ID
De Beer, Mr CJ         Northern Cape               ANC
Ntwanambi, Ms ND       Western Cape                ANC
Mlenzana, Mr Z (Alt)         Eastern Cape                COPE
Sibande, Mr MP (Alt)         Mpumalanga            ANC
Mashamaite, Mr TA (Alt)      Limpopo               ANC

Select Committee on Public Services

Member                 Province              Party

Mlenzana, Mr Z         Eastern Cape                COPE
Jacobs, Mr MP          Free State            ANC
Feldman, Mr DB         Gauteng               COPE
Zulu, Prince MMM       KwaZulu-Natal         IFP
Mabija, Ms L                 Limpopo               ANC
Sibande, Mr MP         Mpumalanga            ANC
Themba, Ms MP          Mpumalanga            ANC
Groenewald, Mr HB            North West            DA
Tau, Mr RJ             Northern Cape               ANC
De Beer, Mr O                Western Cape                DA
Rasmeni, Ms RN (Alt)   North West            ANC
Worth, Mr DA      (Alt)           Free State             DA
Nyambi, Mr A     (Alt)       Mpumalanga            ANC
Sinclair, Mr KA (Alt)        Northern Cape               COPE

Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises

Member                 Province              Party

Mlenzana, Mr Z         Eastern Cape                COPE
Jacobs, Mr MP          Free State            ANC
Feldman, Mr DB         Gauteng               COPE
Zulu, Prince MMM       KwaZulu-Natal         IFP
Mabija, Ms L                 Limpopo               ANC
Sibande, Mr MP         Mpumalanga            ANC
Themba, Ms MP          Mpumalanga            ANC
Groenewald, Mr HB            North West            DA
Tau, Mr RJ             Northern Cape               ANC
De Beer, Mr O                Western Cape                DA
Rasmeni, Ms RN (Alt)   North West            ANC
Worth, Mr DA      (Alt)           Free State             DA
Nyambi, Mr A     (Alt)       Mpumalanga            ANC
Sinclair, Mr KA (Alt)        Northern Cape               COPE

Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development
Member                 Province              Party

Nesi, Mr B             Eastern Cape                ANC
Mokgobi, Mr MH         Limpopo               ANC
Mofokeng, Mr TMH       Free State            ANC
Matila, Mr AG          Gauteng               ANC
Nzimande, Mr LPM       KwaZulu-Natal         ANC
Makhubela, Mr MW       Limpopo               COPE
Watson, Mr A                 Mpumalanga            ANC
Chaane, Mr TE          North West            ANC
Faber, Mr WF                 Northern Cape               DA
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Northern Cape               ID
Bekker, Mr JMG         Western Cape                DA
Bloem, Mr DV (Alt)           Free State            COPE
Montsitsi, Mr SD (Alt) Gauteng               ANC
De Beer, Mr CJ(Alt)          Northern Cape               ANC

Select Committee on Trade and International Relations

Member                 Province              Party

van Lingen, Ms EC            Eastern Cape                DA
Mnguni, Mr BA          Free State            ANC
Chen, Ms SS            Gauteng               DA
Gamede, Mr DD          KwaZulu-Natal         ANC
Dikgale, Ms MC         Limpopo               ANC
Nyambi, Mr AJ          Mpumalanga            ANC
Maine, Mr MC           North West            ANC
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Northern Cape               ID
Sinclair, Mr KA        Northern Cape               ANC
Adams, Mr F            Western Cape                ANC
Moshodi, Ms Ml (Alt)   Free State            ANC
Ntwanambi, Ms ND (Alt) Western Cape                ANC
Feldman, Mr DB (Alt)   Gauteng               COPE
Montsitsi, Mr SD (Alt) Gauteng               ANC

Select Committee on Petitions and Members Legislative Proposals

Member                 Province              Party

Mazosiwe, Mr SS        Eastern Cape                ANC
Bloem, Mr DV           Free State            COPE
Matila, Mr AG          Gauteng               ANC
Zulu, Prince MMM       KwaZulu-Natal         IFP
Memela, Ms TC          KwaZulu-Natal         ANC
Dikgale, Ms MC         Limpopo               ANC
Watson, Mr A                 Mpumalanga            ANC
Maine, Mr MC           North West            ANC
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Northern Cape               ID
Harris, Mr TD                Western Cape                DA
Adams, Mr F            Western Cape                ANC
Mashile, Mr BL (Alt)         Mpumalanga            ANC
Faber, Mr WF (Alt)           Northern Cape               DA

Select Committee on  Women, Children and Disabled Persons

Member                 Province              Party

Qikani, Ms AND         Eastern Cape                ANC
Bloem, Mr DV           Free State            COPE
Mabe, Ms BP            Gauteng               ANC
Nzimande, Mr LPM       KwaZulu-Natal         ANC
Zulu, Prince MMM       KwaZulu-Natal         IFP
Mabija, Ms L                 Limpopo               ANC
Boroto, Ms MG          Mpumalanga            ANC
Groenewald, Mr HB            North West            DA
Mokgoro, Mr GG         Northern Cape               ANC
Gunda, Mr JJ                 Northern Cape               ID
De Beer, Mr O                Western Cape                COPE
Ntwanambi, Ms ND (Alt) Western Cape                ANC
Gamede, Mr DD (Alt)          KwaZulu-Cape          ANC
van Lingen, Ms EC (Alt)      Eastern Cape                DA
Rantho, Ms DZ (Alt)          Eastern Cape                ANC

                           WEDNESDAY, 3 JUNE 2009
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

    The following member has been appointed to the Committee below:
    Select Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative Proposals

    Member             Province              Party
    Nyambi, Mr A J          Mpumalanga             ANC


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Tourism and the Minister of  Water  and  Environmental
    Affairs

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
        Tourism for 2009/1- to 2013/14.

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Business Plan of South African National Parks for 2009/10.

3.    The Minister of Tourism

    (a)     Strategic Plan of South African Tourism for 2009/10 to 2013/14.

                            THURSDAY, 4 JUNE 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

   1. Membership of Committees


      (1)   The following members have been elected as Chairpersons of the
          Committees below with effect from 4 June 2009:
          Select Committee on Education and Recreation


          Makgate, Ms MW


          Select Committee on Social Services


          Rasmeni, Ms RN


          Select Committee on Economic Development


          Adams, Mr F


          Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations


          De Beer, Mr CJ


          Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
          Affairs


          Mokgobi, Mr MH


          Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs


          Qikani, Ms AND


          Select Committee on Public Services


          Sibande, Mr MP


          Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises


          Themba, Ms MP


          Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development
          Mofokeng, Mr TMH


          Select Committee on Trade and International Relations


          Gamede, Mr DD


          Select Committee on Petitions and Members Legislative Proposals


          Nyambi, Mr A J


          Select Committee on  Women, Children and Disabled Persons


          Mabe, Ms BP

      (2)   The following member has been appointed to the Committees below:

          Select Committee on Public Serivices


          Member                  Province               Party


          Montsitsi, Mr S D       Gauteng                ANC


          Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises


          Member                  Province               Party
          Montsitsi, Mr S D       Gauteng                ANC

                             MONDAY, 8 JUNE 2009
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Proclamation No R.36 published in Government Gazette No 32205
        dated 6 May 2009: Commencement of sections 2 and 3 of the Criminal
        Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 68 of 2008).

    (b)     Government Notice No R.513 published in Government Gazette No
        32205 dated 6 May 2009: Regulations under the Criminal Procedure
        Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by
        Space Objects, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on International
        Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects.


    (c)     Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer
        Space, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on Registration of
        Objects Launched into Outer Space.


3.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
        Fisheries for 2009/10.


4.    The Minister in The Presidency (Mr O C Chabane)

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Media Development and Diversity Agency
        (MDDA) for 2009-2012.


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
        2009/10-2011/12.


    (c)     Strategic Plan of the Government Communication and Information
        System (GCIS) for 2009-2012.


5.    The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for
        2009/10–2011/12.


6.    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Rural Development and Land
        Reform for 2009-2012.


7.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Report of the Central Drug Authority (CDA) for 2007-2008 [RP 10-
        2009].


8.    The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of International Relations and
        Cooperation for 2009-2012.


                            TUESDAY, 9 JUNE 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

 1. Designation of Provincial Whips


    The following members have been designated as Provincial Whips of the
    NCOP with effect from 8 June 2009:


    1)      Hon. Ms. D. Z. Rantho (Eastern Cape)
    2)      Hon. Mr. M. P. Jacobs (Free State)
    3)      Hon. Mr. S. D. Montsitsi (Gauteng)
    4)      Hon. Mr. L. P. M. Nzimande (KwaZulu-Natal)
    5)      Hon. Ms. L. Mabija (Limpopo)
    6)      Hon. Ms. M. G. Boroto (Mpumalanga)
    7)      Hon. Mr. T. E. Chaane (North West)
    8)      Hon. Mr. G. G. Mokgoro (Northern Cape)
    9)      Hon. Mr. T. D. Harris (Western Cape)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Trade and Industry for 2009-
        2012.


                           WEDNESDAY, 10 JUNE 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

                  1. Designation of Whips
    The following Member has been designated as the Programming Whip of the
    NCOP with effect from 10 June 2009:

    The Hon. Mr. S. S. Mazosiwe (Eastern Cape)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for 2009-
        2012.

2.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the National Development Agency for 2009-
        2012.


                           THURSDAY, 11 JUNE 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Service for 2009/10
        – 2011/12 (Update for 2009-2010).

2.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Corporate Strategic Plan of the Department of Science and
        Technology for 2009-2010.


                            FRIDAY, 12 JUNE 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Police

    (a)     Annual Performance Plan for the South African Police Service
        for 2009/2010 [RP 23-2009].


                           THURSDAY, 18 JUNE 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
    (a)     Medium Term Strategic Plan of the Public Service Commission for
        2009/10-2011/12.


    (b)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
        Implementation of the Performance Management and Development System
        for Senior Managers in the Northern Cape Province – November 2008
        [RP 285-2008].

    (c)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Measuring
        of the Effectiveness of the National Anti-corrupt Hotline: Second
        Biennial Report – December 2008 [RP 284-2008].

2.    The Minister of Police

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints Directorate for
        2009-2012.

    (b)     Regulations tabled in terms of section 9(2) of the FIFA World
        Cup South Africa Special Measures Act, 2006 (Act No 11 of  2006).

3.    The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Home Affairs for 2009/10-
        2011/12.

4.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


    (a)     Medium term Strategic Framework of the Department of Arts and
        Culture for April 2009 – March 2012.
5.    The Minister of Correctional Services


    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for
        2009/10 – 2013/14.

6.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for
        2009–2012 [RP 54-2009].

7.    The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Memorandum by the Minister of Public Works setting out
        particulars of the Building Programme for 2009-2010.


                            MONDAY, 22 JUNE 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2009/10 -
        2011/12.

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for 2009
        - 2012.

3.    The Minister of Social Development
    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency
        (SASSA) for 2009/10 - 2011/12 [RP 28-2009].

4.    The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans


    (a)     Strategic Business Plan of the Department of Defence and
        Military Veterans for 2009 – 2010.


                            TUESDAY, 23 JUNE 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Strategic Plan of National Treasury (Update) for 2009/12 [RP 52-
        2009].

    (b)     Strategic Plan of South African Revenue Service (SARS) for
        2009/10 – 2011/12: Revised Activities and Deliverables per
        Corporate Strategic Priority June 2009.

2.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration
    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Public Administration Leadership and
        Management Academy for 20008/09 – 2011/12.


                           WEDNESDAY, 24 JUNE 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Education
        and Training Authority (CETA) for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 71-2008].

2.    The Minister of Energy

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Minerals and Energy for
        2009/10 – 2011/12.

3.    The Minister of Mining

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Minerals and Energy for
        2009/10 – 2011/12.


                           THURSDAY, 25 JUNE 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation
    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation for
        2009 – 2013.


