---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 February 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-02-19
---

THURSDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

  CONSIDERATION TO BE GIVEN TO REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FINANCE AND
                 TO FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF PARLIAMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House, noting that the Portfolio Committee on Finance has this
   morning reported on the Financial Management of Parliament Bill – B74B of
   2008 - resolves to consider both the Report of the Portfolio Committee
   and the Bill today, after Order No 5 on the Order Paper.
Agreed to.

   EXTENSION OF DEADLINE BY WHICH AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE MUST TO REPORT ON
                   NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BOARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move on
behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party:

   That the House, noting the resolution it adopted on 5 February 2009,
   inter alia setting the deadline for the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on the
   appointment of members to the National Youth Development Agency Board to
   report by 19 February 2009, and subject to the concurrence of the
   National Council of Provinces, resolves to extend the deadline by which
   the Ad Hoc Joint Committee has to report to 19 March 2009.

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                          (Consideration of Report)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:


   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                           (First Reading debate)

Mr K A MOLOTO: Madam Speaker, hon members, the global economy is in a
serious recession, the most severe in the past 50 or 60 years in terms of
depth and length. The scale of this recession is alarming and has far-
reaching consequences. Developing countries are finding it difficult to
raise funds in international capital markets as the cost of borrowing has
just shot through the roof. South Africa is in a very fortunate position as
it can still raise most of the required funds in the domestic markets, as
our domestic capital markets are very sophisticated and deep.

The private capital flows to emerging markets are drying up as the stimulus
package initiated by the developed countries is sucking up all the
available funds. The problem emerging markets have to deal with is the
collapse in consumer demand in the United States and the European Union.
The collapse in the housing market has meant that households could not use
the equity in their home-loan finance consumption. This has an adverse
effect on the exports from emerging markets, hence a drop in manufacturing
output.

The fact of the matter is that US consumers are the most heavily indebted
in the world, financing most of their consumption through credit. Access to
that credit has ceased temporarily because banks’ balance sheets have come
under pressure as a result of subprime losses. The developed countries have
to deal with two challenges, that of bailing out their banks and that
stimulating the economy through massive infrastructure investments.

The Asian Tigers are also experiencing serious problems. Their narrow focus
and excessive dependence on exports have made them even more vulnerable,
compared to their Western counterparts, as their export-led growth was tied
up to the American consumer boom.

About 36% of South African-manufactured exports are sold to the G7
industrialised countries. Only about 5% of such exports go to Brazil,
Russia, India and China. Currently, the economies of the G7 countries are
experiencing serious contraction in economic growth.

Above all, we need to realise that the neoliberal agenda of lax regulation
of financial markets has landed the global economy in this mess. Those who
have been arguing about rolling back the role of the state in the economy
must realise the folly of their ideology.

I want to go back to the statement made by one congressman to Federal
Reserve Chairman Bernanke, I quote:


  Wall Street had a party, got drunk and broke chairs. American citizens
  were not invited to the party, and now they are expected to pay for the
  damage caused by Wall Street.

Wall Street has landed the global economy in the mess it is in now. The
neoliberal agenda of reckless financial deregulation, turning a blind eye
to the regulation of all manner of derivatives, has proved dangerous to the
health of the global economy. The world needs comprehensive regulation of
financial markets.

These global economic developments have major implications for the South
African economy. Lower commodity prices have a huge influence on mining
output and ultimately translate into reduced revenue collection for South
Africa.

These international economic developments also have far-reaching
consequences for the budgets of the Southern African Customs Union - that
is Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and South Africa. The customs and excise
revenue for each member state is collected into a common revenue pool and
distributed to member states according to an agreed-upon formula. The
problem is that customs revenue is highly volatile and closely follows the
business cycle.

Customs revenue represents over 50% of the budget revenue of Lesotho and
Swaziland. In the case of Botswana and Namibia, customs revenue represents
over 20% of their budget. The contribution of customs revenue to our total
revenue is negligible and has never been considered as a major source of
revenue.

I’m mentioning these facts because customs duties for 2008-09 are expected
to be R7 billion less than expected. This will have a negative impact on
the budgets of Lesotho, Swaziland, Botswana and Namibia. It might force
these countries to reduce their expenditure.

The ANC election manifesto acknowledges the existence of these serious
global economic challenges. This Budget should be seen in the context of
the realisation of the objectives of the ANC manifesto.

This year’s Budget is guided by the following five principles: One, to
protect the poor; two, to build the capacity for long-term growth; three,
to sustain employment growth; four, to maintain a sustainable debt level;
and, five, to address sectoral barriers to growth and investment. These are
the principles that will guide the ANC for the next five years.
Electricity failures in the past clearly indicate that South Africa’s
ageing infrastructure is a major impediment to economic growth. The R787
billion infrastructure investment plan will ensure that we build our
capacity to create employment and grow the economy.

The building of rail networks, roads, school buildings, dams, port
operations, housing and investment in power generation will lay a solid
foundation for long-term economic growth. Decent work opportunities will be
created in the process of building this infrastructure.

We have to strengthen the role of agriculture in our economy. The sharply
food prices in the past clearly point to the need to focus on domestic
agriculture as these prices have a negative impact on the poor. This is a
labour-intensive sector and we need to pay sufficient attention to it. The
manifesto mentions a number of interventions that will be made to
strengthen the role of agriculture and food security.

We have to increase our export performance. Compared to other emerging
markets, South Africa’s export performance has not been impressive. We are
still importing much more than we export. The 2009 Budget includes R17
billion for industrial support and tax incentives, which will assist in
improving our export performance. It is important that the next Parliament
should require an annual report on the effectiveness of these tax
incentives and industrial support measures.

The ANC manifesto is calling for special-sector programmes to strengthen
our industrial and trade capacity. The interventions contained in the
national industrial framework will ensure that we build a competitive
manufacturing industry and create jobs.

The ANC’s plan is to step up the Expanded Public Works Programme linked to
infrastructure and meeting social needs with home-based care, crèches,
school cleaning and renovation, community gardens, the removal of alien
vegetation, tree-planting and school-feeding.

The 2009 Budget introduces a new performance-based incentive to
municipalities to increase the labour intensity of Public Works programmes.
An additional R4,1 billion is allocated to the Public Works programme.

We will manage our economy in a manner that ensures that it continues to
grow, that our people benefit from that growth, and that we ensure that we
create decent work for the unemployed, for workers, for young people, for
women and the rural poor. We’ll remain in touch with our people and listen
to their needs. We have achieved much in the past 15 years, but we are
committed to doing more. Working together, we can do more! I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson, this Bill has major implications and
potential consequences that should support the requirements for a
sustainable gross domestic product, GDP. The Minister must be complimented
on his bold and clear observations and advice he has given about the
unacceptable performance by most departments. Unfortunately, it often seems
he is a lone voice in a political wilderness where nobody else sees, hears
or speaks sensible and prudent economics.

The global economy is now in real turmoil, while uncertainty and also
anxiety prevail amongst global investors, which emanate from a negative
sentiment towards emerging markets that also profoundly affects our
domestic economy. The political volatility and the views expressed by the
ANC’s leftist partners have certainly added to this. Our inflation and
interest rates remain relatively high when compared to our main trading
partners. It is expected that the rand will weaken further in response to
the uncertain portfolio inflows, a volatile dollar and the perceived risk
linked to the ever-increasing current account deficit.

The DA’s election manifesto has the objective of offering a realistic
alternative approach in an open-opportunity society in order to assure all
taxpayers and investors not only that the DA can and will make realistic,
meaningful and constructive contributions to ensure the highest probability
of macroeconomic success, but that we can act as their credible and
knowledgeable watchdog and as a realistic alternative government-in-
waiting. We have an important role to play to comfort current and potential
investors.

Die Minister moet gekomplimenteer word vir die volgende:

Die verdere toedeling aan Eskom, staatsondernemings, provinsies en
munisipaliteite vir hulle kapitaaluitbreidingsprogramme, hoewel daar te min
op die privaatsektor se rol gefokus word.

Die klem op die noodsaak vir die uitvoergerigtheid en die verdien van
buitelandse valuta.

Die noodsaak vir die ontwikkeling van vaardighede om die verlangde
ekonomiese groei te ondersteun.

Die toekenning om die maatskaplike sektore verder te bemagtig en die mees
kwesbaaarste in ons gemeenskappe, kinders tot 15, die behoeftiges en veral
gestremdes, verder te ondersteun.

Dit is noodsaaklik dat ons die ekonomiese koek groter moet maak, en dat die
belastingbasis verbreed moet word sodat meer volhoubare werksgeleenthede
geskep kan word. Dit sal die lewenstandaard en welvaart van alle burgers
verbeter, en dit kan verseker dat die vraag-en die aanbodkante van ons
ekonomie optimaal ontwikkel en benut kan word.

Die volgende bekommersnisse bestaan onder andere by ons:

Die vooruitskatting van die bruto binnelandse produk, BBP, is ’n skrale
1,2% en verdere ekonomiese skokke kan ons in ’n resessie dompel, sonder
genoegsame reserwes.

Hoewel ons begrip het dat die 3,8% begrotingstekort en die leningsopnames
tans geregverdig kan word as ’n anti-sikliese meganisme, is ons tog
bekommerd dat sulke tekorte en skuld nie volhoubaar is nie en as ’n las op
toekomstige generasies gelaai kan word.

Die al groter wordende tekort op die betalingsbelans bly ’n groot bron van
kommer. Die Minister het – soos ook verlede jaar – dit erken en die goed
bedoelde erkennings, versoeke vir buitelandse kapitale investerings en die
toekenning van fondse na die Departement van Handel en Nywerheid vir
uitvoerbevordering, is klaarblyklik nie meer genoegsaam nie.

Kommerwekkend is dat die nywerheidsontwikklingsbeleid steeds nie daarin
slaag om uitvoere effektief te stimuleer en om vaste kapitaal investerings
na Suid-Afrika te lok nie.

In meerdere gevalle het ons belemmerende wetgewing. Nie net moet huidige
werkers beskerm word nie, maar behoort die toetrede van veral werkloses en
eerste toetreders, aggressief ondersteun te word. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The Minister should be complimented for the following reasons.

The further apportionment to Eskom, state enterprises, provinces and
municipalities for their capital expansion programmes, although too little
focus is placed on the role of the private sector.

The emphasis on the need to be focused on exports and earning foreign
exchange.

The need to develop skills in order to support the required economic
growth.

The apportionment to further empower the social sectors and to further
support the most vulnerable in our communities; children up to 15 years of
age, the needy and in particular the disabled.

It is essential for us to enlarge the economic cake and to broaden the tax
base so that more sustainable job opportunities can be created. This will
improve the quality of life and prosperity of all citizens and it will
ensure the optimal development and exploitation of the supply-and-demand
side of our economy.

Amongst others, we have the following concerns: The estimation for the
gross domestic product, GDP, is a paltry 1,2% and further economic shocks
could plunge us into a recession, minus sufficient reserves.

Although we understand that the 3,8% budget deficit and loans being taken
up can currently be justified as an anticyclical measure, we are
nevertheless concerned that such deficits and debts cannot be sustained and
might be transferred as a liability onto future generations.

The ever-increasing deficit in the balance of payments remains a great
source of concern. As happened last year, the Minister has acknowledged
this, but such well-meant acknowledgements, the requests for foreign
capital investment and the apportionment of funds for export promotion to
the Department of Trade and Industry are apparently no longer sufficient.

It is alarming that the industrial development policy has still not
succeeded in effectively stimulating exports and attracting fixed-capital
investments to South Africa.

In most cases we have restrictive legislation. Not only must current labour
be protected, but access for the unemployed and first-time entrants ought
to be supported aggressively.]

The Setas have demonstrated that they are a huge failure in support of a
targeted GDP. The DA’s view is that the business sector should rather be
rewarded for providing the required skills. A whole restructuring of the
employment, skills development and human resources programmes in the
Department of Labour is needed to ensure an environment conducive to
quality and responsive skills development.

It was a huge disappointment to the DA and business at large that the
expectation of a wage subsidy created by the Minister in his 2008 Budget
Speech seems to have vanished from his radar screen. This is a great open-
opportunity mechanism to support especially the unemployed and first-time
entrants to gain skills and experience.

The DA will persist that this be brought back and that other job-creating
initiatives and incentives be considered. Similarly, it seems that most of
the National Treasury’s commissioned Harvard report proposals have also
been ignored to date. Much more needs to be done to support business in
creating new jobs. The underperformance of most government departments and
the apparent lack of real skills and accountability are still major
barriers to development opportunities for all.

It is evident that the current requirement for foreign investment, well in
excess of R3 billion per week, to fund the current account deficit is
catching up with us. We urgently require an initiative to effectively
address this question. Sustainable exports will not only support the much-
needed employment drive, but will also release pressure on the current
account deficit. The DA believes that export processing and job-creating
zones need to be developed in support of these.

Everybody is shocked that the Minister has once again rescued SA Airways
from bad management and financial decisions. The taxpayer cannot be
expected to carry this liability much further. [Interjections.] SAA can be
a strategic and competitive asset, provided it is viable. As an increasing
liability, unbundling and/or privatisation must become realistic options.

Verbruikersbesteding en kredietopname asook hulle spaarvermoë het die
afgelope jaar skerper gedaal as verwag. Dit regverdig aggressiewe verdere
rentekoersverlagings.

Die DA sal voortdurend krities wees om te verseker dat ons weer ’n
kompetering- en voorkeur ontwikkelingsmark alternatief word, veral ten
opsigte van direkte vaste kapitale investerings. Onder die huidige moeilike
ekonomiese omstandighede, is ons egter gemaklik met die doelstelling van
hierdie wetsontwerp. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Consumer spending and taking up credit, as well as their capability to
save, dropped further than expected in the past year. This justifies
aggressive further interest rate cuts.

The DA will continue to be critical in order to ensure that we once more
become a preferred and competing development market alternative, in
particular in respect of direct fixed-capital investment. Under the current
difficult economic circumstances, however, we are comfortable with the aims
of this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr N SINGH: Madam Speaker, hon members, the world, and, in turn, the South
African economy, are in distress. Much has been said over the past few
months about this crisis, and many predictions, assumptions and possible
remedies have been put forward. We all know that the current situation is
very bad, and many are predicting that it will get even worse.

Ultimately, we don’t know exactly how bad the situation will get and
exactly how much damage it will cause. All we can do is speculate. In the
interim, we must be proactive and implement innovative policies and plans
to best deal with the current situation, as well as to ensure that we do
not ignore our long-term growth and development needs. When we do emerge
from this downturn, we must be in a position to continue on our growth path
and reach our economic and social targets.
The economies of the developed world and our main trading partners are in a
panic, with many of the traditional economic powers in recession and facing
the prospect of an unprecedented number of job losses.

The hon Minister of Finance indicated to this House that 2,6 million US
workers lost their jobs last year. This year, the state of California alone
is to start notifying 20 000 state workers that they may lose their jobs.
While these problems might seem a million miles away, they do have a direct
effect on the developing world and our prosperity.

The World Bank has said that about 53 million people in developing
countries will remain poor because of the world economic slowdown, and
estimates that 40% of the world’s 107 developing countries are highly
exposed to the global crisis. This crisis will undermine efforts and gains
that have been made in reducing poverty.

The effects of the economic stagnation are already being felt harshly right
here in South Africa. According to a report by the Motor Industry
Bargaining Council, 36 500 jobs were lost in the local motor industry
between July and last month. This number is set to increase as more jobs in
the industry are in jeopardy. This is terrifying when you consider that
jobs will most likely also be lost in other sectors such as mining,
manufacturing and textiles. The social ramifications of these retrenchments
are enormous.
In his state of the nation address, our hon President stated that
alternatives to layoffs would be explored, including longer holidays,
extended training, short time and job sharing. The IFP hopes that some of
these interventions will be implemented urgently and that assistance is
given to ailing sectors.

Turning to job creation and growth, during periods of relative prosperity
there were still not enough jobs being created to meet the needs of our
growing population. We acknowledge that there are impediments preventing us
from attaining a higher growth rate of at least 8%, which we believe will
be needed if we are to create the amount of jobs that we want.

These impediments, such as rigid labour laws and ageing infrastructure,
must be removed, and an environment that is conducive to growth,
development and investment must be created. We must also make it easier for
emerging businesses and SMMEs – small, medium and micro enterprises - to
obtain finance and other support from our development finance institutions.
These institutions must also be properly financed and staffed with
professionals who are capable and able to provide a high standard of
service. The promotion of SMMEs is especially important for the creation of
employment during this difficult time.

In his Budget Speech, the hon Minister of Finance indicated that the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund had been allocated R1 billion. This fund was created
in 2001 to help youth development, but it has not been successful in this
regard and has serious shortcomings that have left scores and scores of
young people marginalised and excluded from its programmes ...

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the noise level is unbearable. There is an
hon member who just laughed as if she was at a stadium and Bafana Bafana
had just scored. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] Yes, that is called
patriotism. We expect the Minister to respond to all the people who are
addressing us now. It is very difficult, even for me being so close to
them, to follow what they are saying. We are pleading with you. I know it
is the last day, and there are all sorts of meetings happening. We want to
appreciate that those meetings should happen. There are so many venues in
Parliament. Could you do that and not use the National Assembly, please. I
am sure we have an undertaking that all of us want to follow the debate.
This is very important for the country.

Hon Singh, I am so sorry to have interrupted you. Will you please continue.

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sure I will receive injury time
with that whistle being blown.

We trust that the hon Minster of Finance will investigate whether the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the new National Development Agency are successful
in ensuring that the youth benefit from these funds.

The promotion of SMMEs and the development of our youth are vital in our
quest to create employment. The institutions tasked with assisting these
groups should be used for their intended purposes and not to enrich a
select few who are politically connected. All forms of corruption and
inefficiency must be removed from these institutions.

The IFP believes that spending on infrastructure development and
maintenance is paramount to our growth and the attainment of our economic
and social targets. The recent energy crisis highlighted our shortcomings
and the need for investment in infrastructure projects that address our
long-term needs.

We are therefore pleased that infrastructure spending, hon Minister, is
given priority in this Budget, especially during this time of economic
hardship. We are also pleased that there are additional allocations to
other departments including Education, and we trust that these monies will
be well spent.

Further, the IFP believes that an industrial policy that promotes
beneficiation and manufactured exports and also focuses on sectors with
high job potential, such as agriculture and tourism, is needed to promote
growth. Rural agriculture must also be resuscitated as increased investment
in this area will go a long way towards providing our rural poor with food
security and an improved quality of life.

Other speakers from my party will touch on SAA, social welfare and other
issues.

I would like to conclude by congratulating the hon Minister on his Budget
Speech, as he has given this House and us an honest appraisal in which he
mentioned both the areas of success and failure. This was probably one of
the most difficult Budgets he has had to deliver, considering the gloomy
global economic outlook and the lack of certainty that it has created.

Even though we may not agree with everything there, we believe that it is a
well-balanced Budget that addresses both our short and long-term goals. I
would like to thank the staff of the Minister and all my colleagues in the
Finance committee and the respective chairpersons for the wonderful co-
operation we have had during our term of office. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mme L L MABE: Ke a leboga Mmusakgotla, maloko a Ntlo e kgolo e, mo boemong
jwa mokgatlho wa ANC ke rata go leboga Maaforika Borwa otlhe a a dirileng
go tlala seatla gore demokerasi ya rona e tie, le gore naga ya rona e ntle,
ya molalatladi, e gole, mo dingwageng di le sometlhano tse di fetileng.

E ne e se phoso gore bagaetsho ba re Freedom Charter ke se re tla tshelang
le sona dingwagangwaga. Tota e fetogile nnete 100%, tota ke dira phoso, tla
ke re 120% gore Freedom Charter e be e bua dilo tse di amang batho ba rona;
tseo di kayang gore batho ba rona ba tshwanetse go nna le botshelo jo bo
botoka, eseng metlholo e e dirilweng mo dingwageng di le makgolo a mararo
tse di fetileng tsa gore batho ba bo rona ba sotliwe; se se dirwang ba sa
gopolwe, ba gopolwa fela fa ba fiwa masaledi a a sa ba kgotsofatseng.

Gompieno ga ke tle go bua ka dipalopalo. (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms L L MABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and members of this august House. On
behalf of the ANC I would like to thank all South Africans who worked hard
to strengthen our democracy, and who enabled our beautiful rainbow nation
to grow in the past fifteen years.

It was not a mistake for our people to say that the Freedom Charter is
something we will live with for years. That turned out to be a reality of
100% - pardon me, I’m making a mistake, let me say 120% precisely - that
the Freedom Charter refers to the things that concern our people, those
that mean that our people should have a better life, not the ridiculous
things that were done in the past 300 years of abuse. They were only
considered when they received the leftovers which did not even satisfy
them.

Today I am not going to talk about figures.]

I am not going to talk about figures, but about what concerns our people.
There are those who know that I like figures but today I am not in the
mood. I just want to state forthrightly that beautiful and great ideas and
plans cannot be fulfilled without financial resources.

The enthusiasm and the political will are what we need to ensure that every
year, when the Minister of Finance presents the Budget, it will be able to
achieve the best for our people. I repeat: “political will” to ensure that
wherever we are deployed in particular by this great movement, which is a
congress of the people - the real congress of the people - we will do our
best to ensure that our people have a better life. [Applause.]

There is a tendency in certain corners to isolate Comrade Trevor Manuel,
the Minister of Finance, from the ANC, from ANC government. I don’t know
where this comes from. Comrade Trevor, the Minister of Finance ...
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: He’s clever!

Ms L L MABE: That’s true, he is clever.

He cannot be dissociated from the ANC. He can’t be dissociated from the ANC
government. [Interjections.] He is all ANC in blood. What he thinks about
the Budget, what he thinks about for our people, is ANC in blood.
[Interjections.] You are mistaken, my friends. [Applause.]

This is a fallacy. If you want to know what my comrade is doing, study the
January 8 Statement, study the conference resolutions -the recent ones are
the Polokwane resolutions - study the Freedom Charter. You will know why,
whatever he presents every February of every financial year, he says what
he says. [Interjections.] You will understand it. [Applause.]

I want to remind you that when my comrade, Comrade Trevor - hon Minster, I
forget you’re my comrade - presented the Budget, he was riding high in the
ANC manifesto. Those who said that the ANC had a wish list were mistaken.
He proved 150% that the ANC knows where it is going. [Applause.] The ANC is
definite and determined to ensure that for years to come our people will
have a better life. [Interjections.] I want to remind you, my friends, my
colleagues, that your critics are misleading you. People of this country
know that the ANC is with them at all costs. [Interjections.] You are
wrong.

I also want to remind you that when Comrade President Kgalema Motlanthe
spoke to this House, he did not make a mistake. Many people thought that he
did not have anything to say about government. They prophesied that he
would not say anything because he had only been in office for five months.
But they were surprised when he reflected ... because this is a baiting.
This is a baiting of one comrade after another. He rode high on the
foundation former President Mbeki laid; on the foundation former President
Mandela laid. Unfortunately, because people do not understand this elephant
called the ANC, they were surprised when they heard what he said.

The SPEAKER: Order, hon member! I do understand the mood that you are in,
but will you please come back to the Appropriation Bill? [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

Ms L L MABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Ke a go leboga Mmusakgotla, fela dilo tse ke di buang tse, ke ne ke
gapeletsega go di bua. [Thank you, Madam Speaker, but I am forced to say
what I am saying.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please!

Ms L L MABE: E rile ka ngwaga wa 2004 ... [During 2004 ...] ... while
travelling in a taxi from Zeerust to Rustenburg, people were talking about
the political parties before the elections. Amongst them was a man from
Botswana, a mineworker. He reminded the people he was conversing with in
the taxi that South Africans were very lucky to have a government like
ours, a government that was determined to have a budget that could improve
the lives of the poor. He said that many countries did not prioritise the
poor to ensure that they could have a better life in the budgets they
appropriated.

I am proud that yesterday the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Joint
Budget Committee finalised the Bill on amending the money Bills, the Bill
that is going to ensure, as the Budget is presented to us, that as
Parliament we will then have better oversight and more teeth to ensure that
monies allocated to various departments, monies allocated to provincial and
local governments, will be used to fulfil the will of our people.

I also want to state that I believe Comrade Baleka, the Deputy President,
wherever she is, is proud that this Bill has finally been concluded and
that we are now going to use our teeth to ensure that there is effective
and efficient service delivery and spending.

Also, when it comes to money made available in the Budget, we must ensure
as government departments, as Parliament, that those monies, as
appropriated, are used effectively and efficiently. This is one of the
weaknesses that exist – that monies are allocated, but come midyear, the
monies are not utilised when our people need services. So we must ensure
that we monitor fully these budget allocations as outlined in the
Appropriation Bill.

When Parliament does its work, does its function of budget oversight, it
should not be misunderstood - seen as an enemy of the executive. It is
within our right to ensure that on a frequent basis, we look at the budget,
for example: what a department has done, what a department has not
achieved, what the reasons are there for not implementing the budget. To
cite an example, as the budget committee we have, on several occasions,
raised the problem of high vacancy rates. And the question is: How can we
ensure that this budget is fully utilised if the vacancy rates are high in
departments because there are no people who will ensure that service
delivery reaches our people? We must ensure, as budgeted, that those
vacancies are filled, that there are people who can use the money to ensure
that our people can have a better life.

We are very happy as the ANC that when the Budget was presented, it talked
about education, which is central to whatever development we want to make
as a developmental state. This Budget must ensure that our people can get a
better education. But it is also our responsibility as Members of
Parliament to ensure that children, as the President said, go to school; to
ensure that parents support their children; to ensure that teachers teach;
to ensure that Tshwane University of Technology students go to class, go
and learn, because they have been away from class for quite a long time and
it is time they went back to class, went back to the university and
studied, because we will need their services in the future.

Therefore, the allocation that goes to that institution must be monitored
to ensure that it definitely achieves what it is supposed to achieve.

We are also happy that the Budget addresses health services so that the
poor can access health care, so that those who are infected with HIV/Aids
not only get treatment, but better treatment. As the ANC, we are very happy
that the Budget addresses the issue of crime and that the criminal justice
cluster will get sufficient resources to ensure that we can sleep
peacefully in our houses and travel peacefully in the streets because
criminals are dealt with. There are sufficient resources to deal with
criminals.

Those of us who come from the rural areas are saying “hallelujah” because
this Budget addresses the fact that people must farm.

Ba tsamaye ba ye go lema; batho ba rona ba tshwanetse go lema ka gonne
bontsi jwa bone ba phutile diatla ga ba sa kgona go lema, ke ka moo ke reng
re a itumela jaaka re le mokgatlho wa ANC ... [Let them go and farm as most
of our people should, because most of them are doing nothing at the moment
and are unable to farm. That is why I say we as the ANC are pleased ...]

... that our people will be assisted to farm.

It is our responsibility as Parliament that when money is allocated for
housing, we monitor the houses being built to ensure that they are decent
houses – and not the houses that we have seen, that collapse and are not
safe for our people. The money is there, and when this money is made
available, let us monitor it because it is our responsibility to ensure as
Parliament, as the community, that this money will be spent in the best
way.

It is important that efficiency, value for money and effectiveness in
government spending is achieved. As I always say, the money is available
but we can achieve more in the way we use the money. And I am prepared to
state that it’s the determination of the ANC that this money be used
effectively and efficiently. I am positive that post the elections, the
pace will be increased to ensure that services can reach the beneficiaries.

I want to close by thanking the National Treasury for having worked closely
with us – that every time we call them they do appear before us and give us
information as requested. I also want to thank various departments that
have been working very hard with us, the departments that have been
responding to our calls and have been responding to the queries that we
raise with them.

Finally, I want to thank members of the Joint Budget Committee for having
worked hard during this term of Parliament, and I want to thank all the
portfolio committees that have been assisting us to ensure, as we deal with
the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, that they are with us, they enrich
our deliberations and even enrich our recommendations to Parliament.

Lastly, if I happen not to come back, I want to say thank you to the ANC
for having given me the opportunity to represent the people of this country
and that I won’t join any other party except the ANC. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Speaker, I have a point of order. A member of the public was
harassed by Mike Waters yesterday for wearing an ANC T-shirt. Mike Waters
was chased all over Parliament - to his office. Today, again, Mike Waters
says in this House that he would be a better Minister of Finance. I think
these are very serious issues, what Mike Waters is doing in Parliament, and
we definitely have to deal with him.

The SPEAKER: Let me allow the Whips to deal with this matter outside,
because we do not have some of the information that I am expected to rule
on and it is not actually related to the debate, which makes it very
difficult. Will the Whips please attend to that?

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Speaker, the ID is extremely concerned about the
global economic meltdown, which could bring about a worldwide depression as
bad as the one in the 1930s. This meltdown is already having a negative
impact on our economic indicators, with our economic growth rate
retracting, government revenues falling, commodity prices falling and a
spate of retrenchments being announced.

As the Minister says, the storm is now over us and we will have to take
action to mitigate its worst effects. In this regard, the ID maintains that
we have to ramp up government spending in order to stimulate demand in our
economy and to create jobs and provide relief to the millions of South
Africans who continue to live in poverty.

In doing this, however, there are a few principles that need to be
observed. Firstly, we need to make investments that will address the
structural failures in our economy that prevented us from fully
capitalising on the past period of high capital growth.

We must invest in our failing infrastructure and bring down the cost of
doing business through addressing factors such as our exorbitant
telecommunications costs. This investment must also maximise job creation
through ensuring that local industries and jobs are promoted in providing
for our infrastructural needs.

One clear opportunity in this regard is for the government to ramp up its
investment in renewable energy, which will not only position us as leaders
in the fastest growing industry in the world, but will also stimulate local
industries and create hundreds of thousands of jobs across the value chain:
from research and development, to manufacturing, installation, maintenance,
and sales and marketing.

This Budget, however, has only allocated a paltry R55 million to renewable
energy, while it continues to pump billions of rand into the nonperforming
Pebble Bed Modular Reactor that does not hold out any potential for job
creation.

We must also avoid rewarding mismanaged enterprises with expensive
government bailouts, such as the R1,6 billion given to SAA. How can you
justify such a bailout and, in the same breath, question the affordability
of extending the child support grant to 18-year-olds?

Minister, the grant system is without a doubt the most effective poverty
alleviation measure that we have, and numerous studies have already shown
that extending the grant will reduce the high school dropout rate in this
age category.

Overall though, Minister, the ID welcomes this Budget and its significant
increase in government expenditure during this difficult period. We
specifically support the increase in health expenditure and we agree that
we have to find ways of reducing the massive inequalities between the
public and private health sectors.

While expenditure has increased in the criminal justice sector, the bulk of
this seems to be going towards the DNA database. The ID questions why this
has to cost R6 billion and which entities, both local and foreign, will be
involved in supplying the components for it.

Finally, on the social side, the ID believes that more emphasis should have
been given to hiring thousands more social workers and channelling more
government resources to those NGOs and community-based organisations that
are tirelessly providing services which the state is obliged to provide.
Working together should not just be a slogan, but should be matched with
budgetary resources. I thank you.

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Madam Speaker, hon members, in January this year Oxfam
reported that “the 2007 and 2008 food price increases affected more than
850 million people. Even before the 2008 food riots, about 60 000 children
were dying every day from hunger-related causes. Today, about one in six of
the world’s population goes short of food.” They further reported that
although food prices fell in the final months of 2008, they remain above
the long-term trend and are likely to do so for the foreseeable future.

In addition, Oxfam argues that there two growing threats to sustainable
food security and that these are likely to exacerbate the problem of
hunger. Firstly, climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity
of hazards such as floods, drought and tropical cyclones that destroy
crops, livestock and livelihoods. Secondly, the global recession looks set
to further increase the number of people going hungry because of its impact
on employment, incomes and public spending.

In this regard, Oxfam concludes by making the recommendation that
“Governments in developing countries must ensure the realisation of the
right to food and social protection of people living in extreme poverty.
This will require implementing comprehensive food, agricultural and social
protection policies to meet immediate needs and shield vulnerable
communities better against the shocks.”

This is a call we must all heed and a challenge we must equal. This is not
a matter for political point-scoring; it defines our struggle for basic
necessities and is at the heart of human dignity. It defines the daily
struggles of our people, to which we have to have a plan to respond swiftly
and with the urgency required. This is so because ours is a caring nation,
ours is a developmental state geared towards the needs of all South
Africans. And ours is an ANC-led government that calls for food security,
that ensures that no one goes to bed hungry.

As a result, the ANC is committed to creating an environment that ensures
that there is an adequate amount of food available to all, that we grow our
own food and protect the poor communities from the rising prices of food
and eradicate hunger. As part of the measures that constitute our plan to
respond swiftly and with the urgency required, the ANC will introduce a
food-for-all programme to procure and distribute basic foods at affordable
prices to poor households and communities. This is already part of our plan
which is in the manifesto.

We will also expand access to food production schemes in rural and peri-
urban areas to grow their food by providing implements, tractors,
fertilizers and pesticides. Another measure we will put in place includes
supporting existing community schemes which utilise land for food
production in schools, health facilities, churches and urban and
traditional authorities.

In addition, through our election manifesto we emphasised that land and
agrarian reform, food security and rural development would occupy
significant space in the economic transformation of our country.

When delivering the Budget Speech, the hon Minister of Finance aptly
highlighted this fact by emphasising the important role that agriculture
plays in rural development and called for the reactivation of agricultural
activities on communal land in order to build sustainable rural
livelihoods, thus contributing towards poverty eradication. And we agree
with the Minister on that.

Through the recent Budget, the ANC-led people-centred government has
demonstrated its plan to respond swiftly and with the urgency required by
allocating about R1,8 billion for rural development, mainly focused on
supporting small-scale agriculture. This is a laudable intervention,
Minister, and as Parliament we will put our eyes of oversight on it and
ensure that the money is indeed spent and spent appropriately.

As the ANC, we remain resolute in ensuring that there is adequate food
available for all our people. As the ANC, whilst we note the inroads we
have made in advancing land and agrarian reform, we are still, however,
concerned about the pace and quality of land reform. Access to land for
production purposes is an essential requirement for the poor to enjoy the
benefits of agricultural growth.

The slow pace of land delivery can be attributed to insufficient funding,
escalating land prices and capacity issues to enable us to respond
adequately to land reform challenges. In terms of funding, the Department
of Land Affairs has indicated that it will need approximately R74 billion
to deliver on the remaining 21 million hectares of land by 2014.

The consequences and implications of these are that the Department of Land
Affairs might need to make adjustments going forward to enable it to
effectively implement and sustain a land reform programme. And I’m quite
confident that moving forward, this matter will be attended to.

It is precisely because of this reason that through our manifesto as the
ANC, and as part of our plan for the next five years, we seek to intensify
the land reform programme to ensure that more land is in the hands of the
rural poor, and as a result seek to provide them with technical skills,
financial resources to productively use the land to create sustainable
livelihoods and decent work in rural areas.

In this regard, we call upon all the people of South Africa, in the spirit
of the Freedom Charter’s clarion call that “the people shall govern”, to
work with us to achieve the goals of land reform. This, we say, because we
know that working together, we can do more.

Finally, as the ANC over the next five years and as part of our
comprehensive plan for effective and efficient agrarian reform, we will
create an overarching institution with resources and authority to drive and
co-ordinate an integrated programme of rural development, land reform and
agrarian change. This will enable us to revive rural economies, create jobs
and fight poverty in rural areas. The ANC supports the Appropriation Bill.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, the ACDP supports this pragmatic
and stimulatory Budget which is presented under extremely difficult
economic conditions, both globally and domestically. The fiscal deficit of
R95,6 billion is necessary under the present circumstances by expanding
government’s contribution to the economy. The fiscus is able to support
economic activity at a time when global and domestic demand is faltering.

While the 3,8% budgeted deficit is higher than the preferred level, it can
be supported if there is a clear and sustainable path to a return to
balance budgeting. However, large budget deficits are not sustainable in
the long run as they can result in government having to borrow money to pay
interest on debts, should government saving and the budget balance remain
in negative territory.

The ACDP welcomes the focus on the Budget, particularly on increased
expenditure on enhancing the quality of education, improving health care,
fighting crime, delivering housing, water, electricity and sanitation, and
addressing unemployment and poverty. It is also remarkable that in
difficult times, hon Minister, you find space for substantial individual
tax relief, for which we can all be thankful.
The other good news amongst the gloom is the projection of a lowering
current account deficit. It is noteworthy that during January this year,
international capital flows to South Africa were on the positive side for
the first time since mid-2008. Added to this is the possible World Bank
loan to Eskom amounting to US$5 billion.

Additional good news is that economic activity is expected to start
recovering in the second half of the year in response to declining debt
levels, lower interest rates and a more expansionary fiscal policy. The
looming domestic recession, however, has necessitated steps to immediately
stimulate economic growth. The huge public spending on infrastructure,
roads, ports, railways, etc, will accelerate growth, create jobs and
position the country to take advantage of the next positive economic cycle,
and the ACDP supports these moves.

We are, however, concerned with the lack of service delivery and
underperforming managers in various departments, with 11 government
departments receiving qualified audits in the 2006-07 financial year. In
this regard, we fully endorse the Minister’s call for a comprehensive
expenditure review. There is very clearly a need to assess all government
programmes to see how we can improve value for money and to identify errors
where we can eliminate and reduce wastage. We agree that as we spend more,
we must also spend better.

In conclusion, the ACDP commends the Minister on what must have been one of
the toughest Budgets that he has had to present. He has stuck with the
countercyclical strategy introduced two years ago. He has tried to
stimulate economic growth against the effects of collapsing global demand
and sharply lower prices for local resources. He will, undoubtedly, be
remembered for the legacy he has built up of prudent fiscal policy, saving
for a rainy day. That rainy day has now arrived and we, as the ACDP,
welcome the loosening of Treasury’s purse strings. I thank you.

Ms C B JOHNSON: Madam Speaker, in the ANC’s 8 January Statement, we said
that crime is a national concern and that much more needs to be done to
fight crime. One could very well argue that crime, along with poverty,
inequality and HIV/Aids, is possibly among the biggest challenges facing
our country at this moment. There has been a very real plea from our
communities to be safe from crime, and our people are specifically looking
to the ANC government for help. We have listened to them and we have heard
their pleas.

Parliament recently embarked on extensive public hearings throughout the
country on the review of the criminal justice system. Communities were
given an opportunity to directly raise their concerns about crime and to
voice the problems that they are experiencing on a daily basis with the
criminal justice system.

The only way to ensure that criminals are caught, taken to court,
prosecuted and sentenced is to have an effective, modernised and
transformed criminal justice system. The ANC, in its election manifesto,
envisages such a new and modernised criminal justice system. This will see
the bringing together of all role-players, such as the judiciary, the
magistracy, the police, prosecutors, Correctional Services, the Legal Aid
Board and community policing forums. It is envisaged that the review will
bring about significant progress in fighting crime and in reversing current
crime trends.

We are pleased to see in the Budget that an amount of R3 billion has been
allocated for restructuring the criminal justice service over the medium
term. The importance of this allocation is that it reflects the political
will of the ANC-led government to fight crime effectively. But these are,
after all, public funds; it’s R3 billion. We need to ask ourselves as
parliamentarians what we are getting for our R3 billion and how this
R3 billion allocation will help our people on a daily basis. These funds
provide for the expanding of the criminal DNA database, accelerating the
roll-out of national fingerprint and case-management systems and upgrading
IT networks.

With regard to the criminal justice system, an intensive seven-point plan
of interventions was drawn up. The review will entail adopting a single
vision and mission for all the departments within the criminal justice
cluster, which means that departments will not be working in isolation but
will have a single set of objectives and priorities. Draft recommendations
are also envisaged with regard to new or amended legislative measures that
will include the functioning of the criminal justice service initially and
very effectively. These recommendations include draft legislation to
regulate minimum standards for the cash-in-transit industry, draft
legislation for the continuation of a trial in certain circumstances in the
absence of the accused, and also draft legislation to allow and regulate
access to fingerprints to all law enforcement agencies.

When we visited the various provinces, our people spoke to us about courts
and the problems that they experience when dealing with our courts. Once
again, the ANC has heard them. Existing court processes in criminal matters
will be transformed so as to improve the performance of our courts. New
processes will ensure that courts are focused on trials, rather than on
administrative processes such as postponements, and will result in a
significant reduction in backlogs and in case cycle times.

Other creative initiatives would be the establishment of a Legal Aid Board
Court and a new screening mechanism that will ensure that only prima facie
cases and cases that are actually ready to proceed to trial are indeed
proceeded with. This is important, because our people have told us in the
public hearings that very often they need to travel great distances to go
to court, either as complainants or as witnesses, and that when they get to
court the matter is simply postponed.

A further important aspect is that of improved capacity. The recommendation
will result in a substantial increase in the number of crime scene experts
and forensic experts. In fact, an additional R750 million has been provided
to the Department of Safety and Security so as to increase the number of
police officials from 183 000 to 204 00 by 2011, with the emphasis being on
increased detective and forensic capacity.

The focus will be on accelerated detective training and increasing the
number of detectives. It will also include measures to retain and attract
skilled personnel by providing for an occupation-specific dispensation. In
addition, senior detectives will be placed in designated courts to oversee
the quality of investigations and dockets. This also includes the
strengthening of our organised-crime-fighting capacity, criminal crime
fighting and crime intelligence capacity.

We need to establish an integrated and seamless criminal justice
information system and we need to modernise all systems and equipment. The
modernisation of systems will also include the fast-tracking of existing
modernisation projects, which include initiatives such as a digital
recording system to be used in our courts, video postponement of court
cases, with links between our prisons and our courts so that you initially
minimise the risk of flight between your correctional centres and your
courts, as well as an automated inmate tracking system. Other new
initiatives include the electronic system of capturing of dockets. Many
people will know that very often when you go to court, a case cannot be
proceeded with because the docket has either gone missing or has been
stolen, and, obviously, electronic capturing of dockets will rule out this
problem.

The resolution of the 52nd national conference of the ANC re-emphasises
community participation in the fight against crime. When we visited the
various provinces we were once again reminded of this important fact. The
ANC has heard what our communities have to say and therefore we are
proposing very innovative amendments to our community policing forums. What
we are proposing is that our community policing forums be given financial
and administrative support and that they also have a wider role, for
example in policing and in interacting with parole boards.

The fight against crime requires both government and our communities to
work together. Communities must be vigilant when it comes to the reporting
of criminal activity, but, at the same time, our law-enforcement agencies
must respond to the needs of our people and be able to offer witnesses and
complainants the necessary protection, particularly when they are afraid to
report crimes or when they are afraid to be witnesses in court proceedings.
Our court processes should be aligned to make it easier for victims and
must at all times minimise any secondary trauma experienced in the court
process. In this regard, the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development has put together a very useful service charter for victims of
crime, which is an important instrument to promote justice for all our
people.

What our people mentioned to us at the public hearings, was that they very
often feel that victims of crime have fewer rights than the criminals. That
is why the Victims’ Charter is so important, because it very usefully
explains the rights of victims and provides information on the various
services that are available to victims and survivors of crime. This
includes the right that a complainant has to be informed of the status of
their case, whether or not an accused has been arrested; whether or not the
person has been charged; whether or not bail has been granted; and if a
matter is being postponed, what the reason is for the postponement.

A complainant also has the right to protection and to be free from
intimidation and harassment and, under certain circumstances, to be placed
in a witness protection programme or for the matter to be held in camera.
Other rights that victims have include the right to assistance, the right
to compensation and, in certain cases, the right to restitution.

What we need to do is to really make victims of crime aware of their
rights. If they are not aware of their rights, they simply cannot exercise
them. We have to think of creative ways in bringing this Victims’ Charter
to the attention of our people, possibly putting it in our parliamentary
constituency offices, giving it to our community development workers,
giving it to Thusong Service Centres and the like, to really make it
accessible to people.

With regard to the protection of our vulnerable groups, R150 million has
been allocated for the implementation of the Child Justice Bill and the
sexual offences legislation. With regard to other departments in our
cluster, the hon Bloem will be very pleased to note that the Department of
Correctional Services has received funding for four new correctional
centres at Paarl, East London, Klerksdorp and Polokwane, which will be able
to accommodate a further 12 000 inmates. [Interjections.] The Department of
Defence has received an additional R80 million to expand its reserve force
to supplement its landward defence capability. It is therefore with pride
that the ANC supports the Appropriation Bill.

Finally, as many members may very well know, I have taken the decision to
return to the legal profession while I can still remember how to be a
lawyer. Therefore this is my very last speech in the House. I would really
like to thank, in particular, the ANC and to my committee ...

An HON MEMBER: The DA.

Ms C B JOHNSON: I don’t know about the DA - some of the members of the DA,
but the ANC in particular. Also, I would particularly like to thank – I
call them my committee, but they’re not really my committee – the Portfolio
Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, who really, in my
view, without fear of exaggeration, would be a group of people who are
incredibly diligent and meticulous in what they do, not only in their
legislative function, but also in their oversight role as they take it very
seriously. They are really a group of people that it has been an absolute
honour for me to work with.

Then, particularly to all the female members of the House I would like to
say the following. When one enters a profession such as the legal
profession at a very young age, it’s very difficult to have female role
models, because very often you are the only female practising at a
particular firm. So it was very inspiring and also refreshing to come to
Parliament where there are so many empowered, dedicated and, quite frankly,
really brilliant women. [Applause.] I really want to thank those on this
side of the House and also those on that side of the House. It makes it
easier for younger women who enter politics when there are people like
Marie, Thelma, Bertha.

Thanks go to the staff of Parliament and the officials of the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development for putting up with me. I do realise
that I can be a bit of a control freak at times, but thank you for putting
up with me nonetheless. I also wish Parliament, as an institution, and the
members individually all the best – those who are coming back, those who
are not. I want to thank you all and wish you well.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: What about me?

Ms C B JOHNSON: Yes, and you as well, hon Olifant, of course!

In my last minute, before the curtain finally comes down, let me just
highlight two things in my mind that really are the non-negotiables to all
South Africans and South Africa as a country, and this has to start in this
House because we have to take leadership. The first is that we must, at all
times, vigorously uphold the values of our Constitution, in particular we
must respect our constitutional institutions – our courts, our judiciary,
our Chapter 9 institutions and the rule of law.

Secondly, let us never lose sight of the fact that a significant number of
South Africans still go to bed either cold or hungry or without access to
basic services. If you don’t have access to basic services, it affects your
human dignity on a very personal level. So, for their sake, let us
intensify our commitment to the realisation of socioeconomic rights for all
our people. We promised them a better life and we must deliver on that
promise. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member. On behalf of the Office of the
Speaker, I would also like to wish you, hon Johnson, lots of luck in your
new endeavours and to thank you very much for your contribution. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr D T GEORGE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The global economic
meltdown has ignited a debate on which economic model is the most
appropriate solution to the worst economic conditions in living memory.

Across the world governments in developed economies are intervening to
stimulate their economies by increasing spending and cutting taxes. In
their intervention, there is also the knowledge that once this crisis
passes, the hand of government within the economy will be relaxed. They are
performing the role expected of government by ensuring that their economies
remain functional.

Despite hopes to the contrary, our own developing economy is not immune
from the fallout, and we now face deteriorating economic prospects. Over
the past few years, our economic prospects have been improving and there
existed an expectation that this trend would continue.

Economic hardship is not good for democracy, especially if government seeks
to create dependency from which individuals will struggle to emerge. The
tightening hand of government in the economy can easily become a
stranglehold that can choke the growth prospects of even the most vibrant
economy. We need to be assured that the aim of policy is to stimulate the
economy and not to drive it into an unworkable central plan.

We face the possibility of recession, although currently it looks like a
slowdown. We need to be prepared for what is actually coming our way.
Before the global crisis began, our economy was already grappling with the
fundamental problem, identified by the International Panel on Growth, that
too few South Africans were working and that skills were in short supply.
This problem has not gone away and the environment in which this problem
exists has become a whole lot worse.

This Budget is clearly focused on the global economic realities likely to
hit us hard this year. The 2009 tax revenues will fall short on the
baseline budget, and this will be compensated for by a widening deficit and
more borrowing. There is R130 billion more spending than budgeted over
three years and a cumulative R115 billion tax shortfall over this period.
The budget deficit will need to be funded and cannot be sustained at this
level.

The Appropriation Bill sets out where government spending will be applied.
This is crucial because the application of funds to a particular part of
our economic system influences the performance of the multipliers that
drive economic growth. Government has already demonstrated that its
mechanisms for delivery are inefficient at best, and that it is incapable
of applying the people’s money to optimal effect.

We simply cannot afford ongoing bail-outs to entities such as Eskom and
SAA. We cannot afford to squander the taxpayers’ hard-earned money on
departments that fail to deliver and on fixing the gaping holes in public
enterprise balance sheets. Underwriting Eskom’s debt is a further noose
around the neck of our economy.

An economic model that places the state at the centre of the economy as a
controller of resources and as a dispenser of patronage, denies the
economic freedom that should follow from the long and painful struggle for
political freedom. Command economies across the world did not work because
they denied this human right.

What will work is the hand of government facilitating an environment within
which the engine room of the economy, driven by business and entrepreneurs,
is stimulated to the extent that it not only survives the prevailing harsh
conditions but grows stronger and is thus able to sustain the necessary
social spend.

Small steps have been taken to ease the process of doing business, but far
bolder steps are required for any real economic impact. A reduction in the
corporate tax rate would have been appropriate. An increase in the fuel
levy is not. A delay in implementing mining royalties will not compensate
for the damage done to the industry as a result of the Eskom fiasco.

The DA’s approach to economic development remains rooted in an unwavering
belief in the empowerment of the individual, with a focus on boosting the
economic engine room. Millions of well-equipped economic agents acting in
the economy will provide a far more powerful stimulus than a government
that has already proved unable to implement its own policies.

The process of retirement reform must bear in mind that optimal asset
allocation and the maximisation of returns cannot be achieved through a
central fund, managed by bureaucrats. Clarity is required on exactly how
the proposed national health insurance will be funded and how it will fit
into the overall reform programme.

The DA’s focus remains on breaking the cycle of poverty. Our carefully
designed and costed economic model presents the people of South Africa with
a viable alternative to life without hope of ever participating in the
economy. Our economic modelling shows that spending on appropriate points
in the economy can lift all of our people out of the poverty trap. The aim
should be to minimise dependency on social grants, rather than to boast
about the rising number of grant recipients.

Since 1994, government has initiated several programmes with limited
success. It has not succeeded in breaking the back of poverty. The poverty
line index promised to be available weeks after last year’s budget has not
materialised. The very basic starting block of quality education has not
been achieved despite the steady increase in annual spend. The process of
getting appropriately skilled people into the workforce in sufficient
numbers has stalled. A wage subsidy, opportunity vouchers, a simplified tax
regime and less onerous business regulations could have been the catalysts
to bring this process back to life.

Just as the economic crisis has presented an opportunity to question the
market system, it also presents an opportunity to question the missing
ingredient in the government’s approach to poverty elimination, that
ingredient is the individual wanting to soar beyond the confines of a life
trapped within the boundaries set by the circumstances of birth. An
environment that encourages individuals to be everything that they are
capable of being is the missing ingredient. We need an open-opportunity
society for all.

No system is perfect and our economic system is no exception. We have
witnessed at first hand how things can go horribly wrong and will feel the
incredibly painful process of correction. We do, however, need to remain
focused on the long-term prospects for our economy, influenced by the real
drivers of economic activities such as entrepreneurs and small to medium
business enterprises. Sentiment influences the economy, and we must remain
hopeful that we will not only survive the crisis but emerge stronger when
it is over. To achieve this, we need to make the right choices. To make the
right choices, we need to filter out the noise and focus on what actually
works. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen,
this Budget speaks to the ongoing efforts to realise the goals and
objectives the ANC arrives at through its deep relationship with the people
of South Africa.

It is this deep relationship that led them to give us a resounding mandate
during the last elections. We will return during the month of April to the
fourth elections confident that the people will say: “Difficult as the
journey has been to meet our needs, you’ve done your best under the
circumstances. Here is more - go back and continue the good work.”

One of the difficult areas on this journey has been the navigation of the
transformation of local government. Part of this, to make a slight detour,
is what people have been talking about: that the global crisis we are
confronted with manifests itself in the local state as well. So, our
responses at that level have meaning for the local state.

To cite three examples of this crisis, as seen by a commentator: firstly,
this crisis manifests itself in the demise of unilateralism; secondly, in
climate change and resource abuse and misuse; and, thirdly, the crisis ...

Let me come back to this; it’s crucial. For example, the crisis of
resources and the projected water shortage in our country has important
significance in our cities and towns. The responses to this have crucial
meanings.

The green profiling of the budget has serious implications for our
environmental protection and regeneration initiatives, with important
implications on the conduct of the local state. The crisis of unilateralism
means that, even at a local level, the continued deep consultation and
involvement of people in finding a solution is an important response as it
is, equally, valid at the local level.

Let me use an interesting study conducted by Idasa. When I last checked, it
was not a subcommittee of the ANC. It’s an independent institute. Its
publication: What does the Local Governance Barometer tell us? is a study
of local government. Idasa studied 16 municipalities around the country.

In their conclusions they make interesting observations: that
municipalities are finding it difficult to juggle, firstly, pressure from
citizens, from auditors who, rightfully, demand clean accounts and
effective and efficient use of public money, from the Department of
Provincial and Local Government and provinces and other sector departments
who shift, or often offload, more and more tasks to the local level without
providing additional financial resources and demanding fast results and
evidence of success.

The study also talks about local politicians whose interests often conflict
with long-term development targets defined in the integrated development
plans. These are conclusions of this study. We have responses to these
issues. I think researchers must research. But here is a more fascinating
one, and I quote:

  Despite the fact that local government in South Africa has improved its
  service delivery substantively over the past 10 years at an unprecedented
  pace and extent hardly seen anywhere else in the world, most of the
  municipal councils face a widening gap between demand and the supply of
  services.

In other words, it confirms the view that we are often victims of our own
success on the one hand. On the other hand, it also says this gap between
demand and supply of services has often been responsible for conflict in
these areas. This is an important point that we have to be mindful of.
So, as a broad stroke of response to these issues of problems at a local
level, fast pace of service delivery unmatched anywhere in the world has an
underlying unfortunate result in that as people see progress around their
areas, their impatience also grows. It creates the ability to respond to
these issues with appropriate political skill.

Some of our initiatives and responses are crucial for that reason - the
huge resources that have been growing and going into local government. For
example, the R11,3 billion that is aimed at the 2010 infrastructure with
key significance for those cities, the urban and rural dynamic that will
benefit from these resources, the impact of migration in these areas and
the EPWP, the input in capacity development, as well as access to resources
- because you are dealing with cross–cutting issues -  are all important
responses to the problems that we have identified.

I also believe that these resources have to meet the identified problems,
but must also add and increase the pace of delivery of services. Comrade
Minister, the implications of these have partly been responded to.

Let me refer to the vision which is contained in the White Paper on Local
Government, which remains valid today, that local government must be
developmental, with this being defined as meaning a government that works
with local people to find sustainable solutions to their problems.

In fact, this vision is precisely the answer to what the ANC considers the
appropriate response to our issues, that is, dealing with the problems of
the local state of the communities where they live with their active
involvement in a dynamic manner. That the study of Idasa’s identifies this
area of involvement of people as a problem is precisely the reason the ANC
has identified it as an area of intervention.

Our overall strategy for the next decade, as identified in our strategy and
tactics that we must build a developmental state, is informed by this
perspective and it’s a direct rejection of the DA’s kind of politics. We
expect the state to have the capacity to intervene in the economy, in the
interest of higher growth and sustainable development, effecting
sustainable programmes that address the challenges of unemployment, poverty
and underdevelopment with the requisite emphasis on vulnerable groups; and
mobilising the people as a whole, especially the poor, to act as their own
liberators through participatory and representative democracy.

This is the basis for why we believe the growing resource allocation to
local government and to the state as a whole is an important part of
evolving into a developmental state.

The expansionary nature of the Budget, limited as it is; perhaps, this
year, but growing in significance through the 3,8% budget deficit, is an
investment in the strategic areas that will see what I call here both a
defensive and an offensive strategy. In other words, it is investing in
areas that will ensure the satisfaction of the services of the people while
also ensuring that South Africa remains cushioned against the global
economic crisis.

There is no doubt that what we consider to be the challenge of the next
coming decade is not only the proper and effective management of the
resources that we generate in this country, but also equally the effective
involvement of local people to deal with their problems in a sustainable
manner.

It is for this reason that the exemplary nature of the department of
Treasury in styling itself as green, but also producing and giving
resources for the rest of the country to become green, is an exemplary
model of how to conduct ourselves. Parliament itself has that
responsibility to conduct itself as a green institution, as have all
departments. But this is also most important in our communities.

The poor are often the ones who suffer from environmental degradation and
lack of protection. Therefore, going this route is not only for the benefit
of posterity, but in the immediate time, for the protection of the poor and
the vulnerable.
For that reason we have no hesitation in saying that despite the current
difficulties in local government, the progress that is even identified by
outside independent observers is an important indication that going forward
we have laid a sound foundation on which to build even more in the
tradition of the ANC and inspired by the Freedom Charter. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Deputy Speaker, for some years now I have been teaching
public finance at a local university and the vast majority of more than 400-
odd students I have taught over this period have come from the public
sector, various municipalities, all of the provincial governments, national
government and even from the National Treasury.

Now, public finance in the modern, public-sector world is a wide-ranging
subject within which matters of financial and delivery performance are
central. And having chaired the subcommittee back in 1999 that put together
the Public Finance Management Act, I am very aware that such matters of
performance-linked financial management are a distinct part of that Act’s
reform intentions for our national and provincial governments.

Now, almost 10 years later, I believe it is true to say that while all our
government institutions go through the PFMA motions, there are very few who
really grasp and pursue the performance attitude and ethic we had hoped to
achieve.
And this is quite apparent from the generally poor quality of performance
measures used to be found in departments’ strategic plans and budgets, as
well as from the weak and often ambiguous reporting of their performance
achieved in the annual reports.

But for me this absence of performance mindshift is also very evident from
study assignments I had my public sector students carry out around the
subject matter of performance. It’s clear the necessary preoccupation with
workplace performance is just not there as it should be.

So, Minister, let me agree and disagree with you when you regularly, as you
indeed did in your Budget Speech, implore parliamentary committees to raise
the oversight standards in order to cause departments to raise their
spending and delivery performance.

My analysis and observations would support your inferences of an adequate
or an effectual oversight by committees. My personal experience, and
through Scopa a number of years back, gives substance to your contention
that committees can be quite influential and be something of a catalyst in
having departments raise their performances. Of course, there are many
other notable examples from other committees also.

But Minister, in this regard, I think you should point more publicly and
more directly at the state institutions themselves and their political
heads, who after all are constitutionally obligated to perform optimally
and whose officials are, in fact, paid to do so.
While I share your general frustration and your concerns, I do not think
that the management shortcomings in question can be altogether solved
through stronger parliamentary oversight. Rather, I would have to see a
shift in approach from the National Treasury as to how in terms of its
obligations in section 6(2) of the PFMA, it guides and advises the
department and other entities in the application of the PFMA, the Treasury
and the other relevant guidelines they produce.

As things presently stand, department officials tend to respond to these in
exactly the same way as they responded to those vast sets of rules in the
prereform era; and as such, they defensively follow the letter rather than
the spirit of the PFMA, and indeed, the MFMA, meaning that the
opportunities to be real managers, who constantly challenge themselves to
improve value-for-money performance, are not grasped.

Of course, there is one notable exception, that being Sars. There, the
performance dynamic is very evident. Each year Sars sets and then beats a
comprehensive range of raised performance targets which they set for
themselves. Clearly, they are becoming performance-driven in a way which
produces that self-perpetuating type of performance improvement as they go
forward. By my calculations over the past eight years, efficiency and other
performance gains made and sustained in subsequent years by Sars have
contributed at least an additional R70 billion to the fiscus, which in turn
must have played a big part in the much-acclaimed budgets the Minister has
presented in recent years.

But returning to the issue, let’s consider how much more these budgets
could be enhanced by equivalent performance improvements across all the
departments and other spending agencies. Surely there are expenditure
efficiencies of at least a further R70 billion to be gained there.

However, while departments remain in a lethargic yesteryear paradigm and
parliamentary oversight remains inadequate, this big opportunity for the
Minister to allow for further expansion of government programmes and
projects passes us by.

So, Mr Minister, I would respectfully suggest that you are the best-placed
person to create and take forward an initiative that will properly
investigate and then plan how best to imbue the urgently necessary
performance mentality across all of government. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members and comrades, the
current Budget has clearly argued that microeconomic and regulatory reforms
are needed to ensure that a competitive and labour-absorbing economy
emerges, especially under the circumstances of the current global economic
crisis.

In this regard, the 2009 Budget has made a commitment that government will
increase public investment spending, expand labour-intensive employment
programmes, and work with business and organised labour to protect work
opportunities and accelerate skills development.

To this end, the ANC welcomes the five principles underpinning the 2009
Budget, namely, protecting the poor, creating employment, investing in
infrastructure, promoting competitiveness, and fiscal sustainability.

The ANC, in its 2009 election manifesto, recognises that despite
significant progress in changing our economy to the benefit of our people,
unemployment, poverty and inequality remain serious challenges. Thus,
decent work should be the foundation of the fight against poverty and
inequality.

Decent work embraces both the need for more jobs and for better-quality
jobs. It is the protection within the discourse of labour rights. It speaks
to the matters of provident funds and medical aids that promote sustainable
livelihoods. It is about the promotion of the important role the mining and
agriculture sector plays in the employment benefits of communities. This is
effectively addressed through the current Budget as a political tool for
socioeconomic development.

The principle that the Budget must respond to is that of the unemployed, of
low-income workers and of vulnerable groups, all of whom stand to lose the
most during the economic downturn, and who will face the greatest burden
during this period. The potential of the economic downturn to destabilise
the welfare of the vulnerable and increase inequality and poverty, is
recognised and must be the greatest concern of the Budget.

All the activities indicated in the Budget must lead to strengthening the
capacity of the domestic economy to grow and create decent jobs.

Increased public sector investment in economic infrastructure, increased
resources for skills development and the introduction of effective
industrial strategies, are indicators in this Budget of the areas that
should be the focus over the next 3 to 5-year period.

There are fundamental aspects that emerge from the ANC’s election manifesto
and constitute the essence of the change and continuity theme that emerged
from the 52nd national conference of the ANC. These aspects include
ensuring that fisca1 and monetary policy mandates - including the active
management of interest rates and exchange rates - promote the creation of
decent employment, economic growth and broad-based industrialisation and
reduce income inequality.

Die addisionele fondse vir Werk vir Water en Werk teen Vure, dra by tot
groei en werkverskaffing en is ’n korrekte observasie van die regering se
waardetoevoeging in agtergeblewe gemeenskappe.

So ’n voorbeeld is dié van Christalena de Kella van Uniondale. Sy het
Standard 10 in 2003 voltooi en nooit gedink dat sy ’n brandweervrou sou
word nie.

Oorspronklik wou sy ’n rekenmeesteres word, maar het nie die finansies
gehad om universiteit toe te gaan nie. Sy het toe by Werk teen Vure begin
werk in 2004.

Die Suid-Kaap se distriksbestuurder het in 2005 haar potensiaal raakgesien
en haar toe gemotiveer om haar eie basis te bestuur in Plettenbergbaai. Sy
is in 2006 genomineer om die eerste mediaskakelbeamptekursus by te woon in
Kaapstad.

Die Plettenbergbaaispan het in 2007 toegemaak, en sy het toe teruggekeer na
Uniondale. Daar het sy die span ten alle tye gemotiveer en gehelp met
opleiding en dissipline. Sy het egter, as gevolg van asma, aan die einde
van 2007 van kursus verander. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The additional funds for Working for Water and Working on Fire contribute
towards growth and job creation and are a correct observation of the
government’s value added in disadvantaged communities.

Such an example is Christalena de Kella of Uniondale. She completed
Standard 10 in 2003 and never thought she would become a firefighter.
Originally she wanted to be an accountant, but she did not have the
financial support to go to university. She then started working at Working
on Fire in 2004.

The district manager of the Southern Cape noticed her potential in 2005 and
motivated her to manage her own base in Plettenberg Bay. She was nominated
in 2006 to attend the first course to become a media liaison officer in
Cape Town.

The team in Plettenberg Bay disbanded in 2007 and she returned to
Uniondale. There, she motivated the team at all times and assisted with
training and disciplinary issues. However, as a result of asthma, she
changed her course at the end of 2007.]

In 2008, she was given the opportunity to try out for the stock controller
position at the advocacy office in Cape Town. It was another challenge to
be working as part of the management team in Working on Fire.

On 17 February 2009, she passed her driver’s licence test.

Now, after five years in the Working on Fire programme, she is looking to
see how far she can go. She stated, and I quote:

   I have managed to travel the country and meet so many people from all
   walks of life. Working on Fire is not just a stepping-stone for your
   future, but is also a good learnership programme that has managed to
   build a shy, immature girl into a grown-up woman who can stand up for
   what she wants in life

Today we have heard the DA explaining their economic model to us. I think
our response as the ANC must be to point out that the market has a keen ear
for private wants, but a deaf ear for public needs. We must also point out
that you can make even a parrot a learned economist; all it has to learn,
and repeat, are the words, “demand and supply”.

The DA’s manifesto builds on existing institutions and programmes. It does
not offer new programmes; instead, it regurgitates current government
policies and obviously bends these to suit a specific sector of our
society. The document does not bring about a paradigm shift or add a new
vision to the current policies.

The central argument of the DA’s manifesto is a move away from the state-
centric interventionist model where government is the main role-player in
economic development. This is the main departure from the ANC’s commitment
to building the developmental state that will play a central and strategic
role in building the economy. This includes major investment in the public
sector and its personnel in order to build capacity for service delivery.

This departure is the foundation of the DA’s job creation strategy for
2009. The current global crisis is a classic example of the results where
markets are left to operate without any state intervention.

The ANC-led alliance resolution states that decent jobs are a central, long-
term priority. Enabling policies should be fast-tracked; for example, an
active industrial policy that will focus on employment creation.

Our response to the solutions on wage subsidies that we have been given by
the DA is that South Africa already has a variety of measures to address
poverty through social security systems and further skills development
programmes, to increase the uptake of inexperienced learners in
learnerships.

The wage subsidy proposals of the DA create a dual labour market and
displace existing workers, and are further open to abuse if the
beneficiaries are exempted from the protection of labour legislation.

What we require is the promotion of the employability of school leavers in
order to halt the expansion of long-term unemployment. What we need is the
ANC’s decision on ensuring a system of social protection that recognises
the needs of the working poor, thus ensuring that more households can
participate in the economy.

As the ANC, we are proud of our past; we are confident of our future.

Ms Margaret Pathane was an unemployed widow battling to make ends meet by
selling vegetables outside her home in Thembisa. She was the sole provider
for her two daughters and two grandchildren. She joined the Working for
Wetlands programme after it was formally launched in 2000, working on the
Rietvlei wetland rehabilitation project.

In later years she would laugh at herself for having turned up for work in
her new job wearing high-heeled shoes, readily admitting that she had known
nothing about wetlands.

Within the space of two years, Margaret had seized the opportunities
presented by the programme to the point where she was able to set up a
small business as a contractor to the project, employing a team of twelve
people to stabilise erosion dongas that, if left unchecked, would
eventually drain and destroy the wetland.

She suffered from diabetes and died last year. Her legacy is that the
opportunities provided by government, coupled with honest effort and
determination, can change a life and can nurture that most precious of
human states: dignity. Rest in peace, Margaret.

This story mirrors the ANC’s tactics and strategy for the need to build a
caring society and strengthen the motive force. It is here that the need
for the creation of decent work and sustainable livelihoods becomes
relevant to advance the national democratic revolution.

To this end, and out of their excitement and gratitude to the government
for creating these kinds of programmes through the EPWP, the crews on the
Working on Fire project made an effort to put together a poem. It was put
together by crew leaders Papi and Blondie from Butterworth, and I would
like to read it -

   Our hearts go with you whenever you go,
   You gave us strength,
   You lead us not into corruption and fraud,
   You taught us to be committed to our work end to talk the truth,
   You taught us how to be good leaders - not to be bosses,
   You taught us discipline through drill, determination, perseverance and
   dedication,
   You taught us to plan for tomorrow, for life and for the future,
   You made us change our country through being fire fighters preventing
   veld fires,
   We are who we are because of you,
   We are fire fighters,
   We are soldiers of fire,
   We are as hot as fire,
   We love fire,
   Fire is our friend and, at the same time, it is also our enemy,
   Long live Working on Fire!
   You have brought joy into our lives,
   I have seen many provinces because of you,
   We learned a lot to communicate in other languages and people.

I thank you, hon members. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is during this time of the year
that all departments and government as a whole await their budgets, so that
they can start their engines to meet targets of delivery and contribute
towards the sustainable growth and development of our country.

Without a doubt, during great globaly economic turmoil, our hon Minister of
Finance, Trevor Manuel, has, together with his team of professionals,
outwitted the crisis and most certainly devised a budget that has us
steamrolling ahead with our endeavours.

The MF is most pleased about the attention paid to education and the
acknowledgement that education is an investment. We are strongly in support
of attaining equality of education and, more importantly, quality of
education. This does mean qualified and dedicated teachers, earning good
salaries and teaching in classrooms. We cannot afford to have teachers on
strikes and most importantly cannot afford having our children not being
taught.

We also need to bring some stability to disruptions in universities and
tertiary institutions. We are certain that the hon Minister of Education
and her department will effectively institute the budget of this department
to attain the efficient and effective administration, management and
education of the country.

We recognise the accomplishments of the Department of Housing but would
like to see a speedier delivery in terms of areas like KwaZulu-Natal, where
people have been waiting for far too long. We are aware that constraints
exist and we hope that the department will tackle these so that they may go
forward in the construction of homes for the poorest of the poor.

With regard to energy, we are hoping that the department will look at
alternate methods to attain funding for the loopholes in Eskom. Our people
have already been burdened with a huge increase in the cost of electricity
and the government has made a substantial loan for the matter too. I would
hope that our citizens will not have to pay for our shortfalls when poverty
already has them living from hand to mouth.

We would like to see the speeding up of delivery in terms of land
redistribution and retribution. We have people who have been waiting from
1996 for settlement. If we need to look at introducing a special unit to
assist the process, then we need to certainly do so quickly.

Crime remains a central issue for all South Africans. We feel that while we
may boast of the freedom our Constitution has awarded us, the same freedom
is hijacked by the crime situation. The MF is eager to see our 2009 budget
for safety and security filtered to attaining more resources for police
stations, more police stations, more trained personnel and a faster rate of
police appearing on the scene of crime. We need to embrace our communities
in this regard and strengthen our ties between the communities and police
through anticrime forums.

The health sector has also been awarded a favourable budget for 2009, and
we are hoping that the system will continue expanding to become the largest
antiretroviral programme for those living with HIV/Aids and that it will
effectively eradicate cholera and malaria from our midst.

The MF also expresses its concern over escalating medical costs and hopes
that the costs can be carried out and imposed on private hospitals too.

The MF, however, does feel that we need to realise the importance of sports
and recreation to the development of our youth and the growth of our
country. We hope that deadlines for 2010 will be met and that the budget
will be used to speed up this process.

We applaud the contribution made to KwaZulu-Natal and sincerely hope that
the funds shall be used effectively to address the needs of our largely
densely populated and poverty-stricken communities. The MF supports the
Appropriation Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Deputy Speaker, and hon members, the APC fully supports
the five principles that guided the framing of this Budget, especially
protecting the poor and the need to maintain a sustainable debt level so
that our actions today do not constrain our development tomorrow.

The APC is happy that the instrument of a budget deficit is used sparingly
and cautiously. However, the APC is concerned that the Budget does not mark
the anticipated radical departure from established spending patterns.

Government had an opportunity to radically intervene in rural economic
development, but the APC views the expenditure of R1,8 billion on this
item, over three years, as being very cautious taking into account the
scale of the challenge.

The personal income tax relief for individuals is however nullified by an
increase in consumer taxes. The APC is specifically concerned about the
Road Accident Fund levy. The APC believes that other options could have
been considered to bolster the fund’s financial position rather than
increasing the RAF levy. For example, government could have considered
putting a cap on payable claims, ensuring that the fund benefits, first and
foremost, South Africans and that claims by foreigners should be made in
local currency.

This, we believe, could have avoided an increase or we could have had a
lower increase. The Minister could also have given Parliament more details,
that is, on the current standing of the fund and how much is hoped to be
raised in order to sustain the RAF as a going concern.

Whilst the APC is not averse to the postponement of the implementation of
the Mineral and Petroleum Royalty Act of 2008, hope that the approximate R
1,8 billion tax saving will lead to a constructive dialogue to save jobs
should not have been the basis of decision-making.

Government should have asked for firm commitments first, otherwise we may
see workers retrenched while the tax savings go into the pockets of the
greedy. It is the contention of the APC that in the struggle to save jobs,
government is lacking in equal and enthusiastic partners from private
capital.

The APC strongly feels that we need to look beyond the figures and ask what
impact there is on the quality of life of our people; that in these
difficult financial and economic times for our country and the world, those
tasked with looking after and using public funds do so guided by the need
to have value for money, fight wastage, embezzlement, fraud, theft and
corruption, which are said to be on the increase according to a recent
study by the Public Service Commission. It is incumbent on Parliament, in
discharging its oversight role, to ensure that the money so allocated is
used for what it is budgeted for.

Finally, the APC is of the view that the world economic crisis highlights
one objective truism that business decisions should above all make social
sense. We must raise our collective voice against the greed, corruption and
cronyism of a few that is now wreaking havoc all over the world. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Deputy Madam Speaker, hon members, fellow South Africans,
we have lodged our achievement in our health care system and working
together, we shall do more. I must also acknowledge that much more still
needs to be done in terms of quality health care to make health services
available to all South Africans and to ensure better health outcomes.

Our health system continues to face numerous challenges. South Africa has a
burden of at least four types of diseases associated with epidemiological
transition between poverty and lifestyle-related diseases. First, the
country still bears a heavy burden of poverty-related diseases such as
infectious diseases, malnutrition and diarrhoea. Second, South Africa
displays a growing burden of noncommunicable diseases such as stroke,
ischemic heart diseases, diabetes mellitus, etc.

The third burden relates to premature deaths due to violence, injuries and
road accidents. The fourth greatest burden by far is HIV infection and
Aids.

As a country we are struggling insofar as achieving the health- related
Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 6 is concerned. Lack of sustainable
human resources to provide quality health care is also a challenge.

The private sector’s unsustainable increases in expenditure also pose
difficulties. Bed occupancy in the private sector remains low, while there
is overcrowding in the public sector. In our country today, about 65% of
the population is entirely dependent on the public sector health services,
whilst 21% of the population uses some services in the private sector such
as doctors in private practice and retail pharmacies and pay for these
services on an out- of-pocket basis.

This group is, however, heavily dependent on the public sector for
specialists and in-patient care. This means that while the public sector is
responsible for about 86% of the population for health care services, the
private sector is responsible for only 14% of the population who are
members of medical schemes who largely use private-for-profit health
services. This inequity surely places a heavy burden on the public-sector
health care system with regard to budget, human, material and IT resources.


It is also true that sometimes our people are ridiculed, ill-treated and
mismanaged in the public health institutions. I believe that these are
areas that need policy review as well as commitment and determination to
aggressive implementation without fear or favour.

As this government, which is led by the ANC - the greatest movement of all
times, tried and tested - we have responded, and we will continue to
respond, to all these heavy burdens and challenges affecting our health
systems. Let me inform the House as to how we have responded to these
challenges within a short space of time being in government.

Since 1994 the government has achieved several public policy successes,
some of which are structural policy or programme-oriented. Fourteen
departments of health which were racially structured have been integrated
into a single central national Ministry and nine provincial departments of
health.

In 1994 we found a national health system which was based on a curative
health care system and benefited the wealthy few. Not apologetic at all, we
proudly introduced a primary health care system which emphasises prevention
of diseases, the promotion and maintenance of health and benefits the
majority. We reprioritised budgets and resources to focus on primary health
care. We formulated an essential primary health care package which sets
norms for the provision of comprehensive primary health care.

We increased access to clinics and hospitals by removing all fees for
pregnant women and children under the age of six years. We expanded health
services by building 1 345 new clinics, and 266 clinics have been upgraded.
We also have extended our services outside of the health facilities to
communities through a community-based programme.

Today, as we speak, about 95% of our people are able to reach a clinic
within a 5km radius, and that is extraordinary. Minister Hogan informed the
House about this on Monday last week. The outcomes of these initiatives are
that malnutrition-related diseases have declined; our clinics are
increasingly being used; we have reduced malaria and measles. This has
never happened before; those who accumulated wealth and privilege and never
cared about the majority of the people do not see these as important
achievements but our people do.

Furthermore, since the inception of the hospital revitalisation programme,
we have seen a number of new hospitals being built and other facilities
upgraded.

We have made efforts aimed at contributing towards human dignity by
improving the quality of care. This entails introducing the patients’
rights charter, establishment of provincial equality assurance units and
quality assurance programmes which include a complaint system at all
delivery sites.

Another major area of change is the improvement in human resources. We
introduced several initiatives such as changing the gender, racial and
professional profile in health administration as a means of ensuring that
the service providers represent the people they serve.

Due to major shortages in the number of health professionals, particularly
in rural areas, government recruited Cuban doctors in the immediate post-
1994 period. We introduced compulsory community service for recent
graduates as well as scarce-skills and rural allowances for health care
professionals. We also developed a strategy for the retention of skilled
workers through the occupation-specific dispensation for nurses, widely
known as OSD.

To further augment the number of health workers, the government introduced
the community health workers programme throughout the country. This is not
a wish list, as the honourable leader of the DA, Ms Helen Zille says, but
an existing concrete reality, which we implemented and funded.

We have made medicine affordable by introducing a comprehensive national
drug policy. Our National HIV/Aids and STI Strategic Plan 2007-2011 is
aimed at reducing the rate of new infections by 50% through an aggressive
information and prevention campaign.

Since 2005, in particular, there have been increases in real per capita
public health budgets. It is pleasing to note that even the 2009 budget has
been increased and speaks to the resolutions taken in Polokwane in 2009,
where we said we would prioritise health care services. For once, I heard
the hon Pastor Meshoe telling the truth on TV about Minister Manuel. He
said that the Minister has done sterling work, which is true.

He then continued by saying that if he, hon Meshoe, were the Minister of
Finance, he would do exactly the same as the Minister. This, however, isn’t
true because the ACDP doesn’t have prudent financial policies, if any at
all.

The ANC is clear on the way forward in dealing with the challenges and
strengthening the successes mentioned above. In our 2009 manifesto, the ANC
identified 10 clear priorities for a major improvement in our health care
system. Because of the time factor, I will only mention two: the
implementation of national health insurance to provide universal access to
health; and the improvement of the quality of health services through
performance monitoring.

During the celebrations on 8 January, the president of the ANC, Jacob Zuma,
said, and I quote:

  The ANC government will strengthen the formal partnership against Aids in
  our country in the form of the South African National Aids Council. This
  structure brings together government, business, labour, women, youth,
  religious leaders, the entertainment fraternity and many others.


He said this because as the ANC, we believe that working together, we can
do more.

In conclusion, the ship is indeed on course, as many of us will agree - our
scorecard makes for interesting reading. The people of South Africa have
every reason to want to associate themselves with the ANC. To the people of
South Africa we say that our overarching priorities include accessible,
affordable and quality health care for all. We are not saying that we will
deliver all of this from above, but we are saying that with all of us
working together we will transform our health care services. The ANC leads,
the ANC lives!

Mr E W TRENT: Madam Speaker, Al Gore made a documentary about global
warming called An Inconvenient Truth. The arms deal in South Africa is its
inconvenient truth. This has cost the country billions of rand needed to
fight poverty. It has destroyed the political career of one president, and
threatens the political career of an aspirant president.

The real problem lies in the cover-up. We now have explosive and compelling
evidence that the reports of the Joint Investigating Team, JIT, into the
arms deal were fundamentally flawed. Yet I have been denied an opportunity
to present this evidence to Parliament through Scopa. This evidence, if
presented, could quite conceivably have altered the course of the
investigations from the beginning and saved billions of rand.

The various draft JIT reports obtained via court orders began ominously, as
the editor of the report scribbles notes under the headings that include
the names of former President Mbeki and the former Minister of Defence, Mr
Lekota. Following this, handwritten alterations were made to almost every
substantial finding in the draft report.

For example, the draft report pointed out fundamental flaws in the
tendering contracts, while the final report says “no impropriety”. Where
the drafts pointed out the interference from Ministers, the final report
said no senior members of government could be blamed.

One heading even said that the decisions of the Minister of Defence could
have influenced the process. It was altered to read – listen to this – “
... the visionary approach of the Minister of Defence”. Remember, the
drafters of the report and the members of the Cabinet have consistently
denied that any substantive changes were made. The matter cannot be laid to
rest!

The former Chief Whip of this House was sent to jail for lying to
Parliament and the President of the ANC faces that charge now. Yet Scopa
received false testimony from the former Public Protector, from the former
Auditor-General, and the former Head of Acquisitions, yet nothing has been
done about this.

This Parliament owes it to South Africans to recommend to the next
Parliament that this matter be pursued. As the embers of my political
career fade, one thing is absolutely certain: If I were to live my life
over, the choices I made would be the same. Like hon Kraai, I arrived in
Cape Town in 1981 - not here but in the old Cape Provincial Council. Since
then I have made many friends and have seen many people who were our
opponents become colleagues.

For example, the hon Judy Chalmers’ sister, Molly Blackburn, was my
benchmate in that council and next door sat Mr Van Eck – you know who they
are. To illustrate my point, when I came here, my erstwhile opponent, hon
Ryno King, became my benchmate. That is the sign of a mature democracy;
when we can choose and do what we believe is correct.

To conclude, when I spoke from this podium for the last time before the
tricameral Parliament closed its doors, I told the former President De
Klerk that he should acknowledge that the miracle of South Africa came
about by divine intervention. I do believe that; I still believe that.

My wish and prayer today is that during the coming months and years, our
faith in the miracle of South Africa’s democracy will be renewed and
restored with the strength and the help of our Heavenly Father.

Now, we choose different roads, but ultimately all those roads and routes
lead to one highway and that highway leads to one destination; and that
destination, surely, can only be a better life for every South African. I
don’t believe that there is a single member in this House who can dispute
that.

The only difference is, as I said, it’s the road that leads to the highway
on which we differ. I know that we are mature enough to understand these
things and I would like to say to the hon Minister, because this is his
budget - and I don’t say this with my tongue in my cheek - I’ve sat through
a lot of Ministers of Finance and he is good. I’m not going to say he is
the best, but he is good.

I have no problem with this word “comrades” – I really don’t. The reason
why I don’t is because when somebody calls me a comrade, I get a vision of
these thousands of people lining up either in Pietermaritzburg or Durban
for this long race, the Comrades Marathon. And as they go, some fall by the
wayside and others pick them up; but everybody else has a mission to get
somewhere and to help everybody to get to the same place. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, that was hon Trent’s farewell speech. We
want to wish hon Trent all the best for the future. [Applause.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon colleagues, comrades, the people of
South Africa, before I fully address the Budget as I want to, I think that
certainly we would wish the hon Trent good fortune in his future
endeavours. However, I do believe that I must try to correct a number of
issues that were raised here.

Perhaps one of the first things, just something small, and I am sure the
hon Minister would agree, it is certainly not his Budget. I think he wishes
he had that amount of money in his personal account! This is, in fact, the
country’s budget, an ANC government’s budget. [Interjections.]

Let me now address the issues that were raised directly by the hon Trent
and let us get a few facts clear. Richard Young was a losing bidder who
continued to pursue his interests but, yes, he was invited to appear before
Scopa. He was invited to give written representations. He chose to make
these verbally.  Indeed he got court orders and I’ll come to that
immediately. He, in fact, in the end accepted an out-of-court settlement.
Having had that out-of-court settlement in 2005, I find it strangely
disturbing that on the eve of the 2009 election, he chooses to validate
some of these questionable claims. Credibility in such matters, hon Trent,
includes the actions of those who make them - and what on the face of it
appear to be unreasonable claims, because certainly, Parliament has not had
sight of this.

These are very unreasonable claims he makes, as are the aspersions that are
being cast on the honourable Office of the Auditor-General, which is an
essential component of our oversight and monitoring. Up to now, this
democratic Parliament, institutionalised by our Constitution, in which all
political parties had a hand, has never sought to submerge the truth. Not
since its inception in 1994! [Interjections.]

If other role-players have done so ...

Mr E W TRENT: Madame Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: The hon member
says that I cast aspersions on the Office of the Auditor-General. That is
untrue. I mentioned an individual, and that is not the Office of the
Auditor-General.

I have the greatest respect for that institution, and I have been on public
accounts committees all of my political life. I think the member should
withdraw that. It is deceiving the public out there.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon member. I will look at the Hansard and
make a ruling. Continue, hon member.

Ms J L FUBBS: If other role-players have done so, then surely Mr Young is
obligated to reveal exactly who these people are in a transparent manner
and not in a manner which jeopardises the integrity of our constitutional
democracy.

I want to acknowledge certain things because the ANC introduced
transparency into this country and into this democracy. [Interjections.]
And may I say that, indeed, there have been certain complex arrangements
such as the National Industrial Participation Programme, which falls under
the DTI, at a civilian level and under Armscor, at a defence level. But
perhaps there had been many challenges, I would agree in that regard, in
the offset process, but these are being corrected.

In fact, several years ago this ANC government acknowledged that the
procurement processes were faulty and has indeed taken active measures to
correct them. [Interjections.] Understandably, hon Trent, in our nascent
democracy, which had only been in place a few years at that particular
time, we could expect problems to arise.

One thing this ANC government has done within three years, within five
years, and it never took 48 years – a few years, and be careful, Tony -
within a few years we corrected this. Furthermore, we should not forget
that the Armscor acquisition policy was enacted pre-1994.

Now it has undergone a drastic review and led to the drafting of a new set
of policies which were passed in 2004. Quite frankly, New Zealand,
Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom say to us: “You have accelerated the
reform of your public service faster than we could ever have attempted.”
[Applause.] Now get that! [Interjections.]

If I may, I will just take a little water. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, please can get we get the lady more
water?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t know what that point is, but I can ask you
please to keep your voices down. Continue, hon member.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, could we ask the hon Fubbs to keep her
voice down a bit too?

Ms J L FUBBS: This Budget is indeed a people’s budget. It is a budget
driven by accelerated infrastructure development. It is a budget that will
create jobs and grow the economy. The industrial development strategies
linked to infrastructure development will stimulate the economy and retain
jobs and create jobs.

The ANC government, in partnership with the private sector, will accelerate
development. Together we can do this. Together we can eradicate poverty.
This path, though, requires not only that the state plays a regulatory role
but also that it employs a strategic key role in the development of poor
communities and sustainable service delivery.

The macroeconomic path which we heard of from our chairperson in the
Finance Committee, Arthur Moloto, as charted, will harness this industrial
policy and strategy. I want to underpin this - it calls for a partnership
between the state and the market, but a market that behaves in an
integrated manner. The current quality of service delivery can be and is
weakened when market activities are fragmented rather than co-ordinated. We
have heard how the state will use its power to drive development through
fiscal redistribution, the utilisation of state-owned enterprises and
effective regulatory measures.

This Budget reaffirms our commitment to a mixed economy with state co-
operatives and other forms of social ownership and private capital that
will enable our people and our country to steer our economy through the
current turbulence, without straying from our vision of a national,
democratic society or our objectives to create a better life for all our
people.

Indeed, fiscal space, which was developed over the last 10 years, has
enabled this expansionary Budget to allocate a significant R15,2 billion to
the infrastructure development. But we should note that with this kind of
shift, the shift we’ve made in this Budget - if we look at the examples
internationally of the global greed that has characterised the current
depressions and recessions - the same kind of greed within certain organs
of our society, the economy and certain sectors there, could indeed limit
the full effect of such a plan.

We have referred to Richard Young already, and I want to also address at
this particular point a few other aspects of our strategy.

While the ANC government has correctly regulated the financial markets and
thus been protected from the worst ravages that are seen in other
countries, we cannot forget how interwoven our own economy is with the
global economy. We have felt this very directly in, to some extent, what
could be described as a shrinking manufacturing sector. Hence the measures
that have been taken in this Budget to boost that sector yet again.

We should remember that unlike the bad examples which we have seen in North
America and parts of Europe, where governments have responded and, as it
turns out, unrealistically, by buying debt, we have chosen another route.
The ANC government has rather - and those of us who are well-informed on
our manifesto, know that we speak practically - provided and is rather
developing an economic stimulus to specific vulnerable sectors.

Indeed, the ANC in this Budget 2009, through its government, a government
that serves all of the people in our country, has continued its path of
deepening the national democratic society. It is a revolution that will
seek to build social cohesion and national identity.

We will, through the economic components of the Budget, continue
restructuring the socioeconomic fabric of the state through the
consolidation of public sector spending, infrastructure spending, expansion
of the public sector employment and our Public Works programmes. We will
also use instruments of the development finance institutions, DBSA, IDC and
the Land Bank, to drive programmes.

Well, I couldn’t agree more that there have been challenges at the Land
Bank. However, we did not let this ride. Land and agriculture are principal
priorities in an ANC-led agenda. Therefore, it is currently, as you are
well aware, under the prudent custodianship of the Treasury. These
strategic initiatives are the response to the global crises.

We have also heard, and will hear, more on rural development. We have
certainly heard about agrarian reform and the critical role it has played,
and is playing, in food security. This Budget, as I have said earlier,
reaffirms our commitment to a mixed economy.

I want to highlight some of the infrastructure expenditure, which we hope
and believe can generate jobs. As I have said earlier, there is a R15,2
billion infrastructure programme; R13 billion which has been allocated to
the rail sector to strengthen the capacity there.

Provision is made for supplementary funding to the taxi recap and the bus
subsidies. We have heard a lot about the fact that there are bus subsidies,
but how effectively are these managed and distributed? Funds are allocated
to ensure the training and capacity of the management.

As for Gautrain, with which we are quite familiar, may I add that we have
looked beyond Gautrain and are looking towards the upgrade of 165 km of
road networks. Another priority, housing, is also getting a huge injection.


My time is up, hon Deputy Speaker. I want to just sound a note of caution
here. This is a people’s budget. It is an expansionary budget which, I
believe, will generate jobs, will grow the economy. However, I have
referred to a partnership between the state and the private sector. But
economic history, certainly in our own country, has shown that the mere
belief that the markets will respond positively to a stimulus package in
the manner that the state envisages, it is not entirely realistic.

So we need to encourage investment. We need to ensure that we consider very
seriously the investment and proscribed assets by the private sector as a
means to stimulate the domestic economy. Clearly, our prudent path will
guide our decisions in this regard to ensure that the reliable, robust and
realistic financial framework that has so far underpinned the sound
financial foundation is not undermined. And as we embark on this people’s
budget, we should be mindful that the greatest threat to the success here
lies in our hands, in our lack of commitment, not simply in this House but
in South Africa generally, to support it.

The ANC supports this Budget wholeheartedly. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP welcomes the fact that there is a
strong, propoor element to this Budget and that the largest adjustment to
spending plans go to poverty reduction. An amount of R25 billion has also
been added to the budget of provinces, mainly for education and health
care, and R13 billion for social assistance grants and their
administration.

The progress made thus far in reducing poverty has been far too slow. The
impact of our initiatives to free the poor and destitute citizens of our
country, who are confined to living in poverty, must be seriously
questioned as there are still far too many people struggling with
debilitating poverty.

A big part of the failure to provide relief to many people and to free them
from the misery that comes with poverty is the inability of the authorities
at lower levels of government to perform their duties. This is a concern
that has been expressed by other speakers.

While the increase of funding aimed at poverty reduction is most welcome,
this will not have the desired effect if it is not used properly. The IFP
therefore believes that there needs to be a strengthening of the mechanism
tasked with monitoring the spending and the performance of government,
authorities and institutions. During the times of economic hardship we
cannot afford frivolous spending, and the Minister of Finance has also
alluded to this.

Mr Singh said something very important in one of his previous speeches. He
said, “We must always ensure that we get value for money.” It is very
important that we keep this in mind at all times.

During these times of economic hardships we cannot afford this frivolous
spending. The service delivery protests that have been witnessed across the
country are a sure sign that something is drastically wrong and that the
people have lost faith in those who are tasked with improving their lives.

In his Budget Speech Minister Manuel stated that it will be necessary to
take stronger action in pursuit of efficiency and better targeted
expenditure. He also stated that there is far too little control of such
items in government as foreign travel, advertising, public relations
activities and consultancy services.

The IFP agrees with the Minister that if we are to survive these tough
times, then economic prudence and efficiency are needed. These are clearly
lacking currently in the provincial and municipal spheres. They are clearly
lacking, and this problem has to be addressed. We as the IFP pledge to do
so.

The less affluent members of our society had a tough time over the past
year. The sudden escalation in the price of food and the extremely high
inflation rate have meant that they get much less for their rand than they
did previously. Pensioners now get over R1 000 a month. When you consider
the high cost of living in our country, this is not enough. The IFP
believes that a sum in the region of R1 500 per month is required for
pensioners if there is to be an improvement in the quality of their lives.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, with my limited time let me simply
remark that the language used by the Minister in his Budget Speech makes
one feel as if one is licking ice cream. It is persuasive, but upon closer
scrutiny the ice cream tastes bitter.

It is well and good for the Minister to come round to the PAC’s long-held
position that the market cannot be left unregulated. The Minister, however,
needs to go further and be bold enough to offer an alternative.

In 1993 the poorest 10% of the population had 0,6% of the total income
while the richest 10% accounted for 72,5% respectively. The Gini
coefficient in official statistics remains high by international standards.
Where are the jobs and opportunities for the poor? They fall far short of
the target of halving joblessness by 2014. There is no indication that 500
000 jobs will be created per year during this period of economic crisis
without state intervention.

The PAC welcomes the change of heart on the part of the Minister. For years
he has held that governments do not create jobs. Now he recognises that
government has a direct role to play in employment creation through public
employment programmes. The plans are yet to be unveiled. However, the PAC
proposes that when this is done they should focus on youth unemployment.
There must be a radical alternative to Gear.

The PAC welcomes the National Treasury honouring its commitment to increase
government expenditure as targeted by 9,1% between 2009 and 2012, even if
this means going into a deficit. Does this approach constitute a long-term
strategy to protect social spending over the next generation? What will
happen if the Minister’s growth projections are not met?

It is time that the emergence of rural development becomes a priority. This
is where the poorest live and where there is an unacceptable pace of
development. This has not happened in previous Budgets.

The Minister’s 2009 Budget is a significant move. The agrarian reform must
be the key strategy. The allocation of R1,8 billion is, however, peanuts.
The rural areas urgently need to rebuild small-scale agriculture. This
requires addressing the economic concentration of multinational companies
to provide access to markets [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: Chairperson, before I deliver my short speech, I would
like to recommend this brochure to all the members of our House. It deals
with the Quality Learning and Teaching Campaign.

In this document the rules and commitments of different stakeholders - the
departmental official, the teacher, the learner, the parent and the
community - are spelt out. With our understanding that education is
everybody’s business, I would also like to give members a call centre
number with which we can all communicate if we have any problem on the
ground related to education. The number is: 0800202933.

The president of the ANC, Comrade J Z Zuma, on the occasion of the 2009
ANC’s manifesto launch indicated that ”education is at the centre of all
our efforts”.

The 2008 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD,
report on the review of the South African national policies of education
calls for the systematic removal of all the remaining barriers to universal
access and school completion. In this regard, the ANC has committed itself
to the following:
Firstly, to work towards free and compulsory education for all children. As
the immediate step, it will ensure that at least 60% of schools are no-fee
schools. [Applause.] I am happy to respond that this is no longer a dream.
Quintile 3 schools started being categorised as no-fee schools as of
January this year.

The second commitment is to encourage students from working-class and poor
communities to go to tertiary institutions by reviewing and improving the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS. We were told last week that
it is about to be completed. In the Budget Speech by the hon Minister an
additional R330 million was put aside for NSFAS.

Thirdly, school feeding schemes will be extended to all deserving high
schools and the implementation of the feeding schemes in all deserving
primary schools will be improved.

The Minister of Finance, hon Trevor Manuel, in his Budget Speech announced
the commitment to meeting all these initiatives. It is indeed commendable
that government’s contribution to public entities remains its single
largest investment and it reflects the fact that education is the key to
reducing poverty and accelerated long-term economic growth.

At a consolidated government level, education spending has grown by 14% a
year for the past three years and is projected to grow by 10% a year over
the next three years. That is irrespective of the climate.

However, the African Bank and OECD suggest that although South Africa
justifiably allocates the fees of its budgets to education, which is high
by international standards, the current system will struggle to address
huge geographical and quality imbalances inherited from apartheid. In the
Budget Speech the Minister did refer to money put aside for building more
schools to reduce the teacher-classroom ratio.

With regard to the curriculum in teacher training, the 2009 Budget makes
provision for the attainment of educational imperatives in the national
programme identified by the ANC in its 2009 election manifesto. These,
amongst other things, include the improvement of the quality of schooling,
particularly performance in mathematics, science, technology and language
development; promoting the status of teachers and ensuring the employment
of adequate numbers; and improving their remuneration and training as an
important part of our drive to ensure that quality teaching becomes a norm
rather than an exception. To this effect, we have already started to
implement the occupation-specific dispensation in order to raise the
salaries of those teachers who perform well.

On early childhood development, the ANC’s 2009 election manifesto places
emphasis on introducing a sustainable early childhood education system that
spans both public and private sectors and gives children a head start on
numeracy and literacy. The ANC government will also train and employ 15 000
trainers per annum and strengthen support for crèches and pre-schools in
rural villages and urban centres. This is in line with the OECD report
identifying the need for all teachers of Grade R programmes to have access
to the same professional development and support resources.

The expansion of the OECD programme is linked to the policy mandate of
achieving universal Grade R access by 2010. It is very important for us to
also take into consideration the National Mass Literacy Campaign that was
started last year and I would like to request the members to bring even
more people to this.

There has always been a contention that the examination is only at Grade
11. On Tuesday 17 February 2009, the day before yesterday, we were
pleasantly surprised when the department reported that the standardised
test took place as scheduled in November for all Grade 1 to Grade 6
learners, which means that as we speak we are having assessments in order
to concretise that foundation for our education.

With regard to the supplementary materials and libraries, the OECD team
learned that the Department of Education plans to provide extra resources
including libraries to 5 000 schools that performed poorly and are
allocated in the worst resourced districts. ”Kids Up” is one of the
programmes that are trying to address this.

Let me now turn to the importance of quality education. Despite the best
efforts of South Africa’s educational leadership and the large investment
in resources as referred to above, the results and outcomes are
disappointing. In its very informative background report, the Department of
Education itself is critical of the system’s achievement so far.

It went on to say, and I quote: “Learners’ levels of achievement are very
poor”. Of 12 African countries participating in the 1999 MLA project, South
Africa scored the lowest average in numeracy, the fifth lowest in literacy
and the third lowest in life skills.

What is the turnaround strategy? I am happy to report that at the last
meeting that I am referring to, held the day before yesterday and attended
by all teacher unions and the ERC, the unions recommitted themselves to the
non-negotiables: to be in school, on time, prepared and teaching.

In particular, the unions committed themselves to the support and the
implementation of the legislation which regulates Friday as a normal school
day. I want to stress this because it is very important for us so that we
know that Friday is a normal school day. In this legislation it says that
all South African schools are obliged to follow the school hours as
determined in the two pieces of legislation.

I am going to take just one of these two. The National Education Policy Act
says that every educator must be able to account for 1 800 actual working
hours per annum. The most important one is the second one. It says:


  Workload for educators: All educators should be at school during the
  formal school which should not be less than seven hours per day.

The schools that are performing well are those that have classes on
weekends and during holidays, but we are saying if they can only take the
bare minimum. The unions have accepted these hours to push them along so
that the quality can change. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnr S E OPPERMAN: Voorsitter -

   Langs die Grootpad van die lewe
   Met sy blydskap, lief en leed
   Leef so baie hoog verhewe dat ons skoon die pyn vergeet
   Van die lewensmoë mensies


   Op die grootpad van die lewe
   Jaag die “mercs” met fatcats voort
   Loop die Grondpad langs die Grootpad
   Om die eerste draaitjie dood.

Ek het hierdie gediggie baie jare gelede geskryf nadat ek aangegryp is deur
’n artikel van Max du Preez met die titel “Bonteheuwel op ’n
Saterdagmiddag”. So daar is ’n grootpad en daar’s ’n grondpad.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN: Chairperson –

   Langs die Grootpad van die lewe
   Met sy blydskap, lief en leed
   Leef so baie hoog verhewe dat ons skoon die pyn vergeet
   Van die lewensmoë mensies


   Op die grootpad van die lewe
   Jaag die “mercs” met fatcats voort
   Loop die Grondpad langs die Grootpad
   Om die eerste draaitjie dood.

I wrote this poem many years ago after I was moved by an article by Max du
Preez entitled “Bonteheuwel op ’n Saterdagmiddag”. So there is a highway,
and there is a dirt road.]

Therefore my theme this afternoon is “Hands across the highway”. The
Minister of Finance referred in his Budget Speech to the agricultural
support and rural development. The proposal of Lazarus Lamola, wherein he
encouraged partnerships to once again use the land for food production and
sustenance, is relevant.

Maar hoe maak die 24 kleinboere van Tembalethu naby George as die
pompstasie wat die water tot bo by hul damme moet pomp stuk-stuk weggedra
is; as die elektriese kabels wat die krag na die pompstasie moet lei by die
skrootwerf beland het; as die water wat gepomp moet word so besoedel is dat
dit ’n gesondheidsgevaar inhou? As hierdie 24 kleinboere op hulself
aangewese moet bly, sal die aasvoëls bly sirkel, al sit hulle sedert die
dae van Lampie Fick op van die waardevolste grond in die George-omgewing.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[But what are the 24 small farmers of Tembalethu near George to do when the
pump station that pumps the water into their dams has been carried away
piece by piece; when the electrical cables that supply the power to the
pump station, have ended up in the scrapyard; when the water that has to be
pumped is so polluted that it poses a health risk? If these 24 small
farmers have to rely on themselves, the vultures will keep circling, even
though, since the time of Lampie Fick, they find themselves on some of the
most valuable land in the George area.]

Here is an ideal opportunity, hon Minister of Finance, for what you have
proposed, a comprehensive agricultural support programme and allocation to
target rural infrastructure projects. We have worked on a business plan
with strategic directives. We have organised mentoring, but without
financial support it means nothing.

Hierdie projek op die plaas Sandkraal moet gekoppel word aan Hoogekraal om
’n kombinasie van landbou en erfenistoerisme, wat ’n geweldige ekonomiese
potensiaal het, te laat realiseer. Pacaltsdorp was eers Hoogekraal en voor
dit Curi Kama Kraal. Net so was Platteklipstroom in die Kaap eers Soete of
Varsche Rivier, en voor dit Camissa ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[This project on the farm Sandkraal must be linked to Hoogekraal in order
to realise a combination of agriculture and heritage tourism that has
enormous economic potential. Pacaltsdorp was formerly known as Hoogekraal
and before that, Curi Kama Kraal. Similarly, Platteklipstroom in the Cape
was called Soete or Varsche Rivier, and before that Camissa ... ]

... which means the water is sweet.

So, ja, ek verwys na ’n spesifieke erfenis, ’n onderdrukte erfenis, ’n
erfenis wat nou benut moet word. Daarom het ek ook aan die burgemeester van
Kaapstad en die agb Komphela voorgestel dat die nuwe stadion in Kaapstad
Kai Haa Mullai moet heet, oftewel “Great Flat Pastoral Lands,” want so het
die Otentottu die area genoem. Die Franse het Mullai na Mouille, oftewel
“anchorage” gekorrupteer. Ek hoop nie hierdie voorstel van my vir
regstellende optrede val op dowe ore nie.

Ek het self by geleentheid ook verwys na die artefakte van eens magtige
koninkryke wat teen die mure van die Britse Museum in Londen hang. Enige
individu of organisasie wat sy morele kompas verloor het, is op pad muur
toe!

Dit was ’n wonderlike voorreg om die Suid-Afrikaanse gemeenskap as
politieke verteenwoordiger te dien. Ek dank die Here vir ’n wonderlike
seisoen. Ek sê dankie vir wonderlike vriendskappe. Ek sê dankie aan
wonderlike kollegas. Ek sê dankie aan my wonderlike vrou, Agnes, en ’n
wonderlike, ondersteunende familie. Groete aan u almal, en seënwense.
Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[So, yes, I refer to a specific heritage, an oppressed heritage, a heritage
that must now be utilised. That is why I also suggested to the mayor of
Cape Town and the hon Komphela that the new stadium in Cape Town should be
called Kai Haa Mullai, that is, “Great Flat Pastoral Lands”, because this
is how the Otentottu called the area. The French corrupted Mullai into
Mouille, that is, “anchorage”. I hope this proposal of mine for affirmative
action does not fall on deaf ears.
On occasion I have also referred to the artefacts of once mighty kingdoms
that hang on the walls of the British Museum in London. Any individual or
organisation that has lost its moral compass is on its way to the wall!

It was a wonderful privilege to serve the South African community as a
political representative. I thank the Lord for a wonderful season. I thank
you for wonderful friendships. I thank wonderful colleagues. I thank my
wonderful wife, Agnes, and a wonderful supportive family. Greetings and
best wishes to you all. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, guests and fellow
South Africans ...

... ndibona kuyimfuneko ukuba ndiyibeke icace gca eyokuba i-ANC ilwamkela
ngezandla ezingenamikhinkqi uHlalo lwabiwo-mali lowama-2009, oluthiwe thaca
kule Ndlu ibekekileyo ngohloniphekileyo uMphathiswa uManuel kwiintsukwana
nje ezidlulileyo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... I feel it is necessary to state categorically that the ANC welcomes
without reservations the 2009 budget, which has been presented in this
august House by hon Minister Manuel in the past few days.]

The ANC-led government has always committed itself to a comprehensive
support programme to ensure sustainable improvements in livelihoods for the
rural poor, farm workers, farm dwellers and rural farmers, especially women
as well as the youth. In addition, the ANC policy framework clearly
expresses the importance of the implementation of a socioeconomic programme
focused on economic growth and development, the restructuring and
development of our economy, reducing unemployment and poverty and sharing
the wealth of our country in terms of national class and gender categories.

The current Budget demonstrates that kind of commitment, which is in line
with the ANC’s approach. This can be illustrated by the fact that through
the election’s manifesto for the 2009 elections the ANC has clearly
articulated the vision for land agrarian reform, food security and rural
development.

Furthermore, the ANC has also set out its vision for food security to
include an emergency food relief programme on a massive scale in the food
assistance project to the poorest households and communities, including
true partnerships with all stakeholders.

Agriculture and the development of rural areas are much higher on the
agenda of the ANC-led government. The provision of infrastructure and other
facilities in rural areas is also receiving attention as part of the
attempt to stem migration to urban areas.

The current Budget has spelt out the commitment to the protection of the
poor through employment and training, investment on infrastructure and
building a competitive economy and sustainable public finance, and further
places emphasis on the democratic right of all citizens to participate in
their economy.

In response to that, the ANC-led government has a national framework for
local economic development as a guide to advance Local Economic Development
and put forward a strategic implementation approach that all spheres of
government, state-owned enterprises, as well as communities, can use to
improve.

The prominent preoccupation of the ANC’s 52 national conference resolution
is to fundamentally alter skewed ownership partnership of the agricultural
sectors in South Africa and also to focus the agribusiness paradigm towards
agriculture for rural development and food security. To ensure that this
resolution is implemented, a clearly targeted programme and measures to
build smallholder farming with the agricultural sector geared towards self-
sustenance and food security is taken care of in the Budget.

Central to the ANC outlook of agrarian transformation, the Cabinet adopted
a clear strategy in 2002 to implement the integrated food security plan.
This will further ensure food security at all times, especially in times of
vulnerability as a consequence of natural disasters and price hikes that
directly impact on food prices for the poor, with a specific focus on
women, the elderly, people with disabilities and children.

The national framework for Local Economic Development seeks to guide
implementation on the Local Economic Development Programme’s performance
indicators of the five-year local government strategic agenda through
suggested actions and further implementation of the policies and
programmes, and is more integrated as a result of a cluster approach to a
better service.

The framework was launched in 2006 and subsequently presented to the
President’s Co-ordinating Council. The introductory chapter describes
shaping current thinking and practice on LED. The purpose is not to make a
policy statement on LED, but rather to understand the evolving approaches
to LED and how this may interact with practice in South Africa.

The other areas of focus in the Budget are – as we have seen - the rural
transport services and infrastructure grants to improve rural
infrastructure, to upgrade rural access to roads, construction of
pedestrian bridges and walkways, rural freight logistic facilities and
intermodal facilities. Those grants were allocated, and I am not going to
deal with figures today.

Then we deal with the integrated international electrification programme
grant to sustain the current programmes, particularly for the poor
households and also the backlog in water and sanitation services at schools
and clinics.

Furthermore, the EPWP incentive is a new grant aimed at providing
municipalities with incentives to increase the number of employment
opportunities in infrastructure programmes to maximise job creation and
skills development.

On the industrial development strategy we have seen that the focus has also
shifted to small, medium and micro enterprises, which are often more
sustainable under local conditions. The promotion and intensifying of
entrepreneurship programmes to strengthen economic development is one of
the commitments indicated in this Budget. Therefore, it is important for
the people or communities to identify such opportunities and exploit them.
Hence, entrepreneurship is the driving force of economic growth.

Increased human development is a priority, hence it is the single most
important determinant of the pace of economic development. Human
development issues also include health, nutrition, education, and shelter.

Oogxa bam sele bezicacise ngokubanzi zonke ezo meko. [My colleagues have
already extensively explained all those issues.]

The government strategy also includes reduction of the HIV and Aids
epidemic as it slows population growth and imposes a great cost to the
economy and society through a loss in productivity, skills and experience.
Some of the rural development commitments include sport and recreation,
tourism, social development, land distribution programmes and also arts and
culture.

Yiloo nto sisithi uphuhliso lwamaphandle alunakukwazi ukwahlulwa ngoba
luyinxalenye yamasebe karhulumente. Ngoko ke kunyanzelekile ukuba
aqinisekise ukuba kwiinkqubo zawo abandakanya nophuhliso lwamaphandle.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[That is the reason we maintain that rural development is an integral part
of the work of government departments. Therefore, government departments
must ensure that they incorporate rural development in their programmes.]

It is worth noting that the greatest challenge facing our nation is to
conquer poverty, joblessness, illiteracy and ignorance. Such commitments
have been expressed. This challenge has no colour, it faces both black and
white. Therefore, skills-based programmes should be broadened to improve
productivity and make the country’s goods more competitive in a world that
is growing increasingly smaller.

We need to mobilise communities not to despair. It is time for the rural
society to construct and build their future.

Malungu abekekileyo, kuye kube kuhle xa simana sikhumbuzana imvelaphi
yabantu beli lizwe kunye memibandela abathi bahlangabezane nayo ukuze
sikwazi ukulungisa ikamva leli lizwe. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Hon members, it is appropriate that we should, from time to time, remind
one another about the background of the people of this country and the
issues they are confronted with, in order to be able to address the future
of this country.]

South Africa is a country where various cultures merge to form a unique
nation that is proud of its heritage. The country’s biggest asset is its
people – a rainbow nation with rich and diverse cultures. Therefore, when
we relate to our country’s economic development we need to take that into
cognisance.

Although South Africans come from many traditions they belong to one nation
– a dynamic blend of ages, customs and modern ways of building a South
African society to create a better life for all. When one refers to rural
communities it is important to properly understand exactly the context we
are talking about.

We know that during the 1940s the apartheid system designed a policy termed
“separate development”, which divided the African population into
artificial ethnic nations, each with its homeland and the prospect of
independence, supposedly in keeping with trends elsewhere on the continent.


Yiyo loo nto namhlanje urhulumente enoxanduva lokuba athathe inxaxheba
ekuzameni ukuvuselela uluntu lwasemaphandleni. Kwaye akululanga njengokuba
namhlanje, xa sithetha simi apha kweli qonga, sithetha ngathi urhulumente
ufike yonke into ingumthebelele ekubeni eqale phantsi ehamba ebunzimeni.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[That is why today government has the responsibility to get involved in
rehabilitating rural areas. And this is not as easy as we make it out to
be. When we stand on this podium, we speak as if, when this government came
to power, it was smooth sailing, even though it started from scratch.]

This “divide and rule” strategy was designed to disguise the racial basis
of official policy-making by the substitution of the language of ethnicity.
This was further accompanied by technographic engineering as efforts were
made to resurrect tribal structures; in the process government sought to
create a significant collaborating class. The truth was that the rural
reserves were by this time thoroughly degraded by overpopulation and soil
erosion. This did not prevent four of the homelands structures being
declared independent, a status which the vast majority of South Africans
and also international communities declined to recognise.

Forceful removals from the white areas affected approximately 3,5 million
people and vast rural fields were created in the homelands, which were used
as dumping grounds. The pass laws and influx control were extended and
harshly enforced and labour was set up to channel labour to where it was
required.

Asisayibali ke into yokubanjwa nokutshutshiswa kwamawaka ngamawaka abantu
ngenxa yale mithetho. [Needless to say, thousands of the people were
persecuted because of these laws.]

Industrial decentralisation to growth points on the borders of homelands
was promoted as a means of keeping blacks out of the then white South
Africa. In virtually every sphere from housing and education to health
care, central government took control over black people’s lives with a view
to reinforcing their allotted roles as temporary sojourners in white South
Africa.

Sihlalo, bendicela ukuba sibulele uQabane uMphathiswa ngoHlalo-lwabiwo-mali
lwakhe oluquka wonke ubani, sisithi ...] [Chairperson, I would like us to
thank Comrade Minister Manuel for a Budget that is all-inclusive ...] [Time
expired.]

Ms N N SIBHIDLA: Chairperson, hon members, we know as a matter of fact that
before the 1994 democratic breakthrough, the system of colonialism and
apartheid denied the majority of young South Africans, especially the
African youth, opportunities to develop and realise their full potential.

Because of their unfortunate situation and their conviction to attain
freedom in their lifetime, these oppressed and marginalised young women and
men joined the South African struggle for freedom and liberation. Committed
to fundamentally changing South African society for the better, these young
compatriots continue making their contribution to the national efforts
aimed at making South Africa a better place than before.

Given their role in the liberation struggle and in deepening and advancing
constitutional democracy in our country, youth development must be central
to the agenda of our development. This must be the case because that will
generate enthusiasm among young people to participate in consolidating our
democracy and shaping the direction of the country.

As the ANC we have always viewed young people as the most important strata
in society, and sought to ensure that young people are fully integrated
into society as agents of change. We do this convinced that young people
are critical elements of the motive forces of the South African revolution,
whose democratic forces drive the process of fundamentally changing South
Africa for the better.

The ANC remains committed to redressing the imbalances created by the
system of colonialism and apartheid and to affording young people long-
overdue opportunities to participate meaningfully in all sectors of our
society. [Interjections.]

We will continue to prioritise youth development within the broad framework
of the reconstruction and development of our society. Because we take young
people seriously, we continue to devise mechanisms which will advance the
development of young people. [Interjections.] Yes, we do!

Among the interventions we have made currently is ensuring that government
reviews institutions of youth development and creates a National Youth
Development Agency, which will ensure seamless integration, sustainability
and responsiveness to the demands and aspirations of our youth.

I am proud to report to the nation that in 2008 this House passed
legislation to this effect and that processes have started to appoint
members of the board that will govern the National Youth Development
Agency.  While we must remain committed to youth development, young people
must know that they have a duty to the nation. They have to combat
discrimination and racism wherever they are. They have to promote
democratic values, a common national identity and play a meaningful role in
the reconstruction and development of South Africa.

Since the establishment of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth
Commission, South Africa has seen various progressive interventions which
contributed to the realisation of a better life for all. In his 2007 state
of the nation address, the former President of the Republic, Comrade Thabo
Mbeki, set 50 000 as a target for the National Youth Service Programme. As
a government that delivers on its commitments, the ANC-led government
delivered more than the target, as more than 60 000 young people
participate in this programme.

This is a programme that was launched and rolled out to have the excluded
young people of South Africa brought into the social and economic
mainstream and also to inculcate in the youth of South Africa a sense of
volunteerism, patriotism and commitment. In fact, this programme continues
to help young people to develop the skills and abilities required and
necessary to participate in the economy.

Through the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth Commission, the ANC-
led government has helped more than 20 000 young entrepreneurs through the
Business Voucher Programme. In particular, hon Chairperson, this voucher
programme has achieved an increase of more than 11% in 2008 as compared to
2007; more than 12 000 jobs were created through this programme.

Without any doubt, education remains a key priority if we are to change
society for the better; hence the ANC in Polokwane and in its manifesto
reaffirms the importance of education in the transformation agenda.

Since 1994 our institutions of higher learning heeded a clarion call of the
Freedom Charter that, “The doors of learning shall be open for all”.
Currently, we have thousands of learners who have been admitted to these
institutions and many of them graduated and are now working and
contributing to the reconstruction of this country.

Despite this, there are still challenges which have to be addressed when it
comes to tertiary education. We cannot afford to have a system that
marginalises the poor, especially the youth, at this time in our democracy.


It is also important for this House to acknowledge the good work done by
some of the public institutions in providing exposure to the workplace
through learnerships and internships. Many young people are also
participating in a school-to-work programme supported by the Umsobomvu
Youth Programme in which there are about 200 learners trained through the
China Extended Public Works Programme and 100 through the India Artisan
Project. More than 4 000 unemployed graduates have been trained in specific
skills that will help them access employment and some of them have been
placed in jobs already.

These are not just dreams. In this regard, let me quote Mr Malusi Kekane
when he writes:

   We have supported youth from all backgrounds, some of them are owners of
   great South African brands such as Stoned Cherry, Sun Goddess, MosewaMosa
   and K5 Aviation, to mention a few.

In conclusion, let me say that we know that a lot has been done and a lot
has been achieved, more must still be done to reduce and even eradicate
youth unemployment.

Mhlalingaphambili isabelo seR1 billion enikwe Umsobomvu Youth Fund
siyakholwa ukuba iza kuhamba ibanga elide kuphuhliso lolutsha oluza
kuqhubeka phantsi kwentlangano entsha iNational Youth Development Agency.
Kwaye sinethemba elikhulu kurhulumente oza kungena ezintanjeni ka-African
National Congress ukuba uza kuqhubekela phambili ngophuhliso lolutsha,
abuye kananjalo aphose usizo oludingekayo ukuzalisekisa iinjongo zophuhliso
lolutsha. Ndiyabulela. [Applause.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Chairperson, we believe that the allocation of R1 billion given to the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund will go a long way towards youth development under the
new National Youth Development Agency. We also have high hopes that the
incoming ANC-led government will continue with youth development and also
provide the assistance necessary to achieve the objectives of youth
development. Thank you.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Mr Chairman, the appropriation for 2009-10 in general terms
has received a positive reaction from economists and politicians alike. Of
course, there are various items that one can criticise and some which we
would have definitely done differently, but then one must remember that the
Budget is a balancing act.

Each item of expenditure that we would like to increase must lead to a
corresponding lowering of expenditure on other items, for instance, such as
more police officers on the beat against fewer teachers in the classrooms;
that is the choice that you basically have.

We fully concur with the Minister that you cannot solve problems by just
throwing money at them. This is particularly applicable to education and
specifically the Road Accident Fund.

The IFP is very concerned about the R1,6 billion bail-out for SAA, which is
meant to support its turnaround strategy. Questions should be asked as to
whether the South African taxpayers are now subsidising SAA and
particularly the low-cost airline, Mango. When will the bail-outs to SAA
stop and who’s to say that they won’t be back in a year or two asking for
more money? This trend cannot continue.

Last year the Minister sneaked in the fossil energy levy, which in the end
translated into an additional heavy load on the consumers of electricity
and fuel. Now he has done the same with the fuel levy of 42 cents, which,
together with the purported increase of 60 cents in the petrol price next
month, would mean an increase of more than R1 in the price of petrol.

This may have serious effects on the inflation spiral and we all know that
once you increase the price, the inflation goes up and if the price comes
down, the inflation does not come down accordingly.

The hon Minister last year denied that South Africa is gradually working
towards a global or basic income grant (BIG), which the IFP had requested,
but if you look at the children’s grant being extended to 18 and the
lowering of the age requirement for male old-age pensioners, together with
the increase in the EPWP and other social programmes, the tendency of
gradually phasing in something like a BIG is confirmed.

The hon Minister of Finance has delivered a very good Budget and after many
years this year was probably his most difficult task in view of the global
financial meltdown and the effect that it is having on South Africa. With
the substantial drop in income due to lower recovery from corporate taxes
and VAT contributions, together with the demand for greater social
expenditure, he nevertheless achieved a miracle by only increasing the
budget deficit to 3,8%.

Now I want to be nice and pay tribute to this hon Minister, but before you
think I am getting soft, let me assure you that this is not my farewell
speech - hopefully not. But I don’t know when the Minister may decide to
go. I have walked a long road with this hon Minister Manuel, even before
the new dispensation in 1994.

We served together in the Transitional Economic Council with the then
Minister Derek Keys, Dr Zach de Beer and Professor Tshabalala. The
Transitional Economic Council took over the functions of the Departments of
Finance, Trade and Industry and Public Enterprises. How well I remember the
relatively young activist and unionist from the UDF, Trevor Manuel, as the
ministerial representative of the ANC, uncertain and maybe a little bit
unpolished but the fastest learner I have ever come across. That is a real
compliment, Mr Minister. [Applause.]

Remember that after 1994, when as Minister of Trade and Industry he was
promoted to replace Chris Liebenberg as Minister of Finance, the shock to
the financial sector was great. The prospect that this unionist and
possible Communist would take over the reigns of Finance and Treasury
almost backfired and you could see it in the markets; the stock exchange,
the value of the rand, everything collapsed for a little while.

How ironic that today it is exactly the opposite scenario in that the
markets fear the day that Trevor Manuel departs from the South African
financial scene. This is testament to the outstanding job this hon Minister
has done during his time in office. [Applause.] Under his guidance, the
National Treasury and institutions such as Sars have improved drastically
and served the people of South Africa with distinction.

We salute you for that, Minister, and we support the Budget. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mr T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, colleagues and compatriots, proud of our past,
confident of the future, together we can do more. This is the unequivocal,
unwavering and most credible and dependable message of the ANC.

The ANC towers above all others during this critical time as we all go to
the polls to decide on the future of our country because of these
principles and commitments.

Yes, indeed, we inherited a country in deep trouble back in 1994 when the
ANC-led government took over power under the baton of the one and only
uTata Madiba. And like a sinking ship, we steered it back to safety, away
from the turbulent waves and heavy storms of the rough seas.

The ANC pulled the country out of political and economic isolation and
restored it to its rightful place in the galaxy of nations that are
charting the way forward in finding new and innovative solutions to global,
political, social and economic challenges of the day.

In his address on his release from prison on 11 February 1990 entitled, ”We
have waited too long for our freedom”, President Nelson Mandela expressed
his full confidence in the ANC when he said, and I quote:

  I salute the African National Congress, it has fulfilled our every
  expectation in its role as leader of the great march to freedom.

It was heartening to witness the same expression of confidence in the ANC
under its current leadership this past weekend, again by uTata Madiba, as
he affirmed his continued commitment and loyalty to the movement by sharing
a podium with our President, Jacob Zuma. [Applause.]

Yes, the ANC has succeeded in transforming our society to ensure equal
rights and dignity for all, and the right for everyone to have a say
through the ballot on who should govern them and to live where they choose,
to work for a decent wage under decent working conditions, to pursue their
career of choice, to participate in whatever lawful economic activity of
their choice and even to marry whomsoever they fall in love with regardless
of the colour of their skin.

But the ANC did not end there. Inspired by the Freedom Charter, the ANC has
ensured the progressive realisation of the right to full social and
economic inclusion for all by improving access to health care, education,
housing, clean and drinkable water, sanitation, electricity, decent roads
and affordable transport.

For the millions who cannot provide for themselves, a range of social
grants catering for poor and vulnerable children, older persons and persons
with disabilities are being provided, all because the ANC leads, the ANC
cares.

Yes, the Secretary-General of the ANC, Comrade Gwede Mantashe, said we are
learning as we go along. Our policies have not always been met with the
requisite zeal and commitment when it comes to implementation.

Crime and corruption have undermined the pace at which we have been able to
deliver on our promises, and hence we have identified the need to
strengthen our monitoring and evaluation mechanism, including the oversight
role we have to play as parliamentarians.

This point has been especially emphasised by our president, Comrade Jacob
Zuma. Some of these measures have begun to be put in place or have already
been implemented.

Indeed, life has changed or is changing for the better for many amongst our
people. As I stated from the outset, the ANC acknowledges that together, as
the bona fide citizens of this country, we can do more.

Children must go to school and learn. Parents must groom and nurture their
children to become decent and productive citizens. Teachers and managers of
our school system must ensure that our learners receive quality education.

As a caring nation, let’s offer a helping hand by fostering and adopting
abandoned, orphaned, abused and other vulnerable children in need of care
and protection.

We should assist the state in ensuring that no children wander around
during school time instead of being at school and learning. We should
report instances of abuse and must call for help when children are found
indulging in substance abuse or other unlawful social conduct.

Because unless we take it upon ourselves to build and rebuild this country,
there will be nothing left for the very same children to inherit. The ANC-
led government has introduced new comprehensive legislation for the care
and protection of children in the form of the Children’s Act 2005, as
amended.

We introduced new legislation to promote the care and protection of the
elderly, which will be coming into operation soon this year. There is also
legislation to fight substance abuse, namely the Prevention of and
Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill passed by this Parliament in November
last year.

We have improved the quality of service with the provision of the extended
access to social grants. Today we take pride in the fact that our grant
system caters for over 12 million children, older persons and people living
with disability, as compared to the 3 million that received these grants
when we took over government in 1994. We have at the same time
significantly improved the value of the grant.

The means test for accessing the grant has been raised following the
implementation of the new regulations last year, and we have gradually
begun to reduce the age of qualification for the grant for men from 65 down
to 60, to ensure equality between men and women. We are steadily raising
the age limit of the child support grant from the current 14 years to 15
years this year and eventually to 18 years, as envisaged under our
Constitution as the age at which a person ceases to be a child. We do so in
order to honour a commitment the ANC made at its last national conference,
in Polokwane in December 2007.

Perhaps at this juncture I should pause to reflect on the often-mentioned
concern that the grant system creates a dependency syndrome. I wish to
start by urging all of us, when reflecting on this important issue, to
exercise some empathy, consideration and caution; for at some or other
stage of our lives we have all been vulnerable and dependent on someone
else for our very survival, protection and care - right from birth up to a
stage in our lives when we could manage on our own.

Yes, we should keep a watchful eye to avoid perpetuating certain social
practices and tendencies that could promote dependency instead of promoting
a culture of work. As a disability rights movement, for example, we have
always advocated for the right to equal opportunities to ensure that people
living with disabilities access education and training, health care and
other social conditions necessary for them to participate optimally within
society.

We have strived towards ensuring that people living with disabilities
obtain decent work and participate fully in the economic and social life of
society, and that social security should not be used as an excuse for
social exclusion and perpetuating dependency.
The fact of the matter is that if we are truly a caring society, we cannot
look away when those who are less fortunate than ourselves go hungry and
are exposed, without shelter or appropriate clothing to keep them safe and
warm, to the cold nights of winter or the heavy rains of summer whilst we
ourselves are tucked up in warm blankets in front of our huge television
screens, secure in the comfort of our luxurious homes.

The ANC seeks to ensure that eventually all the basic necessities of life
can be afforded or at least accessed by all, and not only by the more
fortunate within our society.

It is for this reason that we, as the ANC, have committed ourselves to
pushing back the frontiers of poverty. We intend to do so to bring
development to the rural and urban poor alike, ensuring that the benefits
of growth in our economy are shared by all and not only some, and that
those who have not benefited from or accessed these new opportunities are
assisted in various ways to gain access whilst their basic needs are met.
Thank you very much. The ANC supports this Budget. [Time expired.]

Mnr K J MINNIE: Agbare Voorsitter, dit is ’n ope geheim dat die staatsdiens
in Suid-Afrika die afgelope 15 jaar onder die ANC se bewind dramaties
agteruitgegaan het.

Weinig staatsdepartemente, Minister, kan vandag getuig dat hul vlak van
dienslewering tans op die standaard is wat van ’n goeie staatsdepartement
verwag word.

Die Minister vir die Staatsdiens en Administrasie en die portefeuljekomitee
se verantwoordelikheid sal in die vierde Parlement se termyn wees om nuwe
vlakke van dienslewering en administrasie te bereik, of hulle gaan die
politieke prys betaal.

Die nuutgestigte Palama met sy nuwe gebou sal moet wys dat die SAMDI van
die verlede begrawe is en dat ons klaar is daarmee.

Die Departement van die Staatsdiens en Administrasie sal moet erken dat sy
vier jaar lange poging om die enkelstaatsdienswetgewing deur die Parlement
te voer die land miljoene rande gekos het, met geen noemenswaardige
vooruitgang nie.

Die DA het die enkelstaatsdienswetgewing in die afgelope vier jaar met hand
en tand beveg en was verheug toe die nuwe Minister uiteindelik die lig
gesien het en dit aan die einde van 2008 van die tafel verwyder het.

Die rol van die Staatsdienskommissie moet versterk word en die DA steun die
onlangse besluit van die Parlement dat die portefeuljekomitees departemente
tot orde sal roep ten opsigte van aanbevelings wat deur die
Staatdienskommissie gedoen is.
Dit is ook baie duidelik en ons weet daarvan - en die Minister moet
dringend daaraan aandag gee - dat Sita besig is om in chaos te verval.

Ek was bevoorreg om vanaf 1980 tot 1993 vir die voormalige administrateur
van Transvaal, dr Willem Cruywagen, asook vir oudpresidente P W Botha en F
W de Klerk te werk. Vanaf 1995 tot 2003 was ek ’n stadsraadslid en vanaf
2004 tot vandag was ek bevoorreg om as ’n lid van die DA onder die bekwame
leiding van Tony Leon en later Helen Zille in hierdie Parlement te dien.

Min van u sal dit weet, maar ’n goue oomblik in my loopbaan was toe ek en
’n kollega vroegoggend op 2 Februarie 1990 die finale toespraak aan
oudpresident F W de Klerk in Westbrooke oor ’n koppie koffie oorhandig het.
Toe ek daardie oggend die president by die deur van die ampswoning afsien,
het ek geweet Suid-Afrika sal nooit weer dieselfde wees nie. Dit is
wonderlik om deel van hierdie nuwe Suid-Afrika te wees.

Ek huldig graag vandag diegene wat ek reeds genoem het vir die invloed wat
hulle op my loopbaan en op my as mens gehad het en nog steeds het. Verder
huldig ek graag die inwoners van my kiesafdeling, Centurion, wat ek vanaf
2005 dien, en bedank ek hulle vir hulle lojaliteit. My dank en waardering
ook aan al die nuwe vriende wat ek in die Parlement gemaak het aan beide
kante, en baie spesiaal, my kollegas in die DA. Aan my vrou, Annaleen, my
kinders en kleinkinders en my moeder op Graskop, “Dankie vir julle
ondersteuning en onderskraging”. Ek groet u en wens u alle voorspoed toe.
Mooi loop! [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr K J MINNIE: Hon Chair, it’s an open secret that the South African
Public Service deteriorated dramatically during the past 15 years under the
ANC government.

Minister, today few government departments can testify that their level of
service delivery is currently at the standard of what is expected from a
well-functioning government department.

During the term of the fourth Parliament, the responsibility of the
Minister for the Public Service and Administration and that of the
portfolio committee will be to achieve new levels of service delivery and
administration, or they will pay the political price.

The newly established Palama, with its new building, will have to show that
the SAMDI of the past has been buried and that we are done with it.

The Department for the Public Service and Administration will have to admit
that its four-year-long effort to pass the single Public Service
legislation through Parliament has cost the country millions of rands
without any progress worth mentioning.
During the past four years the DA fought the single Public Service
legislation tooth and nail, and we were delighted when the new Minister
eventually saw the light and removed it from the table at the end of 2008.

The role of the Public Service Commission must be fortified, and the DA
supports the recent decision by Parliament that the portfolio committees
will call departments to order with regard to the recommendations made by
the Public Service Commission.

It is also apparent and we are well aware of it – and the Minister should
attend to it urgently – that Sita is falling into chaos.

I was privileged to work under the former administrator of Transvaal, Dr
Willem Cruywagen, as well as former presidents P W Botha and F W de Klerk
from 1980 to 1993. From 1995 to 2003 I was a city councillor, and since
2004 I have been privileged to serve as a member of the DA under the
competent leadership of Tony Leon and later Helen Zille in this Parliament.

Few of you will have knowledge of this, but a golden moment in my career
was when a colleague and I handed over the final speech to former president
F W de Klerk over a cup of coffee early on the morning of 2 February 1990
in Westbrooke. That morning, as I bade farewell to the president at the
door of the official residence, I knew that South Africa would never be the
same again. It is wonderful to be part of this new South Africa.

Today I gladly honour those whom I have mentioned already, for the
influence they had - and still have - on my career and on me as a person.
Furthermore, I gladly honour the residents of my constituency, Centurion,
whom I have served since 2005, and I thank them for their loyalty. I also
give thanks and appreciation to all the new friends I made in Parliament,
on both sides, and especially my colleagues in the DA. To my wife,
Annaleen, my children and grandchildren and my mother in Graskop, thank you
for your support and assistance. I take my leave and wish you success. Go
well! [Applause.]]

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chairperson, Ministers, hon members, colleagues, South
Africa has escaped the wrath of the financial crisis, but it is set to
suffer some setback in the real economy as a result. This is precisely so
because we are not trading with ourselves but with the rest of the world.
It is thus inconceivable that we can remain unscathed. To put on a brave
face and tell the public that the damage to the real economy will be
minimal is misleading. The cracks are beginning to show.

The domestic economic outlook since the crisis doesn’t look rosy. The 2009
pre-budget analysis indicated that prior to the economic downturn
expectations in GDP growth were expected to average around 4% per annum
leading up to 2010. The 2008 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement revised
these growth forecasts down to 3% for 2009, 4% for 2010 and 4% for 2011,
while other market analysts were less optimistic, expecting GDP growth to
be as low as 0,7%.

The 2009 Budget Review indicates a 1,2% projection for growth this year,
growing to 4% by 2011 against the backdrop of lower interest rates and
declining debt levels. Some independent analysts have indicated that we may
face a technical recession if the stimulus of developed economies is not as
successful as anticipated.

The Finance Committee was informed during budget hearings that the 1,2%
projected GDP growth was dependent on the Chinese construction industry.
Should the industry slow down, our GDP would slump to below 1%. We still
have to see how close to the truth that is.

The IMF expected world growth to be 3,4% in 2008 and have revised it three
times so far to 0,5% growth. The US, the Eurozone and export-orientated
economies, such as China and India have shown sharp declines. This is
likely to lead to low export demand while commodity prices have declined
sharply. This will have a severe impact on the mining and manufacturing
sectors and is likely to lead to jobs loses domestically.

The deferred implementation of the mineral and petroleum royalty regime
that will see the mining industry saving R1,8 billion in royalties is meant
to minimise retrenchments in the industry. This is a welcomed move as it
shows government’s commitment to bringing about a better life for all.

The National Union of Mineworkers and Federation of Unions of South Africa
have also endorsed this goodwill gesture from government. It is, however,
not clear if such an approach is likely to stimulate the sector as the
taxes were not in place before. Such a tax was likely to put political
pressure on the sector to retain jobs but is unlikely to really stimulate
production.

As a country’s potential for economic growth is greatly influenced by its
endowments of physical resources, namely, land, minerals and other raw
materials and human resources, which is the number of people and most
important, their level of skills, the R1,2 billion allocation for rural
infrastructure and the R20,3 billion for the land reform programme
indicates government’s intention to intervene in the restructuring of the
economy in empowering the rural poor and bringing them into the mainstream
of the economy.

The R787 billion infrastructure spending offers a valuable opportunity to
black entrepreneurs, even during these tough economic times. As we are
pursuing a developmental state route, government has to decisively
intervene to ensure that it is not only the elite and big industries that
benefit. Benefits that should be expected from this investment include
employment creation and poverty reduction.

Public sector borrowing is expected to finance the revenue short-fall in
the light of the global downturn. As part of a stimulus approach, corporate
taxes have remained the same while there has been a postponement of the
R1,8 billion revenue collections from mining royalties, as I said before.

Over the past year corporate tax cuts have been implemented in favour of
attracting foreign investment. More consideration needs to be given to
attaching conditionality to tax cuts because tax cuts seem to have not
resulted in reinvestment or increased savings by the corporate sector.
Instead we have seen companies and directors of companies increasing their
bonuses to the detriment of the workers.

Further, individuals still carry a large proportion of the tax burden. It
would be prudent in the future to have further engagement with the private
sector about the reinvestment of tax cuts in developing our economy.

Countries that are structurally similar to South Africa continue to attract
investment while having high income tax rates. In the Pre-Budget Review we
have indicated that South Africa is ranked lowest amongst the countries
with the lowest tax rates, like the US at 39%, Canada, Tunisia and Brazil
at 34%, India at 33%, and Tanzania at 30%.

The sound signal mechanisms and stability of institutions in these
countries demonstrate that the policy and institutional perceptions of
stability are as important in investment considerations. This suggests that
lowering of corporate taxes is not the only mechanism for attracting
investment.

South Africa is now ranked second in the world in terms of transparency,
openness and oversight over the Budget, placing South African as a good
destination for rational business expectations. We should start to rely
more on this for attracting foreign investment.

The role of the Development Finance Institutes cannot be overemphasised.
Under these bad economic conditions, it is imperative that they review
their funding strategies and/or policies in order to minimise the impact of
the crisis. I have previously pointed out from this podium that there is
statistical evidence that they are not doing what they are supposed to do,
and asked if the people that are leading these institutions have the same
vision as the mandate of the political leadership in government.

Chairperson, as we brace ourselves for an increase in the fuel levy we
should be looking forward to the more active involvement of the Competition
Commission in the fight to alleviate poverty by making sure that the
criminal behaviour of the likes of Sasol, Tiger Brands and other
institutions is stopped at once.

Monopolies and uncompetitive behaviours are only adding to the woes of the
population, particularly the poor. We would like to see price-fixing and
collusion by mills and bakeries stopped so that the extra R50 added to the
old age grant can put more food on the table. Together, we can do more.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, thank you to all the
speakers this afternoon and to all the parties for their support of the
Budget tabled and their support in this First Reading debate. First Reading
debates, in their tradition, are highly political events. The fact that we
are now within the two-month zone of elections, meant the debate this
afternoon was no exception.

But I think it’s also important to recognise that there are certain
features of the contributions made here this afternoon that we must be
aware of. One of them is that this is a particularly emotive period in the
history of this Parliament. The end of the third Parliament is a
particularly emotive period.

A number of members who have been here since 1994 and some of those who
have been here even before then have decided to call it quits. So part of
what we heard in the Budget debate this afternoon is a very emotive sense
of people who will take leave of something that has been all of their lives
for a very long period.

I think we want to recognise that, and we also want to recognise the
contributions of all across the divide of the House. We want to recognise
that and the contributions of all because above all, we are here to serve
our people. I think we must recognise that and pay tribute to Members of
Parliament for their service. [Applause.]

I also think we need to recognise the contributions of the many who stood
up here today to announce their departure and some of those who did so in
the debate on the state of the nation address. I think there is also
something else we together as colleagues in this House must recognise,
namely the fact that a number of us in this House also have an uncertainty
about our future because whilst some are privileged and can choose to
depart, others don’t know.

This is in the character of the political animal in all members, even those
who have not declared their departure and may later wonder why they didn’t
actually have a farewell speech. It is important that we recognise the
contribution of the members. I don’t make this remark light-heartedly.

It is a big, big issue in all our lives. The need for certainty and the
need for continuity in our lives and where we choose to be is a big, big
issue. I want to pay tribute to all the members who worked with us in the
portfolio committee and the Joint Budget Committee and also those with whom
we have interacted as Members of Parliament over the past 15 years.
[Applause.]

The debate this afternoon is less about numbers - a number of colleagues
have referred to that. I think the debate is about the choices we make as a
country in times that are outside of our immediate sphere of influence.
This is what I think we need to understand.

To some extent Dr George prompted this debate to be advanced this
afternoon. As for the key issue before us, I am one of those pessimists who
don’t think that this issue is going to be resolved within the next year or
two. I think we are in for a pretty long haul as we try and get the global
economy through the trough. I think it is going to be a long haul.

I think one of the first questions that confront us is: What do we know and
where do we know it from? These issues are important because we need to
understand the nature of the crisis. We also need a yardstick against which
we can measure decisions taken by government here and also by governments
elsewhere.

The key issue in respect of what we have now - and it is very different
from the Great Depression - is that right now the world is very highly
globalised.
Within this highly globalised world there are huge imbalances. So if indeed
we observe what the remedies are - and I go back to what Dr George offered
- with all due respect, Dr George, I think your remedies appear too close
to those which were offered in the USA between 20 January 2001 and 20
January 2009. This is a period during which you had the complete attrition
of the state, the unfettered control of markets and the excesses that the
world has lived through.

Very important in understanding this period is the testimony of Dr Alan
Greenspan to Congress on 23 October when he said: “There has been a fault
in the approach that I’ve had.” I think it is fundamentally important that
we understand this and understand the turning point because in this period
you now have a situation in the United States.

Forget about Wall Street and the Detroit Three. Consider the fact that
there are 43 million people in that country who don’t have access to health
care because they are uninsured. Consider the millions of people who are
just disgorged, without much protection beyond a short period of
unemployment insurance, because the labour markets are free and
unregulated. Consider the vast differences between schools for the rich and
schools for the poor. This is measured in the outcomes.

As we begin to understand this, then, I think we can go back to the
question: What do we know and where do we know it from? The proposals
advanced by President Obama are already being lobbied against. The
US$500 000 limit on bank executives is being lobbied against so
extensively, as is the proposal that a bonus should not exceed one-third.

But if you go into the detail of the legislation that President Obama
signed two days ago, there are features that are exceedingly worrying
because they are highly protectionist, highly nationalist and take the
country back as though it’s not part of this global entity. We need to
understand that and ask questions about what we know, and deal with this
Budget so that as the debates continue over the next few years, we have
tools with which to measure and gauge the effectiveness of the decisions of
government.

Part of what we know is frequently masked by what we assume. One of the
most abused assumptions is what Adam Smith said about the “hidden hand”. I
think he only used the phrase twice in the Wealth of Nations - if he used
it more times it may be thrice. People sometimes forget that, in fact, his
more important work is the Theory of Moral Sentiments; and the fact is that
you must have ethics, and governments have a role in respect of ethics.

This assumption that Adam Smith is all about markets to the exclusion of
the state therefore has to be fundamentally wrong because it is not
supported by reality.

Similarly, I suppose, there is this assumption that the strong left- wing
view includes a view that one must have very high deficits. This is
certainly not a view espoused by Karl Marx in Das Kapital, because he
argues, and I quote:

  The public debt becomes one of the most powerful levers of primitive
  accumulation. As with the stroke of an enchanter’s wand, it endows barren
  money with the power of breeding and thus turns it into capital, without
  the necessity of exposing itself to the troubles and risks inseparable
  from its employment in industry or even in usury.

To ask, “What do we know and where do we know it from?” becomes very
important as we try and take decisions over this next period. In the same
way Keynes’ work in the Great Depression was fundamentally important.
However, it was important for a time when countries were highly sovereign
and had control over the instruments of the economy from monetary policy to
trade policy. The issues of aggregate demand driven by Keynes clearly had a
place in a large economy that was somewhat isolated from the rest. It
doesn’t yet deal with the problem that obtains here, which is global
imbalances.

The problem we have in the world is in China. China now has savings equal
to 54% of its GDP. The country has foreign exchange reserves of some US$1,8
trillion. It is the world’s workshop - it manufactures everything for the
rest of the world - and the US consumes what China produces and lives off
the savings of China.

This in many ways defines these global imbalances. So when countries take
these highly nationalistic decisions, what doesn’t disappear is the extent
of global imbalances. Unless we put heads together and unless we mandate
government to sit in the G20 and in all the international forums to deal
with this issue, all we have in the endeavour to deal with the crisis is
palliatives. That is the problem between the present and the future. This
is why the question of what we know and what we don’t know becomes so
fundamentally important. These issues, I believe, should continue to
dominate; and hopefully the fourth Parliament in its early term will have a
very intense debate about this because I think it is fundamentally
important.

I would also like to turn to what the hon September said. It is very
important that we recognise certain proposals to deal with vulnerable
workers - low-skilled workers at risk. But in my view it is equally
important that we also have proposals to deal with those who are not yet
vulnerable workers because they remain unemployed. So the issues of school-
to-work transition are important.

It is unfortunate that you categorise these proposals as coming from the DA
because in fact, the hon Sibhidla also focused on school-to-work transition
because that is fundamental. There are too many young people in society who
have left school without the possibility of ever finding work. They sit on
street corners and get up to mischief in our communities.

This is more than an economic problem; it is a social issue that produces
social crime. We must deal with the school-to-work transition, and I think
this moment of crisis presents us with the opportunity to deal with that as
well.

Where is my comrade Eddy Trent? Oh, there he is. Comrade, I think what
makes the truth inconvenient is that there are no easy done-and-dusted
proposals about corruption. This is inconvenient because you so badly need
to show how corrupt we are; it is inconvenient that you can’t find it
because, inconveniently, it is not there!

Let me respond to the hon Pheko – he is not here. Do you represent him, hon
Godi? [Interjections.] No longer? [Laughter.] Let me repeat because he
misses what I’m saying. The government cannot create sustainable employment
except for public servants. Expanded Public Works Programmes are important,
but they are of short-term duration. They are not permanent. We must
continue to engage in this issue. But I think government is going to be a
poor owner of barber shops, corner shops, local bakeries and stuff like
that. We are not going to be very good at that.

A number of colleagues have raised the issue of SAA – I hope my time runs
out! [Laughter.] The hon Bekker says he hopes that SAA will not be back in
a year or two. I don’t understand why they would wait so long. They were in
Parliament yesterday asking for more. [Laughter.] I think there are key
issues that will perhaps be taken up again.

When you have these entities, what is the point at which you might be
considered to be throwing good money after bad; what is the point at which
the absence of an intervention might actually sink something that otherwise
could be brought to sustainability? This is especially the case in a
competitive industry where we need to strengthen the balance sheet. Then we
can say, ”We have now taken off your training wheels; go and sort this
out.”

The problem, of course, is that when Members of Parliament discuss this
they remember the food they had on the plane; the number of times the
planes were late; and the number of times they were kicked off the plane
even though they had boarding passes. [Interjections.] The whisky? That
too! That is in fact not what the restructuring is about.

I think that with Eskom we need to exercise choices. The hon Greyling is
very big on green energy, but green energy costs. Now what would
electricity cost and how would we deal with these issues? These matters are
not going to go away, partly because Eskom has been in this position of
privilege for more than a century when it didn’t need fiscal transfers. Now
it finds itself in a position that it can no longer do that. So what is the
rational approach that government must take, and how does Parliament
intervene in that process?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Hon Minister, would you like me to come
to your rescue? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Let me conclude, Chairperson. I should have saved
this Eskom one!

Let me conclude. I would like to express my sincere appreciation to all
members and to all parties in this House. I have had a remarkable 13 years
as the Minister of Finance. This is not a valedictory because I don’t know
where I will be. [Applause.] But I know that the discussions and the
debates we have in this Parliament are great, and I hope this will
continue.

I hope that as we prepare for transition from where we are to the fourth
Parliament, the fair winds that have obtained here this afternoon, where
parties across the House supported the Budget, will be carried forward in
the First Reading debate, so that the fourth Parliament will have, by
resolution, the continuity of this Budget and the detail of the policy
discussion that must then inform the choices, line by line, that will get
us through the Second Reading debate. But I want to say to all of you,
“Thank you very, very much”. It has been a great innings with wonderful
support. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, may I address you, sir. The other day in this
House, the hon Trevor Manuel, the Minister of Finance, said the following
words, “The DA will only rule in this country when hens grow teeth”.  I
have something of a shock for the hon Mr Manuel today. I have photographic
proof of the fact that hens have already grown teeth ... [Laughter.] ...
and would like to present this to Mr Manuel.

Whether he is leaving Parliament permanently or not, only he would know.
But the important thing is that this would be something that he can hang in
his office to remind him on a daily basis that the DA will indeed be ruling
very much sooner than he thinks. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, may I thank the hon Ellis for his
kindness. [Applause.] I need to ask him if this the result of a facelift or
just the injection of some botulist poison. [Laughter.] Thank you.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): No, hon Minister. I hope it is not a
case of false teeth must hide what false politics doth know. Hon members,
that concludes the debate

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.

                   WESTERN CAPE INHERITED DEBT RELIEF BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a first time.

                   WESTERN CAPE INHERITED DEBT RELIEF BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

          MONEY BILLS AMENDMENT PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS BILL

  (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Portfolio Committee on Finance on
            proposed amendments by National Council of Provinces)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                   FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF PARLIAMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.
                    FILMS AND PUBLICATIONS AMENDMENT BILL

 (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs
    thereon, and President’s reservations on constitutionality of Bill as
                              submitted to him)

There was no debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Hon members, requests for declarations
of vote have been received and I will allow three minutes to one member of
each party wishing to make a declaration.

Declarations of vote:

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, it was never the intention of the portfolio
committee to undermine the freedom of expression or the Constitution.
Having dealt with this Bill as a portfolio committee and after coming back
from the President, we have made a few amendments to clause 29 and sections
4, 3 and 2. We believe that with the amendments that we have made, we will
be able to comply with the constitutional requirements.

On that note, I want to take this opportunity to thank members of the
portfolio committee from the ANC, the DA, IFP and ACDP for the contribution
that they made in trying to address one of the most critical areas. We were
emphasising the point that those who are found to be in possession of
pornographic material must be punished. It was a very general approach that
we took and on that note I think we have managed to resolve those issues.
We therefore believe that when the Bill goes back to the President it will
be in line with the Constitution. Amandla!

HON MEMBERS: Awethu! [It’s ours!]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Viva, ANC, viva!

Phansi nge-IFP, phansi! Phansi nge-DA, phansi! [Down with the IFP, down!
Down with the DA, down!] [Interjections.]

Ms H WEBER: The President’s observations have probably been addressed but
do not go far enough. We remain, as we have been throughout, opposed to the
unconstitutional concept of pre-publication censorship by an administrative
body such as the Film and Publication Board. We therefore continue to
oppose the Bill.

It has always been incomprehensible to the DA that free-speech issues like
film and publications are in the hands of the Home Affairs committee. This
arrangement is inherited from the old apartheid government where the
Ministry of Home Affairs conducted censorship on behalf of the apartheid
state. Now the ANC government has come full circle and is embarking on
censorship as was practised by the old apartheid governments.
We urge the new incoming government to place the Film and Publication Board
in the hands of the new Communications Minister and hence the
Communications committee, where it rightfully belongs.

This is also my final speech, and I will not be politicking, but as I will
be retiring, I would like to thank all my colleagues for the friendship and
support during my parliamentary term. I would also like to thank my family
for their support. It indeed has been very nice and very encouraging and I
trust that this Parliament will in the future become truly democratic.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: The ACDP supports the amendments that have been added to
ensure the constitutionality of the Films and Publications Amendment Bill.
This is the end of a long road in which the ACDP’s proposals to protect the
freedom of the oppressed were accepted some time ago, as were our proposals
to accommodate concerns regarding pornography and, in particular, child
pornography.

We wish to say that we are grateful for the manner in which this issue was
approached and that the concerns regarding constitutionality have now been
addressed. The ACDP will support this Bill. Thank you.


The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

      NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: PROTECTED AREAS AMENDMENT BILL

       (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Portfolio Committee on
    Environmental Affairs and Tourism on proposed amendments by National
                            Council of Provinces)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE THE MAJORITY PARY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST OF MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM
 FOR RATIFICATION BY PARLIAMENT OF EXCLUSIONS FROM COASTAL PUBLIC PROPERTY,
 THE CONFINED PORT AREAS IN TERMS OF SECTION 27(4) OF NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL
             MANAGEMENT: INTEGRATED COASTAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 2008

There was no debate.

Request of Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism for Ratification
by Parliament of Exclusions from Coastal Public Property, the confined Port
Areas approved.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOOPMNET ON
    STUDY TOUR TO BRAZIL ON SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND SOCIAL SERVICES IN BRAZIL

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT’S ANNUAL
      REPORT, FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT 2007/08

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Study Tour to Brazil on Substance Abuse and Social Services in
Brazil accordingly adopted.
Report on the Department of Social Development’s Annual Report, Financial
Statements and Auditor-General’s report 2007/08 accordingly adopted.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, hon members, the
time has come for us to say goodbye to dear friends, fellow comrades and
compatriots. We cried together; we sang together; we laughed; we fought,
but today is a sad moment when we have to say, “Let’s kiss and say
goodbye”.

Let me share with you the words of wisdom that were said to me this morning
by hon Johannes Malahlela, who, by the way, is one of the members we are
bidding farewell to, because this House has recommended that he be given
another responsibility. He said, and I quote:

  I shall pass through this world but once. Anything, therefore, that I do
  or any help that I can offer to any human being, let me do it now. Let me
  not defer or neglect it, for it shall not come this way again.


Let’s all of us take these words and live by them.

On behalf of the ANC, I would like to thank all members of this House for
the good work done this term. I would like to thank the Deputy President,
who is our Leader of Government Business, for her guidance and leadership.

I’d also like to thank the following people: the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker for their good leadership; the leaders of the opposition parties
represented in this House for their co-operation; the Table staff and the
Secretary to the NA for the excellent work done in this House; the
chairpersons of committees for the good work done in this term; members of
the executive for their co-operation; chairpersons and Whips, members of
the Chief Whips’ Forum and all members for the good work. You really went
beyond the call of duty to assist in the smooth running of this House.

I thank all service officers and all staff, Members of Parliament and the
staff from parties for their assistance. We’d like to thank members of the
media for covering our proceedings and debates. We do not always agree with
them, but we thank them for their work.

We have come to the end of this historic, democratic Parliament, which has
been an exciting place in many respects. It has been exciting because
despite our different views on how we should handle certain issues or how
to respond to certain developments, we have always remained loyal to the
Rules we have set up to govern our conduct in Parliament. More importantly,
we have remained loyal to the Constitution of the Republic, the supreme law
of the country. To us, as the ANC, this is very important.

In the midst of heated exchanges, we have always found time to share jokes,
enjoy lighter moments and laugh - especially hon Mike Ellis and hon Koos
van der Merwe – amongst ourselves as Members of Parliament; as
representatives of our people.

Over the past five years of the life of this Parliament we have worked well
in various areas of deployment, be it at portfolio committee meetings,
Chief Whips’ Forum meetings or various other committees that were set up
according to the niche.
Working well does not necessarily mean that there were no differences; it
means that we have come to understand that we will always differ and we
will always need to persuade and convince each other of the correctness of
our positions. However, there was one committee where all hon members sang
from the same song sheet, namely, the task team on the Moseneke commission.
[Laughter.]

Every member of that committee from every political party always agreed. I
so wish that every committee in Parliament could function the way this task
team did. There would be no need for late sittings!

Chairperson, I stand before you with a firm conviction that all of us
seated here remain committed to one goal: to achieve a better life for all
our people. In this Parliament we have embraced the unity of all South
Africans, irrespective of their race, culture or religion. It is this unity
that is a source of our strength.

Since 1994, our democratic elections have been about the aspirations and
the collective desire for a better South Africa and a better life for all.
It has been a journey to bring to an end the legacy of apartheid and to
build a united, nonracial, nonsexist democratic and prosperous South
Africa.

Much work still needs to be done to deepen our democracy and to deal with
the scourge of poverty that afflicts our people. The coming Parliament will
need to continue the work done by this Parliament and focus on the
following: Continued democratisation of our society based on equality,
nonracialism and nonsexism; national unity in diversity, which is a source
of our strength; building on the achievements and experiences since 1994;
an equitable, sustainable and inclusive growth path that brings decent work
and sustainable livelihoods; education, health, safe and secure communities
and rural development; targeted programmes for youth, women and workers,
the rural masses and people living with disabilities; and working towards a
better Africa and a better world.

We have entered our second decade of freedom, with the strengthening of
democracy and the acceleration of the programme to improve the quality of
life for all our people. This has been done through the processing of
legislation, amongst other things.

In the past five years we have passed more than 230 pieces of legislation.
This number might be seen as a drop in the ocean compared with the first
and second democratic Parliaments. However, we must not forget that the
third democratic Parliament focused more on oversight and the effect of the
legislation that we have passed for our people.

The outgoing Parliament, as I have indicated, shifted its focus from
passing legislation to issues of transformation of the institution itself,
oversight and public participation, in line with the vision of Parliament
to build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs
of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better quality
of life for all the people of South Africa.

These achievements and many more were possible because all South Africans
worked together to overcome the challenges facing our country. Together, we
pressed forward to our shared vision of a united, nonracial, nonsexist
democratic and prosperous South Africa.

It is our collective task to continue with the work started by this
Parliament. We need to strengthen the oversight capacity of Parliament.
The third democratic Parliament has seen its stature grow internationally
through its active involvement in international activities and in
partnership with other parliaments. More and more parliaments throughout
the world are joining hands in an effort to create a just world for
humanity.

In Africa we are part of the SADC Parliamentary Forum, which consists of
representatives of all parliaments in the region. This body, amongst other
things, is involved in observing elections in countries of the region.

On the continental front, we are part of and hosting the Pan-African
Parliament, which is involved in continental discussions that range from
peace and security to human rights.

Let me take this opportunity to extend our heartfelt gratitude to the hon
members who will not be returning to the fourth democratic Parliament and
those who will be assuming new assignments in various areas of our
government and civil society.

We want to thank them for their loyal and sincere dedication to this
institution. We wish them well in their new assignments.

We also extend our sincere appreciation to those hon members who are
retiring from public life, and again we wish them well in their endeavours.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, Mr Van der Merwe, you are quite right I wasn’t
called. But I am so eager to make my speech that I cannot wait any longer.

It is, in fact, just over three months ago that we said farewell to each
other at the end of the 2008 parliamentary year. However, this farewell
today is certainly far more important and far more significant. Last year
we were saying goodbye to each other, knowing that we would all be back
again in January. On this occasion we are saying a permanent goodbye to
many of our colleagues who have been with us for many years.

A number of members have chosen the end of this Parliament to retire and
others have their party hierarchies and the voters deciding for them that
it is time for them to move on. This is, of course, the point made earlier
by the hon Minister of Finance. [Interjections.]
No, Mr Jeffery, I am afraid I will be back, sir.

It reminds me of the old adage that voters like to trot out at this time of
a parliamentarian’s life, “Make your MP work, don’t re-elect him.”

When those of us who are coming back do return after the election,
Parliament will have many new faces. There will be, I am sure, far fewer
parties than we have today. But in so saying, we also know that there will
be one very important new addition. We wonder how the ANC will be able to
cope with this! But time will tell. [Laughter.] Undoubtedly, the ANC ranks
will be much reduced, and the opposition benches will be very much fuller.
This will all be very exciting.

But this is for the future. Today we are saying farewell at the end of five
years of working together. It has been five tumultuous years, both in and
out of Parliament, especially for the ruling party. But quite frankly, this
is not a time for point-scoring. So, let me concentrate on the task at
hand.

The fact of the matter is that most of us have friends in this House across
party lines. Most of us are, individually, pretty decent people who care
about others regardless of the party they belong to. [Interjections.] You
can tell the people who have been out of this House for some time this
afternoon. I wonder where they have been. [Laughter.]

It is usually only collectively that we fight. This is, of course, the true
nature of politics. Let me say that I can see some good in nearly all ANC
members, even in people like the hon Dennis Bloem, Danny Oliphant and
others at the back there. But at midnight on 21 April 2009, many people who
are presently members of this very exclusive club, known as Parliament,
will be leaving this club and will lose those two letters behind their
names.

They will do so to start new careers or to enter retirement. It is
important that we wish all these people every success regardless of which
party they belong to and that we do this very sincerely.

Obviously, within the DA ranks we are saying farewell to a number of our
colleagues, including the whole front bench. I want to take this
opportunity to wish our retiring members well. I do hope that this House
will not mind if I single out two individuals.

The first one is the hon Joe Seremane, with whom I have worked closely for
more than 12 years now. He has taught me a great deal in terms of personal
relationships, etc. But the truth is that Joe Seremane got married recently
to a wonderful woman. [Applause.] I am sure he now has many more better
things to do than simply warm the benches here in Parliament. He is a good
man in every sense of the word, and I shall miss him.

I also want to pay a very special tribute to my friend, one-time leader and
colleague, Tony Leon, who has been a massive inspiration to me since 1989
and especially since 1994. We have walked a long path together, hon Mr Leon
- a very exciting one. It has been a great period in my life and in our
party’s life.

Thank you very much indeed. But I have no doubt that South Africans from
across the whole range will hear a great deal more about the hon Mr Tony
Leon over the decade to come. I want to say to him that he has played a
major role in this country’s political history. Certainly, sir, you can be
proud of what you have achieved. [Applause.]

As this third democratic Parliament comes to an end, let me pay tribute to
the Table staff in the NA. They have given this House an excellent service
over the past five years, first under the leadership of Kasper Hahndiek,
and for the past few years under Kamal Mansura. The DA certainly
appreciates your help and professionalism over the years and at all times.

Let me also pay tribute to other officials in Parliament, including sound
and vision, protocol, IT, finance and various other departments. You have
all played an important role in the lives of MPs, and we appreciate what
you do. [Interjections.] Certainly catering! Thank you very much indeed, Mr
Singh. [Interjections.]

Well, how can we forget the bar service. You are quite right. Thank you
very much indeed. To all the bars and the people who work in the bars, a
very special thanks - especially on behalf of those people at the back
there! [Laughter.]

To you, Madam Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the House Chairs, past and
present, the DA has been a very well-behaved model party in terms of
decorum. I am sure you appreciate our general behaviour, Madam Speaker -
the fact that we called for very few Divisions, made very few interjections
and took hardly any points of order. [Laughter.]

I’m sure you both appreciate this very much. But we do thank you sincerely
on behalf of this institution for all you both do for this House and for
Parliament in general. We don’t always agree with what you do and what you
say. But certainly that helps to make this institution much more exciting
and to make it what it is.

To the Whips in the DA and to the Whips of all parties, we certainly
enjoyed our interactions. I believe that our work in the Chief Whips’ Forum
has always been in the best interests of Parliament.

To everyone, farewell! Some of us, Mr Jeffery, will meet again after 22
April 2009. But the DA certainly does wish every member of this third
democratic Parliament all the best for whatever their future holds. Thank
you very much indeed. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, the previous speakers have expressed
words of appreciation and thanks to the staff and all the other people, and
we associate ourselves with that.

We have these farewell speeches at the end of every year. But I don’t think
they should be farewell speeches every year; they must be goodbye speeches
because we normally come back. This time, of course, it’s a special
occasion. We now say farewell to a number of people because it is the end
of this Parliament.

To those who are leaving I would like to say to you that no matter which
party you represented, you served as an honourable member. You all did your
best and served your country with loyalty and dedication. May you continue
to be of service in retirement. You have acquired many outstanding skills
during your stay in Parliament. You should use those skills when serving
your communities.

We are now preparing for elections. In this regard, the eyes of the world,
especially Africa, will be upon us to see how we are going to conduct
ourselves in the forthcoming elections. We had three elections so far – in
1994, 1999 and 2004. What have we learned? I say we learned much about
democracy and tolerance. We learned to respect the will of the people. We
learned to behave ourselves properly in conducting elections. There are, of
course, exceptions which one can expect, so let us therefore not treat the
Julius Malemas as the norm but as the exception. South Africa has become a
democratic model for other African states. Let us keep it that way in this
election.

At the end of an era, we as colleagues must try for a moment to also
reflect on our successes - and there were many during the five years.
Together we have finally proved that our Parliament functions in accordance
with international parliamentary standards. We have a Parliament to be
proud of. Our presiding officers are executing their duties with great
objectivity and dignity.

If you would permit me, I wish to add that the IFP is very proud of the
exemplary and dignified manner in which our member, Mr Ben Skosana, is
fulfilling his duties. Jy doen goed, Ben! [You are doing well, Ben!]
[Applause.]

During the five years there were failures too. But today is not the time to
dwell on those. It is safe to briefly say that we in the opposition are
very unhappy about a few matters such as the recall of Mr Mbeki, the death
of the Scorpions, the dismissal of Adv Pikoli and others. But now is the
time to say farewell to some and goodbye to others. We in the IFP greet
you.

Mr Chauke said “IFP, phansi!” [down with the IFP!] I do not know where he
sits. [Interjections.] He has left. I want to say to him that we have a
very special message for him and his colleagues in the ANC. We in the IFP
will see you on 22 April, and we are going to beat the living daylights out
of you. We are going to teach you a lot of lessons. So, we say to you in
the ANC: “Ayihlale phansi ibamb’umthetho! Ayihlale phansi ibamb’umthetho!
Sengihleli! Sengihleli!” [Sit down, pay attention and obey the command! I
am sitting! I am sitting!]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker and hon members, we have reached the end of
another session and perhaps this is the last time that this House meets
prior to the end of this term. Looking back upon the past five years, we
have engaged in important work and achieved a number of milestones. For
such achievements that we have attained, we must pay tribute to the
parliamentary and party staff members who played a pivotal role, behind the
scenes, to ensure that we performed our constitutional duties.

We have had the best of times and the worst of times in this august House.
It is worse still, now that we have to bid each other farewell, some of us
for good. In bidding members of this House farewell, I wish all members all
the best in their campaigning for the next Parliament. This is the fourth
election series. Political parties, therefore, must have matured by now.
Nonetheless, it is still necessary to advocate strongly for political
tolerance and, better still, political acceptance for and amongst all
parties.

Those who will not be coming back for one reason or the other, we wish them
the best of luck and Godspeed in their future endeavours. I would like to
believe the old adage, “Parting is such sweet sorrow.” In the process, we
have become friends, and it is not nice to part ways with friends, but it
is at times necessary. Farewell to you, one and all. I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, today, at the end of a lengthy and eventful
five-year term, we bid each other goodbye and in certain cases, farewell.
We, from the ACDP, would like to share the sentiments of other speakers in
thanking you, Madam Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, House Chairpersons, Mr
Mansura and all the support, security and other staff.

Madam Speaker, a particular word of thanks to you for the gracious manner
in which you have always treated us MPs. Thank you also for the wonderful
dinner and gifts last night; it is highly appreciated. [Applause.]

Two of my favourite places are the bar, that is the coffee bar, and the
library. We often forget about the library staff and their prompt and
effective response to our queries. That is much appreciated. And I have
returned my books!

Let us not forget the finance staff for ensuring that we are paid in time,
sometimes with unexpected deductions as was the case last week. But we are
a forgiving lot of MPs, aren’t we?

The media has played a huge role in keeping the public informed about
current events in Parliament. We need to thank them for their reporting on
our work. I’m sure that the Deputy Minister of Finance, who was here, would
join me in particularly thanking the SABC TV for replacing the chairs in
their parliamentary studio.
As has been indicated, many members will be retiring from active public
life, and it has been a pleasure and honour to work with you all. To those
I’ve worked closely with in various committees, I’ve grown very fond of you
and will sincerely miss you. I trust that those who wish to return will be
back in Parliament, as I will be too.

I’ve also had the privilege of studying economics with a number of members.
Thank you for your encouragement and your support. We have come a long way
together, and let’s make sure that we complete our B Com honours. Remember
our motto: Pass one; pass all! [Laughter.]
To the governing party, thank you for treating us smaller and growing
parties with respect, and allowing us the space to fulfil our role in
Parliament. To the main opposition party, thanks for the many words of
encouragement, both before and after we have spoken at this podium; it has
meant a lot to me in particular.

As we go out to campaign, let us set the example, as true leaders, of
tolerance and the maintenance of peace. Remember that whilst we can and may
differ from one another politically, let us play the ball and not the man.
Remember that we are called to love one another.

To conclude, we, from the ACDP, wish you well. I would like to bless you
with the following:

  May the Lord bless you and keep you; may the Lord make His face to shine
  upon you and be gracious to you; and may the Lord lift up His countenance
  upon you and give you peace.

I thank you. Phambili ACDP, phambili! [Forward, ACDP, forward!]
[Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mev die Speaker, ons het gekom aan die einde van die leeftyd
van die derde Parlement. Die vierde Parlement, wanneer ons terugkom, gaan
anders wees as die derde Parlement, onder andere, omdat ons nie meer
oorloopwetgewing sal hê wat dit moontlik sal maak wat ons in die derde
Parlement gehad het nie. Die verskynsel wat ons tans het met omtrent 15
partye in die Parlement moet u aanvaar gaan anders wees na die verkiesing.
Ons gaan met minder partye terugkom en dit gaan so bly. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, we have come to the end of the lifespan of
the third Parliament. Upon our return, the fourth Parliament will be
different to that of the third Parliament because, amongst others, we shall
no longer have legislation which had made floor crossing possible in the
third Parliament. You will have to accept the fact that the present
phenomenon of having about 15 parties in Parliament will be different after
the election. We will return with fewer parties and it will remain that
way.]

We also have a unique country in the sense that most likely, after the
election, we will be electing our fourth President, unlike our neighbour
Zimbabwe, who couldn’t find the need for another President.

I would also like to extend a word of thanks to my colleagues in the third
force. The third force has been playing a very important role in
Parliament. For those who do not know who we are talking about, that is the
number of members of Parliament, 37 of them, who are supposed to be members
of the so-called smaller parties, who operate as a group together from time
to time when things need to be done. And I would like to say thank you to
them as they are doing their job.

We are now going into an interesting phase in our election period, where
many of us have, so-called, run for nomination. Those of us who are
successful will now stand for Parliament and those who will be elected will
become sitting members, if everything goes according to plan.

Ek wil aansluit by my kollegas wat reeds ’n woord van dank uitgespreek het
teenoor die verskillende afdelings van die Parlement. Ons onderskryf dit.
Ek dink een afdeling wat nog nie genoem is nie, is die sekuriteit- en
veiligheidsdienste wat ons almal hier veilig hou en kyk dat die Parlement
in orde is en dat dinge reggaan – ’n woord van dank aan hulle.
’n Woord van dank aan die media en die pers – waarsonder Suid-Afrika nie
sal kennis neem van wat in die Parlement gebeur of wat tersake is hier nie
– ons waardeer dit. Laastens, ’n woord van dank aan elke kollega wat die
afgelope vyf jaar die pad saam met ons geloop het. Aan dié wat aftree,
sterkte op die pad vorentoe. Aan dié wat terugkom, die VF Plus sal terug
wees en ons sal saam met julle die pad vir Suid-Afrika verder loop. Ek sê
baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to join my colleagues who have already extended a word of
thanks to the different divisions of Parliament. We endorse it. However, I
think the one division that has not been mentioned, is that of the security
and safety services who ensure the safety of all of us here and see to it
that Parliament is secure and that everything is in order – a word of
thanks to them.

A word of thanks to the media and the press - without which South Africa
would not be aware of what is taking place in Parliament or what is
relevant here – we appreciate it. Finally, we wish to extend a word of
thanks to every colleague who has walked the road with us for the past five
years. To those who are retiring, we wish you well on the road ahead. To
those who are returning, we wish to say that the FF Plus will be back and
together we shall walk the road for South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Speaker and colleagues, so we come to the end of
another small chapter in our political history, the end of the third
Parliament. For its part, Nadeco reflects back on the past three and a half
interesting years in which it has established itself as a functioning party
and as a participant in the activities of this National Assembly, to the
extent that our modest numbers allowed.

Nadeco, like all other opposition parties, intends entering the fourth
Parliament with greater numbers and to build on its immediate past
experience. [Interjections.] There is something in that equation, with all
opposition parties intending to come back with an enlarged size. Somebody
is going to have to pay for it, and I suspect that it might be the party on
my right.

For now, however, Nadeco looks back with gratitude for our involvement in
this third Parliament, an involvement which has included many warm
friendships and much co-operation across the party spectrum. It indeed
included the much-appreciated support from the Secretary to Parliament and
the various administrative departments. We thank you all.

For myself, after 15 years, I will be turning my attentions to another
career through which I hope to make a significant contribution to
government and its effectiveness. But, as enthusiastic as I am about this
venture, I do experience more than a measure of sadness in saying farewell
to this Parliament and to all of you.

Let me end by saying that Nadeco wishes all of those who do not return
after the elections every success in their new lives. To those who do
return, Nadeco looks forward to working with you towards advancing our
democracy and our service to the country and all its people. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, this has indeed been a progressive and
memorable five years in which we have had so much success. Despite our
differences, we have been able to take South Africa forward. We need to
remind our people of this success and intensify their confidence in the
government, which had their best interests at heart and has delivered on
that.

I’m praying that the election will be a peaceful and dignified process, and
that people will be free to make their choice without being manipulated and
taunted because of it.

I’m hoping that the faces I have seen over the past years in this House and
in government will offer guidance to the people, so that this election may
be peaceful.

I take this opportunity to thank the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and chairs
of the NA and NCOP. I extend my gratitude to all committees, their chairs
and administrators, and to all the people - staff, support staff and
service providers - in Parliament. We thank and applaud you for making our
task more endurable and possible. I cannot complete these thanks without
honouring the NA table and its impeccable administrators, under the
Secretary to Parliament and the Secretary to the NA. Thank you to all
secretaries and officials.

I’m hoping that in the new term of Parliament, this House will be strong
and more vibrant and committed to delivery. I know that there are a number
of members retiring, and I take this opportunity to thank them and wish
them the very best in their retirement.
Madam Speaker, may I at this point let the House know that I have made a
proposal to my leader, Mr A Rajbansi, that I would like to retire at the
end of this term to allow a younger person to take my seat. [Applause.]
This still has to be confirmed. I do not know what the leader will decide.
So, this may be my last speech in this House. I need to thank you all for
your attention and applause each time I came to this podium. But I feel
that I will be failing in my duty if I do not say thank you to all my
friends and colleagues in this august House.

Madam Speaker, may I firstly thank the former Speaker, Deputy Speaker - who
is now the Speaker of the House - the present Deputy Speaker and all the
chairs of the political parties for the love and respect bestowed on me.
All of you have treated me with the highest dignity, for which I am
extremely grateful. You respected me as a colleague, a friend, a sister and
most of all, you respected me as a mother.

I leave you all with love and blessings. If I retire, I’ll be an overseer
for the MF, so you will sometimes find me sitting in the gallery to say
hello to all of you. Remember, I love you all very much.

A very special thank you goes to my leader, Mr A Rajbansi, for standing
beside me all the way. It also goes to my two staff members, Tasleema
Allie, my researcher, and Moenieba Cupido, my secretary. I thank you. May
the Lord bless you! My life with you has been based on a good experience,
and I will leave with great memories. Finally, once again, I love you.
[Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, I do intend also to speak on behalf of my
comrade and leader, Comrade Pheko, who is not here. I also, on behalf of
the APC, join my colleagues who have come before me to express their
gratitude and appreciation for the manner in which we have interacted,
firstly as colleagues and, secondly, with the administration here, in
reference to Parliament and the presiding officers.

The five years for me have been an occasion of excitement, growth and
learning. It is only when one is in Parliament that one can appreciate the
amount of hard work that MPs have to put up with, and not the perception of
people that MPs have nothing to do and are earning fat salaries.

I think it would be amiss for me personally not to express my sincerest
gratitude to the ANC for having afforded me the opportunity to chair one of
the most important committees in Parliament. It has afforded me an
opportunity for growth and to have perspective on issues that I might
otherwise not have had, had I been an ordinary member.

In the same breath, I want to thank my colleagues in the committee, from
all parties. We have been able to work as a unit. I think we also were a
committee, Comrade Deputy Chief Whip, where you would not be able to tell
whether one was from the ANC or from the UDM, or from any other party. I
wish to thank them very much, including the staff of the committee, which
has some of the hardest working people around.

I wish well those who are retiring; and those of us who are coming back, we
will meet again after two months. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers and members, we have come to
the end of our parliamentary term of office. As we are all busy with
election campaigns, the time ahead will not be one of rest, but of work;
work to bring about a new Parliament with fresh faces and fresh ideas.
We have all worked hard over the past five years to make Parliament a place
in which robust democracy thrives. We have also responded as best we can to
representing our people with integrity and honest labour. We now go back to
our people to ask them for their votes.

The FD, a member of the CDA, Christian Democratic Alliance, wishes all our
colleagues in this House every success in the efforts to win votes and
return to this august Place to continue in building a winning society. We
have made good friends over the past years; we have worked well with one
another; we have also fought hard on matters where we differed; but we also
did so in the spirit of democracy and in respect of our institutions of
government.

We leave here today to go our separate ways. We pray for the peace of God
over all of us as we work to bring about a society that will benefit all of
our people. We express a special word of thanks to you, Madam Speaker and
Madam Deputy Speaker, for a wonderful farewell dinner as well as the photo
of the last Joint Sitting of the third Parliament.

A special word of thanks also goes to all the committee chairs, the Chief
Whips and all staff members of Parliament, for their contribution to making
the third Parliament a great success. A special word of thanks goes to
Rhoda Southgate and Kevin Thompson, our researchers, for work well done.

We do not know what the future holds, but we know who holds the future. May
God go with you throughout these elections; God bless you. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, this is one occasion on which it is very
difficult to say farewell or goodbye, whatever we want to call it, because
we have been a family. Someone said to me that it is like a play: People
who can write would say that the world is a stage and that men and women
are players or actors. There are times for entering and times for exiting;
this is the time to exit the third Parliament.

What we need to do is to look back and ask ourselves questions: Did we do
... Let me take a sip. [Applause.] [Interjections.] I’m not going to sing a
song, hon member, thank you. However, there are people you will always
remember and there are those people you wish you could not remember any
more, and that is life. In this House we had a mix of all that. We had
those people whom you always wanted to give you a shoulder to cry on, and
this cuts across the parties.

If you remember, Nelson Mandela would say that there are good and bad
people everywhere. There are people who touched my heart, such as the hon
Sandra Botha. I had breakfast with her two days ago. If you see tears, they
are tears of joy because we have done a very good job. We have made our
people proud. There were times when things were very difficult, but
nonetheless, umsebenzi ngumsebenzi [a job is a job.] [Applause.]

I am strengthened, as I stand here looking very weak, by some of the people
who are no longer with us - people with whom we started this third
Parliament. I think of the hon Haasbroek. If I could have a tissue, please.
I usually get it from the DA. [Applause.] [Interjections.] Not necessarily!
The tears might be from my own weakness. The hon Diko; the hon Kati; the
hon Mabuyakhulu; the hon Sigcau; the hon Vezi; the hon Zulu; the hon
Ziphora Nawa, whose son is here with us; the hon Gomomo; the hon Kondlo;
the hon Cassim Saloojee and hon Johannes Schippers.

I was going through their speeches, just to ask myself, if they had had an
opportunity to address me now, what would have said? They would they have
said, “Yours was a good race, go home and take some strength and then come
back to the podium.”

There are a number of people whom I would like to thank. I have a very long
speech which I am not going to read, because I think what I have said
summarised how I feel about all of you. [Applause.] Hon Oliphant, when I
say I am going to shorten my speech, it does not mean that you should go to
the coffee bar! [Laughter.] I was told that you were a regular there.
[Laughter.] The Secretary is here and we need to start looking at the
budget for the coffee. We should maybe make sure that members do not spend
so much time there.
But I really need to say that I would like to thank Madam Deputy Speaker;
the House Chairpersons; all the Whips and Chairpersons of Committees; the
Secretary to Parliament, Mr Dingani, and his Deputy, Mr Coetzee; the ever-
hardworking Mr Mansura, who is always available to help; and all the
members of the Table staff. I have mentioned Ms Sandra Botha because when I
worked with her, I discovered that I was working with a leader. To all the
members who would not be returning, I would like to wish you success in
your new lives.

I am not going to sound as if I won’t be coming back, because I think I
will be. [Applause.] When we meet in May I will be addressing you again.
Maybe at that time I will have the courage to complete my speech, which I
won’t be completing today.

Hon members, I would really like to thank you. We did a lot together and
have put our Parliament where it should be. At times, we did so under
difficult conditions and have made our country proud. We made sure that the
South African flag flew higher and higher. At this stage, let me thank you.
[Applause.]

The House adjourned at 18:58.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8F – 2007] – Act No 52 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 18 February 2009).
      2) National Road Traffic Amendment Bill [B 39B – 2008] – Act No 64 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 15 February 2009).

      3) Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 42D – 2008] – Act No 65 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 16 February 2009).

      4) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48B – 2008] – Act No 66 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 15 February 2009).

      5) National Qualifications Framework Bill [B 33D – 2008] – Act No 67
         of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 15 February 2009).

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 19 February 2009:


             a) Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill [B
                75D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             b) National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment
                Bill [B 67B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).

             c) Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 27F – 2006]
                (National Assembly – sec 75).


             d) Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B 74B – 2008]
                (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


National Assembly

The Speaker

Referral to Committees of papers tabled

1.    The Appropriation Bill [B 5-2009] is referred to the following
    portfolio committees for consideration and report on the relevant parts
    of the Schedule in terms of their mandate:

      a) Agriculture and Land Affairs;
      b) Arts and Culture;
      c) Communications;
      d) Correctional Services;
      e) Defence;
      f) Education;
      g) Environmental Affairs and Tourism;
      h) Foreign Affairs;
      i) Health;
      j) Home Affairs;
      k) Housing;
      l) Justice and Constitutional Development;
      m) Labour;
      n) Minerals and Energy;
      o) Provincial and Local Government;
      p) Public Enterprises;
      q) Public Service and Administration;
      r) Public Works;
      s) Safety and Security;
      t) Science and Technology;
      u) Social Development;
      v) Sport and Recreation;
      w) Trade and Industry;
      x) Transport; and
      y) Water Affairs and Forestry.

2.    The Appropriation Bill [B 5-2009] is referred to the following joint
    monitoring committees for consideration in terms of their mandate:

    (a)    Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Women; and


    (b)    Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons.

3.    The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on
    Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women and the Joint
    Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of
    Children, Youth and Disabled Persons for consideration of the relevant
    programmes of the Memorandum:
    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Main Estimates, 2009-
         2010.

4.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Foreign
    Affairs for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates,
        2009-2010.

5.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
    Affairs for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2009-
        2010.

6.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
    Works for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2009-
        2010.
7.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Communications for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Government Communications and
         Information System", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


    (b)    Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Communications", Main Estimates,
        2009-2010.

8.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Finance for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Main Estimates,
        2009-2010;

    (b)    Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
        Estimates, 2009-2010.

9.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Public Service and Administration for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service and Administration",
         Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


    (b)    Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service Commission", Main
         Estimates, 2009-2010;



    (c)    Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Administration Leadership and
         Management Academy", Main Estimates, 2009-2010.
10.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts
    and Culture for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Arts and Culture", Main Estimates,
         2009-2010.

11.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Education for consideration and report:


    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Education", Main Estimates, 2009-
         2010.



12.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health
    for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2009-2010.


13.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour
    for consideration and report.

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2009-2010.

14.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Social
    Development for consideration and report:


    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Social Development", Main Estimates,
         2009-2010.
15.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport
    and Recreation for consideration and report:


    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Sport and Recreation South Africa",
         Main Estimates, 2009-2010.

16.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Correctional Services for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Correctional Services", Main
         Estimates, 2009-2010.

17.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence
    for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2009-2010.




18.   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Safety and Security for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Independent Complaints Directorate",
         Main Estimates, 2009-2010;



    (b)    Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Safety and Security”, Main
         Estimates, 2009-2010.

19.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
    and Constitutional Development for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Justice and Constitutional
         Development", Main Estimates, 2009-2010.

20.   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates, 2009-
         2010;

    (b)    Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates, 2009-
         2010.

21.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Environmental Affairs and Tourism",
         Main Estimates, 2009-2010.

22.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing
    for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2009-2010.



23.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Minerals and Energy for consideration and report:
    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Minerals and Energy", Main
         Estimates, 2009-2010.

24.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Provincial and Local Government",
         Main Estimates, 2009-2010.

25.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
    Enterprises for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Enterprises", Main Estimates,
         2009-2010;

26.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Science
    and Technology for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology", Main
         Estimates, 2009-2010;

27.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
    and Industry for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main Estimates,
         2009-2010.

28.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Transport for consideration and report:
    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Main Estimates, 2009-
         2010.

29.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Water
    Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry", Main
         Estimates, 2009-2010.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Government Notice No R. 832 published in Government Gazette No
        31302 dated 8 August 2008: Withdrawal of the Compulsory
        Specification for Articles Marked E.P.N.S. in terms of the
        Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

     b) Government Notice No 939 published in Government Gazette No 31389
        dated 5 September 2008: Standards matters in terms of the Standards
        Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 1298 published in Government Gazette No
        31658 dated 5 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Category M1, in terms of the
        Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    (d)     Government Notice No R. 1299 published in Government Gazette No
        31658 dated 5 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Category N1, in terms of the
        Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    (e)     Government Notice No R. 1392 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories 03/04, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).


    (f)     Government Notice No R. 1393 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories M2/3, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).


    (g)     Government Notice No R. 1394 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories N2/3, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).


    (h)     Government Notice No R. 1395 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories 01/02, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).


    (i)     Government Notice No R. 1396 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed introduction of a compulsory
        specification for Single-Capped Fluorescent Lamps, in terms of the
        National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 1993 (Act No
        29 of 1993).


    (j)     Proclamation No 33 published in Government Gazette No 31391
        dated 1 September 2008: Commencement of Standards Act, 2008 (Act No
        8 of 2008).


    (k)     Proclamation No 34 published in Government Gazette No 31391
        dated 1 September 2008: Commencement of the National Regulator for
        Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Financial
    Management of Parliament Bill [B74B-2008](National Assembly- sec
    76(1)), dated 19 February 2009.

      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the Financial
      Management of Parliament Bill [B 74B - 2008] (National Assembly – sec
      76(1)), amended by the National Council of Provinces (Announcements,
      Tablings and Committee Reports, 18 February 2009, p 429), referred to
      the Committee, reports that it has agreed to the Bill [B 74B - 2008].

      Report to be considered.

