---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 October 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-10-14
---

WEDNESDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish to acknowledge the presence of
members of the Sudanese parliament in the gallery. They are here on a study
visit. Hon members, welcome to our Parliament. Shukran. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                             PEACE AND SECURITY
                                  Cluster 1

MINISTERS:

    Steps taken to implement tighter protocols regarding passports and ID
                                  documents

130.  Mrs C Dudley (ACDP) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:


        What steps has she taken with regard to (a) implementing tighter
        protocols with regard to issuing of passports and (b)(i) recovering
        and (ii) cancelling illegitimate passports and identity documents?
                                        NO1281E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Speaker, the department, as you would
know, has introduced a new passport which has new security measures to try
and deal with some of the security problems around the passport. As you
know, the major problem was not the passport itself but that it was issued
to the wrong people.

We have also introduced another measure whereby the people who capture the
data for passports have to log in with their thumbs because they were
previously using passwords and they were exchanging the passwords to the
point that you could never trace the person who produced the passport that
was given to somebody who shouldn’t have it. We have recently introduced a
system whereby you log in with your password and with your thumb so that we
can tell exactly who produced which passport and who captured what
information and for what passport. This will assist us in determining if
somebody has issued the passports to the wrong people.

However, the passport is at the end of the line. The real document that we
should secure is a birth certificate, because it is the birth certificate
that enables you to get an identity document, ID, and a passport. So, if
you tighten up the passport and not the birth certificate, once they have
the birth certificate people would be able to get the passport no matter
how tight your protocols are. That is why we are looking at tightening up
the birth certificate protocols.

According to the law, every child should have a birth certificate within 30
days after his or her birth, but nobody is sticking to that. So, we would
like to enforce that law which will ensure that everybody has their birth
certificate before they even apply for an ID. This is because it is easier
to determine the citizenship of a baby by using an ID than it is to
determine that of a 30-year-old.

There is a problem with this late registration of birth where you get a 60-
year-old coming to register for the first time. You can’t tell whether that
60-year-old is from South Africa or not. If you have three 60-year-olds,
one from Mozambique, one from Lesotho and one from South Africa, how can
you tell? We are trying to tighten the birth certificate protocols, and
that is why we have a campaign that says: We are going to issue birth
certificates to all South Africans who don’t have them in the next two
years, so that we can do away with the late registration of births, which
is the one that is used as a loophole.

Of course, if we get an illegitimately issued passport, we confiscate it
and it is destroyed and that person is removed from the population register
if he or she is there and, of course, we also alert the law-enforcement
agencies. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Speaker, hon Minister, in the US state department’s Country
Reports on Terrorism 2008 concerns were raised that issues of poor
administration and corruption regarding fraudulent passports, identity
documents and work permits or the security challenges and sociocultural
attitudes could negatively affect government’s ability to pursue and
intervene in counterterrorism initiatives. It seems from your response, hon
Minister, that the department is taking these concerns seriously, but I
would like to hear your take on it.

In the case of the 66 Home Affairs officials who were arrested in the 2008-
09 financial year and the further 18 suspended on allegations of fraud,
what fraudulent activity were they accused of and/or arrested for, and have
legal proceedings been instituted against them? Could you give us some of
the relevant details concerning these matters? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Speaker, the hon member is talking about
the report. Yes, indeed, when the President appointed me he quoted exactly
that report to me to say these are the issues that we have to deal with and
indeed we are taking that report seriously. We are trying to ensure that
with time that report changes.

In terms of the officials who were arrested – she says there are 66 – I
can’t memorise them. She should have alerted me, then I would have been
able to give her a breakdown of what has happened to each one of them. So,
if the hon member would like to ask another question, I will have an answer
to that question. But, yes, procedures have been followed - those that
needed to be arrested have been arrested - but I can’t give you a
breakdown. Thank you.

Mrs M N MATLADI: Hon Speaker, the mic was pressed, unfortunately, by hon
Dudley as she had to move across and then we had to give her space. I am
sorry.

The SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Kindly press your own mic and not your
neighbour’s mic. [Laughter.]

Mrs J F TERBLANCHE: Speaker, hon Minister, the turnaround strategy for the
department cost almost a billion rand over the past three years. One of the
consequences of that strategy was that South Africans now have to apply for
visas to enter the United Kingdom and with regard to obtaining identity
documents or passports, the department is referred to as Pick n Pay or
Shoprite. For the right amount of money, you can buy any document.

With regard to implementing tighter protocols regarding the issuing of
passports, does the Minister have a timeframe as to when the new security
measures will meet international standards, and when South Africans won’t
have to apply for visas to the UK anymore?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Speaker, the passport does meet international
standards as we speak now. The measures that I have spoken about, the
biometric logon, is in place as we speak. As for the UK visa, the hon
member would understand that it was the UK that decided on the visa, it
wasn’t us. So, it’s not likely that we can determine when that will change.
What I can say to the hon member is that, if the Department of Home Affairs
was referred to as Shoprite and Pick n Pay, that’s not the case. We are
really trying to tighten up protocols. I am not saying we are perfect, but
we are no longer Shoprite or Pick n Pay. We are now the Department of Home
Affairs – Undaba Zabantu. [Applause.]

Of course we have to remain vigilant and keep on introducing measures. As
for the UK visa, we should be honest with ourselves. There were objective
and subjective reasons why the UK introduced the visa. Until we are
satisfied that we’ve addressed all the objective reasons, it would not make
sense for us to go back to the UK and try to renegotiate. We should know
that we are standing on firm ground by the time we go to them. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs Z B BALINDLELA: Hon Speaker, Minister, we have just come back from an
oversight committee visit to areas of the ports of entry, around Beitbridge
and Maseru and other areas in Ficksburg. At those ports of entry the
officials have been complaining a lot about how criminals seem to have
better technology than us. Apparently, by the time technology is put in
place, the thieves and criminals are already far advanced. So, I want to
find out from the Minister if there are any faster ways of trying to curb
corruption by using technology, because in other areas like Beitbridge they
actually complained that they do not even have the machinery to help them
to do that.

Secondly, one of the officials during our ports of entry visit admitted
that the problem is no longer with falsified documents – the passports - he
said that the problem is that indeed there is corruption and that people
have got genuine indicated identity documents. I just wanted to find out
from the Minister if she knows about that. Thank you, sir. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Speaker, hon member, that’s precisely
what I was saying. The problem is not that the passports are forged. The
problem is that somebody who does not deserve to have the passport is given
the passport and that is where I started and that’s why I said our base
documents should be secured.

We are starting to campaign for South Africans who don’t have IDs. We are
going to schools to give the children identity documents as part of the
campaign, because we don’t want, when 2011 rolls around, all of you to put
us into a pressure cooker about the IDs because of wanting votes. We must,
as hon members, participate in that campaign now because Home Affairs will
not be put in a pressure cooker when elections come and that’s also where
the loophole comes in, because when you see somebody in front of you
saying: I am a South African and I don’t have an identity document, Home
Affairs is not giving me an identity document, everybody will be running
around and we will be getting all sorts of people into our population
register who shouldn’t be there.

Hon member, this is an early warning: Start to campaign now for the IDs, so
that Home Affairs won’t be in a pressure cooker in the coming election.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs D H MATHEBE: Speaker, thank you, hon Minister, for the comprehensive
answer. Is there any visible progress in this regard? If yes, where and
when?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Speaker, member, yes, I am sure the hon
member can look and see if she has an ID. If she has, then that’s visible
progress. [Laughter.]

The fact is that now you can get your passport much quicker than before.
You can even get an SMS telling you that your ID is now being printed, your
ID has now arrived at the office and now you can fetch your ID. All that is
visible progress. I didn’t quite understand the question. I hope I’ve
answered it correctly. The fact that you can’t go to Shoprite and Pick n
Pay to get an ID is visible progress. [Applause.]

         Particulars regarding applications for presidential pardon

133.  Mr J H van der Merwe (IFP) asked the Minister of Justice and
       Constitutional Development:


       (1)  Whether applications for pardon were submitted by certain
           persons (details furnished); if so, (a) when were the
           applications received and (b) what progress has been made;


       (2)  whether he will make a statement on the matter?         NO1733E

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Speaker, I would
like to respond by informing the hon member that the applications for
pardon of the persons identified in this question were submitted and
received by the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development on 30
May 2008. These applications for pardon form part of the 2 114 applications
for special dispensation for offenders allegedly convicted of offences in
pursuit of a political objective.

All these applications, including those in question, were processed and
they are currently in the Office of the President. As the hon member may be
aware, the President was interdicted from processing these applications for
pardon by the victim support groups and the Khulumani Centre for the Study
of Violence and Reconciliation, as well as others in March 2009.

This matter was first heard at the Gauteng North High Court and is now
going to be heard at the Constitutional Court on 10 November 2009. At
present the President cannot make a decision on this issue until the
Constitutional Court has ruled on the matter.

Yes, I will make the following statement: It should be noted that the
decision to pardon or not to pardon is, in terms of section 84(2)(j) of the
Constitution, a decision of the President. The former President of the
Republic, Mr Thabo Mbeki, in a Joint Sitting in Parliament on 21 November
2007, announced a special dispensation pardoning certain individuals who
had been convicted of crimes before 16 June 1999 in furtherance of their
political objectives. He announced a window of opportunity for affected
individuals to apply for a presidential pardon from 15 January 2008 to
April 2008. Those are the people who were convicted for offences they
believe were similar to those considered by the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for a
very comprehensive and good answer. In Rapport, dated 3 August 2009, it was
reported that these two have been in prison for 17 years and were not
guilty. What I want to bring to your attention is that it is alleged that,
10 years ago, the ANC promised to assist these people and never did – this
is in the newspaper. These two applicants claim that they applied for
amnesty in terms of section 84(2)(j) eight years ago. Now, the question is:
Were those applications that were submitted eight years ago received by
your department? Because it will not surprise me if they were, in fact,
received and not attended to, because hundreds of applications of this
nature – even a few thousand maybe – are being ignored by your department.
I’d like you to answer - with due respect – if you can make an
investigation into your department to try and trace those two. And if so,
what are you going to do, Mr Minister, about this backlog where people
submit, in terms of the Constitution, applications ... [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Speaker, the hon
member should be aware of this matter, since he was part of the reference
group that was appointed by the former President. These two specific
applications were tabled before the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
and, eventually, before the committee of the reference group.

As I’ve indicated, the matter is now before the Constitutional Court;
therefore, it won’t be appropriate for me to specifically respond to it.
However, I can assure you that these two applications were received by the
department, as I’ve indicated, and when the President was about to respond
to them, the matter was taken to court. I therefore appeal to you to wait
for the decision of the Constitutional Court on 10 November 2009 and
thereafter the matter will proceed.

The SPEAKER: I have on my list the following speakers. Kindly move to your
nearest mic, hon Mpontshane; hon Swart; and hon Smuts.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Speaker, unfortunately ...

The SPEAKER: Are you Mpontshane today?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mpontshane is written on my seat. I’m sorry you have
confused me with him.

The SPEAKER: There is a striking resemblance! [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: He has not requested to ask a question.
Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Speaker. I’m rising in response to you, hon
Minister. I would like to draw your attention to the decision given on 30
September 2009 about Mr Chonco’s application of pardon - which I’m sure you
are aware of - and the scathing comments made by the former Chief Justice,
Pius Langa, which state that despite the undertakings made by the then
President and the then Minister to expedite responses to pardon
applications – this is now pardon applications in that particular case –
the respondents have waited in vain. This is said to be unacceptable, and
he added that the Constitution requires that all constitutional obligations
- wherever they lie - must be performed diligently and without delay.

Now, hon Minister, would you agree with those comments made by the learned
judge, as it was his last judgment? If so, what steps will you take to
ensure that such delays do not happen again? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: The Constitutional
Court is the highest court in the land and the court of last resort.
There’s nothing more I can add except that we have to implement what the
Constitutional Court decides. On these particular matters the President,
even then Presidents Mbeki, Motlanthe and, currently, Zuma were on the
verge of finalising this matter when it was taken to court. So, our hands
are tied until 10 November 2009.

Ms M SMUTS: Speaker, may I ask the hon Minister; and if I could, I would
also ask the hon Koos; but I can’t, so to the Minister: Does he consider
that the litigation by the IFP applicants for pardon, which has just
culminated in the Constitutional Court judgment advising the IFP that it
has been suing the wrong person, has prejudiced the prospect for pardon of
other prisoners?

I have received correspondence from an ANC member who was given a pardon
application reference number by the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development, and who argues that he is suffering because of
the litigation brought by the IFP members who “do not meet the
requirement”. In his view, by contrast, he feels that he meets all
conditions and was commanded by his leaders to commit the crimes for which
he is imprisoned.

Sir, this letter was written in a state of despair and I would like to
furnish the Minister with a copy. I’m asking this question, because,
clearly, this is a deeply felt sentiment on the part of this prisoner in
Kroonstad. I would like to ask the Minister what the prisoner avers. Does
he consider that the litigation in the Constitutional Court has made life
difficult for other pardon applicants?

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Speaker, I was
present at the Constitutional Court when the former Chief Justice Langa
delivered that judgment and the hon Koos was an instructing attorney. I
don’t know how he managed that, but I must say that the Constitutional
Court decided in favour of the Minister of Justice because they had sued
the wrong party. We are not going to wait for them to sue us again, but
rather to consider their application as the department and try to find the
best way to address it.

The SPEAKER: Before the Minister rises, may I remind the hon members to
please press their own buttons and not their neighbour’s? And please don’t
send me lists of names. Just press the button in front of you.

  Investigation into allegations regarding manipulation of crime statistics

146.  Mrs L S Chikunga (ANC) asked the Minister of Police:

       (1)  Whether he is investigating allegations regarding the
           manipulation of crime statistics; if not, why not; if so, what
           are the relevant details;


       (2)  what plans does he have to address the manipulation of crime
           statistics?                                              NO1856E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Deputy Speaker, the answer to the hon member’s
question is yes. There are at least four cases that have been investigated
by the Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD. Some of the cases are in
the process of being finalised and, where necessary, action will be taken
against the relevant officials. It is not possible to reveal all the
relevant details whilst the cases are still under investigation.

However, we can say that two cases have either been finalised or are close
to finalisation. With regard to Mountain Rise Police Station, the ICD has
completed its investigation, and the matter has been handed over to the
provincial commissioner. The provincial head of detective services has thus
far finalised the investigation into 147 dockets, most of which were not
registered on the crime administration system. However, there are still
another 253 dockets which are still being investigated before a final
decision can be taken on disciplinary action.

The SA Police Service in the Western Cape have also finalised their
investigation into the Lansdowne Police Station. After a thorough
investigation of this station, the station commissioner was fired and a
detective branch commander resigned before being fired. When specific
allegations regarding the manipulation of crime statistics surfaced, the
national commissioner referred the matter to the relevant provincial
commissioner or through the Minister to the ICD for investigation.

A unit attached to crime intelligence head office is entrusted with
perusing daily crime returns and media reports to check whether the cases
had been correctly registered on the crime administration system. If errors
are discovered, these are forwarded to the provincial commissioners for
ratification. Members of this unit also visited police stations to check
samples of dockets and the occurrence and incidents book entries against
the registration of the crime administration system, CAS.

The results of these checks are communicated to the provincial
commissioners for information and the necessary steps, if such are deemed
necessary. Members at the provincial offices, during the previous financial
year, have also been trained to perform a similar task in their respective
provinces to enhance the correctness of crime registration throughout the
country and to keep the provincial management components updated on the
situation at station level.

In addition, ongoing training interventions at different levels of policing
are aimed at enhancing crime information management capacity down to
station level, as well as awareness of the vital role of correct and
complete information in combating crime. The Ministry of Police is
currently engaged in a process with Statistics SA to make use of their
services in undertaking a thorough review of crime statistics management
systems within the police. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Hon Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the hon
Minister for his comprehensive and honest answer. Hon Minister, in August
this year City Press reported that a Johannesburg Central Police Station
police officer was seen throwing dockets into a dustbin. Could this
incident be related to the manipulation of crime statistics? If yes, how?
If no, what is the relevant information with regard to that incident? I
thank you.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Deputy Speaker, following the City Press
article, the national commissioner instructed the provincial commissioner
to investigate this matter. The investigation was completed by mid-
September. The investigation found that a police constable from the station
had destroyed papers whilst on patrol in Fox Street. This constable had
torn up the papers and deposited them into the street dustbin. The
constable alleged that he had been cleaning out his patrol van whilst on
patrol. However, the papers that were destroyed were scrap papers, and one
old docket cover sheet. No actual dockets were destroyed.

The investigators contacted the complainant whose name and details were on
the docket cover sheet that was destroyed with the scrap paper. It was
confirmed that the actual docket related to case 2843/06/2009 was still in
the detective services and was still being investigated. The constable has
been reprimanded for throwing these scrap papers away in public and not
shredding them, as required in terms of management of information security
services procedures.
An instruction has been sent out to all stations that no papers, even if
they are scrap papers, should be thrown away, and that such documents
should be disposed of in accordance with these procedures. The SAPS have
contacted City Press and asked them to please retract what had been
printed. It is unclear whether the newspaper printed this retraction. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, with all due respect to the
Minister, considering that the Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD,
directed the investigation into the criminal manipulation of crime
statistics at the Mountain Rise Police Station in KwaZulu-Natal that shows
that the station commander had indeed manipulated the crime statistics,
thus raising that station fraudulently to the number 1 station in that
province, and considering that the whistle-blower was suspended without pay
by that station commissioner, could the Minister explain to this House how
it is that the said station commissioner is still in his position and not
suspended, pending the outcome of what I was told was the second
investigation by the SAPS, who patently disbelieve ICD investigation
outcomes?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Speaker, we will urge the hon member to wait
for the process, because during that period the whistle-blower that she is
referring to had referred the matter to the courts of law. Because of that,
we have had to take into cognisance what has happened in that process.
There is no way that we can continue as if nothing has happened. The
investigation that I am talking about and the dockets that are left deal
with that. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: May I just inform
the Minister that the court case has long been resolved.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, I didn’t give you permission to speak. I
thank you. I am looking at the screen for people who pressed their buttons.


Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Hon Deputy Speaker, this is a follow-up question to
the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development. I don’t know why it
came at a later stage, but with your permission, may I continue?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are now dealing with the Minister of Police. Can
we pass that, hon Ndabandaba? I am sure you will get your time when the
questions are directed to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, it was reported that Johan
Burger of the Institute for Security Studies has charged that the alleged
cooking of crime statistics by police stations in three provinces is the
consequence of fear instilled in police managers by former National Police
Commissioner Jackie Selebi.
We believe that this fear caused some police station commanders to demand
reduced crime figures from their subordinates, who, to impress them,
decided not to record several reported incidents, including domestic
violence, assault, fraud and even rape in the police case administration
system. We believe that this was wrong, undermined good service delivery
and betrayed the trust that citizens had in the police.

We want to know what government is going to do to remove this fear of
recording all reported crimes and to assure police officers that if they
blow the whistle on their corrupt colleagues, they will not be harassed,
victimised or suspended by their superiors. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Speaker, hon Meshoe, the manipulation of
statistics is wrong. Anybody who is involved in that will face the might of
the law. It is as simple as that. That is why, whether there are targets or
not, they are there to be performed honestly and diligently and not with
manipulation, as raised. I wouldn’t talk about what happened in the past.
Even now, there are performance indicators according to which the police
have to perform. However, that does not suggest that people should
manipulate statistics. We want statistics to be explained as they are, so
that we develop the necessary measures to deal with them as they are.

What has happened so far is that we have seen the investigating officers,
the detectives, together with the Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD,
dealing with matters of this nature. And they will continue to do so, so
that at the end of any investigation, if there is a reason for any action
to be taken, it should be taken. I thank you.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga Sekela Somlomo, bengicela ukubuza kuNgqongqoshe
ukuthi kulaba amacala abo aphenywayo ngokulahleka kwamadokodo nokuthi-ke
bashintshe izinombolo ngabe abanye babo bahleli emakhaya yini? Bayahola
yini noma bayawenza umsebenzi khona belahla amadokodo na? (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I just want to know from
the Minister whether those police officers who are being investigated with
regard to the disappearance of dockets and the changing of docket numbers
have been suspended? Are they receiving their salaries whilst on suspension
or are they still working even though they steal dockets?]

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Speaker, hon member, what has happened over
the period is that, with the investigation and the gravity of the matter at
hand, each case has been taken individually. There are those who are still
at work, investigating, to finalise the process. There are those who have
been suspended, depending on the matter at hand and on the perpetrators.
There are perpetrators and those who have assisted in perpetrating these
wrongdoings. I thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was the last question on this. We are now moving
to ... [Interjections.]

Ms M N MATLADI: Hon Deputy Speaker, unfortunately my machine is not
functioning properly. I have been pressing a hundred times, but you seemed
not to be getting the message. They said they will attend to it, but I
don’t know when. There is a question for the hon Minister of Police.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there are four questions already. We have had four
questions for the Minister and we won’t be able to take any more now.

Ms M N MATLADI: All right.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much.

  Statement concerning accountability of NCACC regarding conventional arms
                                    trade

168.  Mr D J Maynier (DA) asked the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
      Development:

      Whether he will make a statement concerning the accountability of the
      National Conventional Arms Control Committee (NCACC) regarding the
      conventional arms trade with reference to the document entitled Arming
      Dictators All Over the World:
      National Conventional Arms Control Committee in Crisis, dated 2 August
      2009?                                              NO1881E

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, I’m
really surprised by this question from Mr Maynier, because he knows full
well that I held a press conference at the Union Buildings on 6 August on
the document he released on 2 August, where I indicated comprehensively
government’s response to the spurious allegations that were made on that
particular document which was widely reported in the media. I indicated
there and I am repeating it now that the business of the National
Conventional Arms Control Committee, NCACC, is done in accordance with the
law and the Constitution. We are accountable to Cabinet, Parliament and
also to the United Nations.

The following day, on 7 August, I was with Tim Modise on the After 8
Debate, where I addressed this issue with the general public. Mr Maynier
also had the opportunity of fielding questions and, caller after caller, he
was condemned for what he had said. So, I don’t know what statement he
wants me to make right now.

I also came before Parliament and the Portfolio Committee on Defence and
Military Veterans, where the hon member was also present. We spent almost
two and half hours in that meeting. So, I don’t know what the basis of this
question is, more than what I have indicated already.

Mr D J MAYNIER: Deputy Speaker, at the time of the release of this report,
the Minister accused me of telling lies about dodgy arms deals. But rather
than refute the allegations, the Minister then called a press conference
where he confirmed the allegations. The Minister conceded in his media
statement that the National Conventional Arms Control Committee, NCACC, had
turned down an application for the authorisation of the sale of aviator G-
suits to Iran.

The Minister at that time, together with his colleagues in the National
Conventional Arms Control Committee, stepped up to the plate and did the
right thing. But that was not the real test. The Minister must now be aware
that the company, Parachute Industries of Southern Africa, that applied for
a permit to export thousands of aviator G-suits to Iran does not in fact
produce aviator G-suits. The Minister must now be aware that the company
which owns Parachute Industries of Southern Africa - that is the Zodiac
group - which is a company based in France, does in fact produce aviator G-
suits. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, I
think this gentleman needs to be examined. [Laughter.] He repeats this lie
time and time again. I don’t really understand what he is up to. I
responded that there is nothing wrong we have done in terms of the law. We
are not accountable to Mr Maynier and his DA. We are accountable to this
Parliament, Cabinet and the United Nations. There is nothing we have done
thus far that is in violation of any United Nations security resolutions on
arms embargo. At the time he is referring to ... [Interjections.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I would just like
to ask if the Minister would care to explain what he means by “the member
needs to be examined”.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! That is really not a point of order. Please
continue, Minister.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I am saying, in
conclusion, that there is nothing this government has done that is in
violation of our Constitution, the law or the United Nations security
resolutions on arms embargo. All transactions we have done with Iran, Libya
and all other countries were in accordance with the United Nations security
resolutions.

Just to respond to you directly, when the United Nations placed embargoes
on Iran, we never had any transactions with that country. So, I don’t
understand why he keeps on harping on this issue. There is an English
saying that says, “never flog a dead horse”. [Applause.]

Ms M N MATLADI: Hon Deputy Speaker, as you were calling on me now, I was
still being consulted for the answer to the question I had to ask the hon
Minister of Police. I was briefing the lady on the matter because they
wanted to make a follow-up on the question. So, my machine is not on. As I
told you, it does not function well. So, it keeps on indicating that it is
on even when my hand is not up.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: But your name is reflecting here. I’m not sure which
machine you are referring to.

Ms M N MATLADI: It is the previous one that I called the technicians to
come and have a look at. They said there was nothing they could do. So,
it’s not my problem. It is the problem of the machinery.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, I take it that you don’t have a question for the
Minister.

Mr M S BOOI: Madam Deputy Speaker, Minister, I think the most important
thing we need to arrive at is how you could assist the member to understand
how the system operates. This is because he seems not to understand how
one, between the executive and Parliament, continues to monitor and ensure
that the things he raises are more relevant and are raised in a proper
manner within the channels of Parliament.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, the
hon member of the DA should know that the National Conventional Arms
Control Committee, NCACC, operates in accordance with the Constitution and
the law that was passed by this Parliament in 2002. We have many committees
in there. We have a scrutiny committee that prepares documentation that
consists of relevant government departments like Trade and Industry,
International Relations and Co-operation, Defence and State Security. It
report to the NCACC, which I am chairing. From time to time we come to
Parliament to report, like we did when we were called upon to do so. We
report to Cabinet, and we also make an annual report to the United Nations
organisation.

None of these structures have ever, even on one day, indicated to us that
there was something wrong with the work of the NCACC. So, maybe the
portfolio committee needs to do the hon member a favour by providing him
with a copy of the Constitution, the Act, the relevant clauses of the
United Nations and all the reports that have been submitted by this
committee. We are also going to, later this month, report in terms of the
law that says we must make quarterly reports. We are going to do so. We
never said we were not going to make any of these reports available.
I have also taken a decision that the reports that were given previously
should be made public. There is nothing controversial about any of the
matters that we are dealing with. But, in instances where there are
commercial agreements and confidential agreements between parties involved,
we will not reveal this information. This is all in accordance with the law
that this Parliament has passed.

Mr J R B LORIMER: Deputy Speaker, Minister, perhaps you should consider
whether you are accountable to your own former leader. Former President
Nelson Mandela announced that human rights will be the light that guides
our foreign affairs when he announced that we made a clear break with our
foreign policy practices of the past.

To give effect to the principle that human rights should be the foundation
of our foreign policy, we passed a law to regulate the sale of conventional
arms. The preamble to that law says that our country is a responsible
member of the international community and will not trade in conventional
arms with states engaged in repression, aggression and terrorism. Yet, now
it emerges that we are dealing with some of the most repressive regimes in
the world.

The Minister confirmed in his media statement of 6 August that there were
permits awaiting authorisation for the sale of thousands of sniper rifles
to Syria and millions of rounds of ammunition to Zimbabwe. Will the
Minister give this House the assurance that the National Conventional Arms
Control Committee, NCACC, will do the right thing and refuse the permits
for the sale of sniper rifles to Syria and ammunition to Zimbabwe?
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker,
well, the ANC, long before the DA thought human rights were the be-all and
end-all in South Africa, has always been pursuing human rights. That is why
we campaigned for apartheid to be declared a crime against humanity and a
threat to world peace when your predecessors, the DA, were in the apartheid
Parliament. [Interjections.]

So, you are not the ones to tell us who to trade with. We are guided by our
own conscience. As the people who pursue human rights in South Africa, our
Constitution and the law, we cannot be dictated to by the DA on who to
trade arms with. We are going to take decisions on a case by case basis. If
it is appropriate to sell arms to Syria, we shall do so. These are
commercial agreements between private sector companies in the main.

For your information, we have not taken any decisions to sell any arms to
Zimbabwe since July of this year. This is not because the DA says so, but
it is because we monitor a situation on a case by case basis. So, to answer
your question directly, we are not going to be dictated to by the DA on
what to do. We are going to be dictated to by the policies of this
government and Parliament. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, can you tell us whether South
Africa has any intentions of trading arms with Venezuelan dictator Hugo
Chavez, who says his country is working with Iran to find uranium. If so,
what arms are to be traded, and for what purposes? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, Venezuela is
one of our most important trading partners in Latin America. We shall
continue to do business with them. For that matter, I will give a response
in this regard. We have agreed and approved arms to Venezuela as the
National Conventional Arms Control Committee, NCACC. There is nothing wrong
with that. It is going to increase trade between our two countries.
[Applause.]

  Defence Department’s performance with regard to Public Service Commission
    report on noncompliance with regulation compelling senior managers to
                              declare interests

132.  Mr L Ramatlakane (Cope) asked the Minister of Defence and Military
      Veterans:

      (1)   Whether she has reviewed her department’s performance with
           regard to the Public Service Commission report on noncompliance
           with Chapter 3 of the Public Service Regulation which compels
           senior managers (SMSs) to declare all interests annually; if
           not, why not; if so, (a) how many did not declare their
           interests, (b) what are the names of noncompliant officials or
           SMSs, (c) what is each one’s rank, (d) what action has been
           taken in each case and (e) what was the outcome in each case;

      (2)   whether a lack of action indicates complacency by the executive
           authority; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
           what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether a failure to act against noncompliance constitutes
           misconduct; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
           what are the relevant details?               NO1630E

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Deputy Speaker, the hon
Ramatlakane from the newly founded entity called Cope asks me whether I
have ... [Interjections.] Chair, will you protect me? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, would you kindly allow us to hear the
response of the Minister to the question.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: ... whether I have reviewed
my department’s performance with regard to the Public Service Commission’s
report on noncompliance with Chapter 3 of the Public Service Regulation
which compels senior managers under Senior Management Service, SMS, to
declare all interests annually; if not, how many did not declare, etc.

Firstly, my response to the first part of the question is that we have
reviewed the report that was given to the Public Service Commission which
was handed in by the former Minister, Minister Nqakula. I am happy to
announce that out of 268 officials, 99% of them have complied. When
checking through our records we found that three brigadiers-general had not
responded on time. We have since followed up with letters reminding them of
noncompliance and they are now responding to that matter. They have assured
us that they had responded to the register. Perhaps we did not file the
reports in accordance with their responses. They are, however, dealing with
the matter.

Secondly, in response to part (b) of section (1) of the question which asks
for the names of noncompliant senior managers, I would not, at this moment,
say that they would be noncompliant senior managers, because they have
telephonically committed themselves to doing something about it. They have
actually indicated that they did respond. So, we are checking our own
records to see where we might have lost their forms.

Thirdly, part (c) of section (1) of the question asks about the ranks of
each of the senior managers who did not declare their interests and, by way
of responding, I stated that they are brigadiers-general.

Fourthly, part (d) of section (1) asks about actions that have been taken
with regard to the noncompliant senior managers. My response is that we
have reminded them and they are responding to the matter.

Fifthly, part (e) of section (1) of the question enquires about the outcome
of each case and my response is that there is no outcome. We expect that
very soon they should be responding to our reminder.

Lastly, section (2) seeks to establish whether or not lack of action
indicates complacency, and if not what the position is in this regard. My
answer is in the negative; it does not, and there is no position. Thank
you.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Deputy Speaker, for the record and for the Minister to
know, let me state that this is no entity, this is Cope. Arising from the
response by the Minister, I would think that the Minister is fairly aware
of the Act, the Public Service Act, as proclaimed in 1999, and the Public
Service Regulation, specifically Chapter 3. I heard the Minister saying
that there is no complacency, but if one looks at what the Act says in
terms of the compliance, it says 30 April of every year.

In terms of the date on which the question was submitted to the Minister,
does she believe that the date of 30 April was complied with? The Public
Service Regulation stipulates what action the Minister has to take should
there be failure with regard to that compliance, including the misconduct.
Does the Minister believe that her action is in compliance with the Public
Service Regulation and the Act?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Deputy Speaker, let me thank
the hon Ramatlakane and add that it’s a question of semantics whether or
not what we were talking about is an entity or a party. I did indicate that
the compliance issue was dealt with by former Minister Nqakula, my
predecessor. All the officials except three seem to have been registered.
Upon assumption of duty I reviewed the matter and found that these three
had actually indicated telephonically that they had submitted their forms.
We have asked them to resubmit. Failure to respond to this within the time
allocated to them would then result in misconduct.

I want to indicate to the hon member over there that some of our members
spend quite a lot of time out of the country on peacekeeping missions. So,
the deadline that we give them differs from time to time depending on where
they are. In fact, there is no dragging of feet here, we have been doing
our work and I’m quite happy with the progress that we have made. I thought
you would stand up and congratulate me on 99%. Thank you.
Mr D J MAYNIER: Deputy Speaker, Minister, in the light of disclosure at
meetings of the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans over
the past two days that senior officials in the South African National
Defence Force, SANDF, and Armscor procurement structures have business
interests, will the Minister be investigating procurement processes and
driving changes to legislation or rules that will forbid officials,
specifically those involved in procurement, from having any business
interests at all outside of their jobs?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Deputy Speaker, I don’t know
if this is still a follow-up question, but I want to assure the hon member
that, just as the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans is
seized with the matter, I’m seized with the matter myself. Should the
Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans require me to
investigate the matter, I am open to that. Thank you.

Mr M S BOOI: Deputy Speaker, Minister, given that you have made so much
progress within the department, do you think that these types of questions
that are being raised regarding senior managers will have any effect on the
work that they are doing and being able to continue improving the image of
the department itself?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Deputy Speaker, hon Booi, I
also wondered whether this was the best way of occupying our time out here.
With new kids on the block, what can you expect? However, I’m open to
entertain their views from time to time. But thank you for the compliment,
I think we have done exceedingly well. Should the hon member out there want
to contribute to us, we have a portfolio committee that meets fairly
regularly. Please feel free to come and join us. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon Minister, it is commendable that
the compliance rate is commendable. Hon Minister, you might consider this a
separate question. In terms of Chapter 3(g) of the Public Service
Regulation, the Public Service Commission is required to make a finding as
to whether there is a real or potential conflict of interest between the
registerable interest and employment in the case of one such interest
having been disclosed. Has there been any action taken in that regard? Are
you aware of any further steps that have been taken in relation to that
conflict of interest?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Deputy Speaker, my response
to hon Swart is in the negative. We submit the senior managers’ assessments
and declarations to the Public Service Commission. The Public Service
Commission goes through them, scrutinises them and, from time to time,
brings anything to the attention of the executive authority should they
think that perhaps there might be a conflict of interest.

On the other hand, this is a guide to the executive authority to indicate
that there might eventually, or in the course of the work of a particular
senior manager, be a conflict of interest. I have not detected this.
However, as hon Lorimer has indicated, the Portfolio Committee on Defence
and Military Veterans has some concerns and I’m open to that. They will
probably deal with this matter themselves, but they can also refer it to me
and I will scrutinise the matter further. Thank you.

 Findings of investigations into circumstances surrounding deaths of inmates
                      in KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern Cape

166.  Mr V G Smith (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      (a) What were the findings of the investigations into the
      circumstances surrounding the deaths of inmates in KwaZulu-Natal and
      the Eastern Cape in the past eight months and (b) how many (i)
      officials have been implicated in these incidents and (ii) of these
      officials are still in the employ of her department?
                                   NO1879E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, we have received
reports about three inmates who were lost and died in the Eastern Cape, due
to unnatural causes, and five in KwaZulu-Natal. I must say that, of the
three, one case was concluded in the Eastern Cape. Its investigation was
concluded. In KwaZulu-Natal, only three cases were investigated and
concluded.

In August, we appeared before the portfolio committee to inform the
committee that a death had occurred at the Kokstad maximum security
facility. We visited the facility, and we gave a directive to the acting
national commissioner to investigate this particular case. We are
particularly interested because of the kind of facility it is, which is a
maximum facility, catering for very dangerous offenders.

The team began its work on 18 August, and we have since received a report
on 9 October. We must point out that the draft report points to acts of
criminality on the side of members. It is recommending disciplinary action
for some and, for others, the laying of criminal charges with the South
African Police Service.

We are currently interacting with the office of the inspecting judge to
make sure that the rest of the cases that have not been reported to them or
concluded, be concluded as soon as possible. Thank you.

Mr V G SMITH: Deputy Speaker, Madam Minister, thank you very much for your
response. I think we are pleased that something is being done, reason
being, Minister, that the mission of your department talks to human rights
and the security of inmates; and with these deaths as a result of
officials, there was a danger that you would lose that.
Not so long ago, three officials were convicted in Krugersdorp, so the
committee, certainly the ANC component of the committee, was beginning to
get concerned that, unless this is arrested, there would be problems of the
environment moving from one of security and human rights to one of
lawlessness. So, in terms of what you’ve explained to us, we are more than
happy that something is being done, and it is being addressed. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, hon member, I think
that with the incident in Kokstad, in particular, we have learned, as a
department, that it is always better for us to be the ones who take, or
seize, the initiative and direct the department to investigate, without
undermining the work that is being done by the inspecting judge. In that
way, you are able to set timeframes for the investigators and you are able
to raise issues if you identify any gaps in the report.

I am happy, for instance, with this investigation and the outcome of the
Kokstad report, because I believe that a lot of work was done, very
objective outcomes are reflected in the report, and that we are acting on
this matter. We will be reporting those who should be reported to the
police so that they can be charged and, for those who are going for the
disciplinary process, the process has already begun.

Mr A T FRITZ: Deputy Speaker, Minister, we would also just like to know
what other steps are being put in place by the Minister to stop and curtail
the occurrence of assaults that lead to deaths in prison and whether the
inspecting judge has the appropriate capacity to deal with deaths in
prisons in South Africa.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, hon Fritz, to be
honest, this is a very difficult matter. It is a very sensitive matter in
that there is a human rights issue here, which has been violated on a
number of occasions by our own members. Actually, in most cases, and this
is what we found out from the last investigation, it is because we need to
look at the circumstances leading to the death of the inmate.

We find that in most cases, in fact, it is a matter of officials reacting
to assaults by inmates on them. Unfortunately, the manner in which they
then react, which goes back to the definition of maximum force, has, in a
sense, led to deaths in some of these cases. We find that, unless we deal
with the whole matter of gangs in our centres, we are not going to be able
to avoid, when we should not even be having, these kinds of unnatural
deaths.

Indeed, if you have a gang culture, for instance, in the case of Kokstad,
where people simply took a decision that the centre was not properly
opened, we need to take steps in order for it to have been properly opened.
Obviously, the reaction of the members is that, in defend themselves by
applying maximum force, this maximum force has unfortunately led to these
kinds of incidents. Thank you.

    Steps taken by department to assist South African farmers in Zimbabwe

158.  Mr K S Mubu (DA) asked the Minister of International Relations and Co-
      operation:

      What steps are her department taking to (a) assist South African
      farmers in Zimbabwe whose farms have been taken over by ZANU-PF
      officials to recover their farms, (b) ensure that the farmers receive
      fair compensation for their lost properties and (c) ensure their
      personal safety and security and that of their families?
                                        NO1870E

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Madam Deputy
Speaker, the Department of International Relations and Co-operation has,
through diplomatic channels, engaged the Zimbabwean government to intercede
on behalf of South African farmers. However, this engagement has been
constrained by the absence of investment protection mechanisms between our
two countries.

The matter of compensation to farmers is negotiated between the affected
farmer and the relevant Zimbabwean authorities. The applicable Zimbabwean
law, the Acquisition of Farm Equipment or Material Act of 2004, provides
that compensation be paid for improvements on land and equipment. In
keeping with provisions of international conventions and applicable South
African legal instruments, the department, on receipt of information that
the life of a South African farmer is threatened, engages through
diplomatic channels with the relevant Zimbabwean authorities. I thank you.

Mr K S MUBU: Madam Deputy Speaker, I thank you very much, Madam Minister.
The SADC Tribunal has passed a judgment that has been in favour of Mike
Campbell and 77 other farmers for the return of their properties, but the
Zimbabwean government has obviously repeatedly ignored this judgment.

Is there a way in which our bilateral agreements or treaties with Zimbabwe
can be used to address this pathetic situation, to try to return these
properties to their rightful owners? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Deputy Speaker,
with all due respect, I will have to repeat what I said earlier. In the
absence of an investment protection mechanism between our two countries,
which is still under negotiation, we really have to abide by the laws of
both our country and those of Zimbabwe, and continue the negotiations on
these important agreements that are still under discussion by the relevant
Ministries.

An HON MEMBER: They don’t abide by the law! [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hayi wena! [Order!]

Mr H T MAGAMA: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, we note that Zimbabwe, of
course contrary to the perception of some in the House, is not the 10th
province of South Africa, but an independent sovereign state, and that
compensation, if any, will indeed logically take place in accordance with
Zimbabwe’s own laws.

Now Minister, we know that the department has been engaged for quite some
time with the establishment of the Bilateral Investment Promotion and
Protection Agreement, or Bippa. Could you perhaps inform the House about
the progress that has been made in this regard? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Deputy Speaker,
hon member, the negotiations, as I said earlier, are still going on with
the respective departments. As and when they are concluded, we shall duly
inform members. I thank you.

 Particulars regarding performance agreements with top management structures
         in SAPS, Secretariat and Independent Complaints Directorate

145.  Ms A van Wyk (ANC) asked the Minister of Police:
      (1)   Whether he has performance agreements with his top management
           structures in the (a) SA Police Service, (b) Secretariat and (c)
           Independent Complaints Directorate; if so, what are these
           agreements based on; if not,

      (2)   whether such agreements will be developed and implemented; if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   whether these agreements have been signed; if not, why not; if
           so, what are the relevant details?           NO1855E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Speaker, I thank the hon member for the
question. The National Commissioner, B H Cele, was appointed on 1 August
2009 as head of the Department of Police. In terms of chapter 4 of the
performance management and development system, the national commissioner
has three months in which to sign his performance agreement.

The performance agreement for the national commissioner has been developed
and is based on the strategic plan of the SAPS, performance agreements
signed by the previous national commissioner and acting national
commissioner and the performance management and development system.

The agreement is in the process of being finalised and some amendments may
be made based on the outcome of the recent SAPS strategic management
planning. This agreement will be finalised within the next three weeks.
Once this agreement is finalised the national commissioner will develop and
implement performance management agreements for the SAPS senior management.

The performance agreement for the secretary of police was developed for a
fixed-term period in line with the fixed-term contract signed by the
secretary of police herself. The performance agreement is based on the
performance management and development system as well as the policy
guidelines developed for re-engineering the restructuring of the
secretariat of police.

The agreement was signed on 1 September 2009. The secretariat is currently
involved in a restructuring exercise and revision of their five-year
strategic plan. Based on the outcome of these processes, performance
management agreements will be signed with all senior management of the
secretariat.

The executive director of the Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD, Mr F
Beukman, was appointed on 7 August 2009 and, as with the national
commissioner, Mr Beukman’s performance agreement is in the process of being
finalised. Mr Beukman’s agreement is based on the performance management
and development system, the policy guidelines on the restructuring of the
ICD and the 2008 parliamentary portfolio committee’s recommendations on the
functioning of the ICD.

The agreement will be finalised by 7 November 2009. Once this agreement is
finalised, the executive director will develop and implement performance
agreements for all senior managers of the ICD. I thank you.

Ms A VAN WYK: Deputy Speaker, thank you very much, Minister, for the quick
movement on these performance agreements. We believe as the ANC that a lot
of the implementation that we don’t see in departments is as a result of
performance agreements that are not in place, and for that reason we
believe it is important.

However, Mr Minister, once these agreements have been signed, also the
level of division of deputy national commissioners and provincial
commissioners and with the senior managers in the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD, and the secretariat, will the Minister ensure us that the
compliance to achieve these performance agreements will be followed; and
where the performance agreements are actually not reached, whether the
Minister will institute sanctions to deal with those senior managers who do
not perform according to the agreements?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Speaker, yes, hon member, we will follow the
Public Service regulations to the letter. You might be aware that they also
have sanctions on the failure to perform by senior public officials. Thank
you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Deputy Speaker, it is indeed laudable, Minister, that
the SAPS has finally moved to join the rest of the corporate world by
introducing service agreements. Obviously, one would like to see station
heads also signing them in order for them to be held accountable. So, would
the Minister share with the House what the consequences would be should one
or more of those in the structure who have signed such an agreement fail to
deliver on their side of the contract? Should that person not face
sanctions, as suggested by the hon Van Wyk; or be dismissed should they
fail to prove unequal to the task of the KPAs of that contract or, for
example, the accepted aim in this country - the target of bringing down
crime at least 7% to 10%?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Speaker, thank you, hon member. Just for
your information, the SAPS is not only joining this corporate world that
you are talking about. These agreements have been there even, as I said,
with the former commissioners and both the former and the acting
commissioner thereafter.

However, as I responded to the question, we will follow to the letter the
Public Service regulations. We are not going to invent anything outside
those parameters of the Public Service regulations. We will follow them to
the letter. Thank you.

 Alignment by department of its demarcation for the jurisdiction of regional
                                commissioners
137.  Mr M N Phaliso (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      When will her department align its demarcation for the jurisdiction of
      the regional commissioners in accordance with the provincial
      boundaries as determined by section 103 of the Constitution of the
      Republic of South Africa?         NO1844E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, the hon member might
be aware that, prior to 2003, there were indeed nine provincial
commissioners, with one appointed for each of the nine provinces.

However, a decision was later taken to review that position. That review
was based on an assessment of the workload borne by each commissioner –
that is, the number of centres, offender population size, bed space, etc –
and resulted in us appointing six regional commissioners, with two of these
regional commissioners managing more than one province.

Otherwise, in terms of demarcation according to the Constitution, no
changes were made. Thank you.

Mr M N PHALISO: Deputy Speaker, inconsistencies might arise from
disparities between the amounts of responsibility carried by regional
commissioners and this might have an adverse effect on service delivery in
the Department of Correctional Services.

What is the Minister planning to do in the intervening period to ensure
that the Limpopo, Mpumalanga, North West, Free State and Northern Cape
regions receive the requisite support to enable them to perform optimally
and thus meet the Department of Correctional Services’ outcomes? Thank you.


The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, the hon member
should know that, as far as we are concerned, we are happy with the manner
in which we have structured the department.

The hon member will find that there are management areas which have inmate
populations that are equal to or even higher than some provincial inmate
populations. So, it indeed became necessary for us to combine some of the
provinces and have them managed by one regional commissioner.

So, in the case of Limpopo, the North West and Mpumalanga, there are no
challenges with regard to the management of the correctional centres. It
suffices that we have one regional commissioner responsible for the three.

If we had had a regional commissioner allocated to each one of those
provinces, it would actually have meant that we would have had to downgrade
the level of that regional commissioner. This is obvious because of the
workload there.

Mr A T FRITZ: Deputy Speaker, we would firstly like to know whether the
Minister is happy with the current six commissioners’ – I know that there
are two vacant positions – qualifications, competence and capabilities.

Secondly, in the same context, we would like to know whether the Minister
is convinced, from a purely service delivery point of view, that those
commissioners are delivering the kind of services required.

Thirdly, we would like to know when the Minister is going to fill those two
vacant positions. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, I would like to
thank the hon Fritz. Well, firstly, we actually have six regional
commissioner posts and only one is vacant. That is the KwaZulu-Natal post,
in which we have an acting regional commissioner. In the case of
Mpumalanga, I would like to remind hon Fritz that the regional commissioner
is on suspension and so still occupies the post.

Secondly, I am sure hon Fritz will be happy to hear that we are actually
doing transfers. We are engaged in a process of transferring people to
different provinces and once we have completed that reorganisation we will
report to this House.

Obviously, we do have a team of dedicated people. Yes, there may, at times,
be shortcomings in the manner in which they do things and they discharge
their duties at times, but I certainly would not want to question their
commitment and dedication to the department. Thank you.

 Particulars regarding calls received on counter-corruption toll-free number

159.  Mrs J F Terblanche (DA) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   How many calls have been received on the counter-corruption toll-
           free number since 1 April 2008;

      (2)   whether any of these calls led to successful investigations
           which resulted in (a) disciplinary and (b) criminal procedures;
           if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                  NO1871E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, since April 2008, the toll-
free number that belongs to the Public Service Commission forwards these
matters to Home Affairs in the form of cases.

Five hundred and seventy-five cases have been investigated. Of those, 240
have resulted in action being taken against the officials and 125 of these
cases have been referred to the department’s employee relations directorate
for disciplinary procedures to be instituted against the officials
concerned. One hundred and fifteen of those cases have been referred to the
SA Police Service for further investigation and the institution of criminal
proceedings against those officials. Thank you.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Deputy Speaker, has the Minister identified a trend
indicating more complaints about certain offices than others; and if so,
has the Minister launched any investigations into these specific corruption
hot spots in order to rectify the situation and put a stop to corruption
once and for all?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, I wish there were just a few
hot spots. [Laughter.]

Let me just say that one of the things that is now beginning to help us -
we will see the results in the coming period – is the biometric login. We
are rolling this out and, in the offices where we have rolled it out, we
are beginning to pick up certain trends. We can now identify not only the
office but also the actual official. There are certain trends that we are
looking at. Hopefully, utilising that, we will not only be able to identify
those hot spots where corruption happens in the front-line offices, but
also identify the exact individuals.

We are also a bit concerned about the ports of entry, but the system has
not been implemented there yet. The cluster is investigating a way of
forming a single entity that is going to look after the ports of entry
because there are many role-players there, amongst others Home Affairs, the
police and Sars. We are discussing ways to consolidate resources and
practices so that we have a single entity that can manage the ports of
entry. That is going to take a bit of time, but it’s on our programme.
Thank you.

Adv Z L MADASA: Deputy Speaker, during the previous week, when we were
doing oversight at the ports of entry, we indeed confirmed what is already
commonly known, namely that corruption levels are high and many officials
are either charged or dismissed. In terms of taking action, the department
is obviously doing well.

We have mentioned the issue of the management of ports of entry and it is
also true that there are low levels of co-operation among the departments
that are involved in managing those ports of entry. Your suggestion about a
single entity is, in fact, welcomed.

The issue I want to raise is that we are of the view that, given this
crisis of human resources, and in order to avoid a vicious cycle, you need
to take steps at a recruitment level, so that when you actually recruit,
the people are properly screened to avoid a vicious cycle. Thank you. [Time
expired.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, the hon member is right.
However, as we speak, there are already 7 000 people working at Home
Affairs. The new recruits will thus be fewer than the staff already
employed at Home Affairs. So, besides reviewing our recruitment policy, we
also need to keep training the existing staff, while dismissing those whom
we can’t do much about.

We also need to take a closer look at society, because, for every corrupt
act, there is somebody who is doing the corrupting – in other words, there
is somebody employed at Home Affairs who is corrupt – but there is also
some member of society who is corrupt.

I think we should all be working towards making sure that society
understands that corruption at Home Affairs is very serious. It can
undermine the security of the country. I think we should all be preaching
that, so that people know that they are endangering our security as a
country by being corrupt.

Nevertheless, I agree with you that, when we recruit, we have to scrutinise
everything and get the national security agencies to also look into the
person’s background, as we do with senior managers in government.

  Discussions regarding lifting of recently announced visa requirements for
                         SA citizens visiting the UK

134.  Mr N J J van R Koornhof (Cope) asked the Minister of International
      Relations and Co-operation:

      Whether she held discussions with her United Kingdom, UK, counterpart
      to lift the recently announced visa requirements for South African
      citizens visiting the UK; if not, why not; if so, what was the outcome
      of such discussions?         NO1828E

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Madam Deputy
Speaker, immigration matters and matters related to the visa regime that
are imposed on South Africans by any country, including the United Kingdom,
fall within the ambit of the functions of my colleague here, the hon
Minister of Home Affairs. However, as the department co-ordinates
international relations for our government, I will share the following
information with the hon member.

The governments of South Africa and the United Kingdom discussed
immigration matters at the last South Africa-UK Bilateral Forum, held from
7 to 8 July 2008 in Tshwane. On that occasion, the then Minister of Home
Affairs held talks with her British counterpart.

Further talks were held in London on 23 February 2009. An agreement on
proposed returns could not be reached at that stage. However, what is
heartening is that the UK government had confirmed to us that they see this
as a temporary measure, whilst we are resolving our internal problems in
South Africa.

The government of the United Kingdom announced the imposition of a visa
regime on South African nationals in February 2009, with effect from March
2009. My predecessor held discussions with her counterpart in London on 6
March 2009, during which this matter was again discussed.

Relations between South Africa and the UK remain strong and sound and the
visa regime remains on the agenda of bilateral discussions between the two
governments. I thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could I just find out from you, hon Minister, if you
would be able to take supplementary questions?

Mr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF: Deputy Speaker, thank you, hon Minister, for that
reply. I think it’s encouraging to hear that there are bilateral talks and
that the government of the United Kingdom said that this is a temporary
arrangement. However, what I would like to ask the Minister is whether she
is aware that this arrangement will cost the economy approximately R500
million next year.

We all know that the United Kingdom is a very important long-haul
destination for South Africa. Let me explain. Because South African
travellers pay for their visas, that R500 million will not be available to
be spent in South Africa; that is why there is a visa cost to the economy.
I would like to have the Minister assure us that she will work with her
predecessor so that we can resolve this as soon as possible.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Hon Deputy
Speaker, I thought that the supplementary questions would go to the
relevant Minister. As I said earlier on, the Minister of Home Affairs is
available. We are co-ordinating the activities of this government in so far
as international relations are concerned. Therefore, the cost to the
economy and all related questions would be better handled by my colleague
and neighbour here, the Minister of Home Affairs.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That’s exactly why I asked the question. The Minister
of International Relations and Co-operation stated earlier on that although
she would give a reply to the question, in fact the question was supposed
to be directed to the Minister of Home Affairs.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Deputy Speaker,
if the Speaker agrees, we can do a bilateral.

Mr S MOKGALAPA: Madam Deputy Speaker, surely this is a matter of public
significance and interest, as many South African citizens are
inconvenienced by these restrictions. Compliance with these requirements is
necessary and the timeframes are important in this regard.

The question to the relevant Minister is: At what stage will the Minister
be in a position to go to her UK counterpart to indicate that we have
complied with the requirements as stipulated by their home affairs
secretary and for them to lift the requirements? I thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could I find out if the Minister is able to answer the
question now? If not, a reply to the question can follow at a later stage.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Hon Deputy
Speaker, we have a bilateral meeting with my counterpart from the United
Kingdom scheduled for tomorrow. He has since sent a message asking for the
postponement of our engagement tomorrow. However, I will leave the rest of
the response to the Minister of Home Affairs.

What we really want to clarify here is that indeed, yes, we are sincerely
and clearly engaged with our counterparts on this very important matter.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Deputy Speaker, we will go to the UK to
renegotiate when we feel we are ready; secondly, there are things that the
United Kingdom is asking for that we will not agree to. So, in terms of our
processes, once we are ready, we’ll go back to them.

For example, they want people who got South African passports fraudulently
15 years or so ago to return to South Africa. I’m not about to agree to
that, but we can discuss this issue with them.

When we are ready with our internal processes, we’ll go back to them and
ask if we can renegotiate on some issues. However, having people that went
to the United Kingdom a long time ago return to South Africa might be
problematic. Thank you.

Ms T B SUNDUZA: Deputy Speaker, thank you, Minister, for your response and
for clarifying to us that the visa requirements for South African citizens
visiting the United Kingdom are temporary. My supplementary question,
arising from your reply, is: Is there any other country in the Commonwealth
that has raised the issues that the United Kingdom has raised based on what
your colleague has said? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Madam Deputy
Speaker, not as far as we know, but if that happens we will respond
accordingly.

We are happy with the work that is under way in the Department of Home
Affairs, but we need the support of all South African citizens so as to
make sure that we cut down on these challenges that tend to become quite
embarrassing at times.

 Training of immigration officers in light of passenger processing agreement
    with Sita regarding visitors to 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament

129.  Mr B A D Martins (ANC) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   Whether, in light of the passenger processing agreement with the
           State Information Technology Agency, Sita, which will eliminate
           immigration checks and formalities of visitors for the 2010 Fifa
           Soccer World Cup tournament at South African airports, her
           department has ensured that immigration officials are properly
           trained and prepared for this initiative; if not, why not; if
           so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   to what extent is this initiative being popularised locally and
           internationally?                        NO1100E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Martins, the answer
is yes, the training of officials, including immigration officials who will
be directly involved in issues related to the Advanced Passenger
Processing, APP, system at the three main ports of entry, namely O R Tambo
International Airport, Cape Town International Airport and Durban
International Airport, commenced on 6 October 2009.

It must also be noted that the APP system does not eliminate the current
immigration checks that all inbound passengers are required to undergo. It
will, however, allow a great majority of travellers to be precleared as low-
risk before they arrive at our ports of entry, and as a result the
clearance process will be accelerated.

Locally, the APP system forms part of the department’s greater 2010
communication strategy and is being embarked upon as such internationally.
The International Air Transport Association or the control authorities
working group is well aware of the acquiring of the system by the
Department of Home Affairs and the processes thus far, and the department
is regularly represented at its annual meetings or workshops.

Of course, in addition to this, there is also work that is being done with
the Local Organising Committee, LOC, in terms of recruiting volunteers.
They will not be doing immigration work, but they will be assisting in
directing passengers so that the queues can be cleared quickly. Thank you.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, will it be possible to
utilise the skills of the personnel thus trained beyond 2010?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, yes, hon member, those people
who are trained will be utilised at the ports of entry and also, some of
them will be trained to use the IT aspects of the system, so they will
continue to be used. In fact, where possible, we’ll be using this skill
beyond 2010 anyway.

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Hon Deputy Speaker, the ID really applauds this initiative,
but of concern to us, hon Minister, is that the Advanced Passenger
Processing system is an integration of the Department of Home Affairs’
R4 billion Who Am I Online project. There is much controversy surrounding
the tender for this project, and since the Portfolio Committee on Home
Affairs hasn’t perused the forensic audit, how will this Advanced Passenger
Processing system then affect the process that will take place in October?
It was also promised by Sita that they would look into land and sea ports
of entry as far as 2010 is concerned. If this is still the case, when will
this happen, especially looking at the high volume of entrants at the port
of entry at Beitbridge? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, member, first of all, let me
just say to the hon member that the Who Am I Online contract that we have
is for plus-minus R2 billion and not R4 billion anymore.
Secondly, regarding the forensic audit, I know one hon member said here
yesterday that we were hiding it. Even if you put a gun to my head and said
I should show it to you, I couldn’t, because we haven’t received it yet, so
we don’t have the forensic audit from the auditors yet.

What I do know is that Treasury has given us money to use for Who Am I
Online on the 2010-related issues, because we can’t wait. The government
has made undertakings for 2010, so that process has to continue and
Treasury has given us the money for 2010-related arrangements. Thank you.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Deputy Speaker, Minister, I understand that this plan
will be effected at our main ports of entry, which are basically the
airports, but I would like to know something else. During our visit last
week it was clear that security measures at the Lesotho border were not
efficient enough. Scanning machines were standing at two ports of entry
like expensive white elephants and people walked through our borders
without their baggage being scanned or manually searched.

I would like to know, Minister, how do you plan on ensuring that visitors
with criminal intentions do not enter the country during the Fifa 2010
World Cup, as surely the elimination of immigration checks leaves this open
to abuse?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, hon member, first of all, let
me say that, with regard to this Advanced Passenger Processing system, we
worked together with the other members of the security sector. If a
person’s name is on the Interpol or our own police list it will show and
that’s precisely why we want advanced processing, because such a person
will not even board the plane if we find out that he’s trying to come here.

Therefore our system will be working with them, linking with our own list
of people who are known to be criminals, but those whom we do not have on
the system we do not know, and they may have criminal intentions. It will
be very difficult to find them.

I wish Home Affairs had the powers to be able to see what people’s
intentions are. Unfortunately we can’t claim powers that we don’t have. We
cannot know which people do have criminal intentions and which don’t. But
those who are already known and who are on the list will show.

Regarding the security at the Lesotho border, you are right. It’s not just
the security and whether people are being searched, it’s also the fact that
even the documents that Basothos produce are not really proper documents,
and we have discussed this matter in the department and we have agreed that
we are going to engage Basothos whilst also looking at our own side,
because unfortunately there are agreements that were reached with the
government of Lesotho that allow some of those things to happen.

There is an agreement by which you are given a six-month permit to come and
go any time without even being scrutinised by the immigration officer. It’s
an agreement that is in operation. There is another one that we are
stalling and which we are going to renegotiate, but that is in operation,
so we have agreed as a department that we are going to review and then sit
down with the Basothos and discuss the issue.

But we are going to do that with other countries as well, just to see how
we can tighten up our security, not only for 2010, but in general, because
we have found out that people fly via O R Tambo to Lesotho, they get those
pieces of paper from Lesotho and then they come in as Basothos. So, it is a
problem. We have identified it and we are trying to deal with it.

And I’m happy that hon Members of Parliament have visited these posts. We
should discuss these issues and share ideas on how to strengthen our
security and also how to review some of the agreements that we already have
with them in order to, whilst allowing freedom of movement, not undermine
security. Thank you.

    Particulars regarding suspension and investigation of certain persons
165.  Ms H N Makhuba (IFP) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:


      (1)   (a)(i) When and (ii) why were certain persons (details
           furnished) suspended;

      (2)   whether they were suspended with full pay; if not, what is the
           position in this regard; if so, what was the total cost to her
           department;


      (3)   whether the investigation and disciplinary process against the
           said persons were finalised; if not, why not; if so, (a) when
           and (b) what was the outcome;


      (4)   what was the total cost to her department for salaries which
           were paid to all suspended officials pending the finalisation of
           their disciplinary procedures for the 2008-09 financial year?
                                  NO1878E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, Hon member, on 10 September
2007 there were indeed charges that were brought with regard to the
individuals concerned. One was charged for undertaking overseas trips
without proper authorisation, and also failure to follow proper procedures
on procurement. The charges against the other related to failure to follow
proper procurement procedures.

When these people were suspended, I suppose it took time to finalise the
case and since they were suspended with full pay, costs were incurred. In
the end there was an agreement to give one a severance package, while the
other one resigned. The total of the severance package was R1 172 288; plus
the resignation for the other was R873 319, 89. That was the cost of the
suspension plus the severance package and the resignation, because the
other one decided to resign instead of defend the case. Those were the
expenses. And this happened in 2007. Thank you.

Ms H N MAKHUBA: Deputy Speaker, thank you, Minister, for your response. The
concern here is that the longer it takes for the disciplinary procedures to
be finalised, the more the department is incurring costs in the form of
salaries to people who are no longer adding value to the objectives of the
department. The sooner the disciplinary procedures are finalised, the
better it will be for the department.

I would just like to ask the Minister if there are any measures in place by
the department to detect malpractices by department officials earlier.
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Deputy Speaker, I agree with the hon
member; the shorter the process, the better. But at the same time there are
processes that have to be followed, because if short cuts are taken, we
might end up not being able to achieve what we want to achieve. There are
stipulations, for example a number of days to be given to a person, a
number of witnesses that the person may require at the hearing, etc. I
agree with you, but at the same time procedures have to be followed.

Yes, as in any other department, there are measures in place. Whether the
measures are adequate is another question, but there are measures in place.
There is an internal audit committee; there is an internal tender
committee; there is an audit committee and other measures in place, as in
any other department. Thank you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House      debates the relevance of skills offered by FET
   colleges and how these skills contribute to the growth of the country’s
   economy and come up with possible solutions.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


   That the House -
     1) debates whether or not measures taken by government to address the
        escalating problem of domestic violence and violence against women
        have been effective; and

     2) whether or not additional or alternative measures should be
        considered.

Mr P F SMITH: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House –

     1) debates service delivery protests taking place in various
        municipalities around the country. There are 51 and the number is
        rising according to government’s response to an earlier IFP
        question. It is the highest number since the new local government
        system was established in 2000;

     2) also debates government’s failure over a number of years to
        recognise and respond to the formative causes of the crisis we are
        facing; and

     3) discusses the validity of government’s spin doctoring and its
        refusal, in public at least, to recognise that there is indeed a
        crisis in local government.

Mrs S P KOPANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the unacceptably long delay in the implementation
   of the National Child Protection Register as well as the national sex
   offences register and come up with possible solutions to fast-track the
   implementation of this vital service.

                                 HYDROGRAPHY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that hydrography is the art and science of charting the
         ocean floor, the directions and intensities of ocean currents and
         ensuring that ships can navigate safely whilst at sea;

   (2)      further notes that the oceans and the atmosphere do not have
         boundaries, making international co-operation critical in
         exchanging data, products, capacity-building and skills
         transference – all necessary conditions for effective management of
         a maritime area;

   (3)      acknowledges that according to Britain’s National Hydrographer,
         Rear Admiral Ian Moncrieff, despite “… difficulties in retaining a
         small qualified staff, South Africa’s Hydrography Office is
         regarded as a mature centre of expertise in this region”; and

   (4)      congratulates South African Navy Hydrographer, Captain Abri
         Kampfer, a recipient of the Alexander Dalrymple Award this year on
         his outstanding work in world hydrography.

Agreed to.

               DEATH OF OLGA KEKANA IN SAPS SHOOTING INCINDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mrs M N MATLADI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -
   (1)      notes the unfortunate and regrettable death of Olga Kekana on
        Sunday in Mabopane in Pretoria when the police apparently mistook
        her for a hijacker. Andrew Singo and Sofie Kgagara were also shot
        during the same incident;

   (2)      further notes that, according to the Independent Complaints
        Directorate, it seems to have been a case of mistaken identity. The
        police were allegedly following up on a stolen hijacked vehicle, a
        grey Toyota Corolla, which they had tracked to a nearby filling
        station. When the driver stopped his vehicle and tried to get out
        shots were fired at his vehicle;

   (3)      also notes that, although the UCDP strongly feels that tougher
        action should be taken against violent criminals, it still condemns
        the act of shooting without careful verification; and

   (4)      notes that this unfortunate incident would have never happened
        if the police were more thorough in the follow-up of their leads.
        We hope that this never happens again and our condolences go out to
        the family and loved ones of the lady that was killed. We also wish
        those who were injured a speedy recovery.

I thank you.
Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, we do have a practice in Parliament
that motions without notice will be circulated to all political parties. We
in the ANC did not receive that motion without notice, and as such, at this
moment, we cannot support it.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very well, the motion will then be taken back,
circulated and then we will come back to it again at a later stage.

The House adjourned at 17:07.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Correspondence on nomination of candidates for Human Rights Commission


    On 22 September, the National Assembly nominated a number of candidates
    including Adv L K B Mpumlwana for appointment as Commissioners to the
    South African Human Rights.


    On 1 October 2009 I wrote to the President of the Republic of South
    Africa requesting him to delay the appointment of Adv Mpulwana until
    such time as the National Assembly has had an opportunity to reconsider
    the nomination, in view of certain matters that were brought to the
    attention of the National Assembly during the debate on the nomination
    of these persons.

 2. Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes have been made to the membership of
          committees:

          PC on Human Settlements

          Discharged:

          ACDP

          Dudley, Mrs C

          PC on Social Development

          Appointed:

          ACDP

          Dudley, Mrs C (Alt)

 3. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Weather Service for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09 [RP 107-2009].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the iSimangaliso
           Wetland Park for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.

     2) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
           Prosecuting Authority (NPA) for 2008-09, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP 116-2009].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Debt
           Collectors for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.

     3) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        a) Register of Debt Collectors in terms of section 12(1) of the
           Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).

     4) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


        a) Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Proprietary) Limited
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Ltd for 2008-
           09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Reports of
        the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
           and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2008-09, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 117-2009].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Academy of Science
           of South Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
           Foundation for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.

    (6)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence and Military Veterans for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments
           Corporation of South Africa Limited (Armscor) for 2008-09,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Group
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP
           56-2009].


     7) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Blind SA for 2008-09,
            including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
            Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National English
            Literary Museum for 2008-09, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
            Information for 2008-09.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for
            2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
            Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
            [RP 179-2009].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the
            Msunduzi/Voortrekker Museum for 2008-09, including the Report
            of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
            Performance Information for 2008-09 [PR 137-2009].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts
            Council for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09 [RP 181-2009].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Freedom Park Trust
            for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
            Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
            Foundation for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09 [RP 43-2009].


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum for
            2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
            Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
            [RP 160-2009].


        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2008-09,
            including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
            Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 188-
            2009].


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
            Museum and Monument for 2008-09, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
            Information for 2008-09 [RP 61-2009].


        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of
            Cape Town for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09 [RP 155-2009].


        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and
            Video Foundation for 2008-09, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
            Information for 2008-09 [RP 150-2009].


        (m)      Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
            Institution for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09 [RP 42-2009].


        (n)      Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys
            Art Gallery for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09.


        (o)      Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts
            Centre of the Free State for 2008-09, including the Report of
            the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
            Information for 2008-09 [RP 218-2009].


        (p)      Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
            Language Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09.


        (q)      Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the
            Boer Republics for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09.


        (r)      Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela
            Museum for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
            on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
            2008-09 [RP 129-2009].


        (s)      Report and Financial Statements of the Kwazulu-Natal
            Performing Arts Company (trading as the Playhouse Company) for
            2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
            Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


        (t)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
            Library for the Blind for 2008-09, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
            Information for 2008-09.


        (u)      Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
            Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
            Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
            Information for 2008-09 [RP138-2009].


        (v)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum -
            Bloemfontein for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09.


        (w)      Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island
            Museum for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
            on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
            2008-09 [RP 180-2009].


        (x)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
            Theatre for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09 [RP 57-2009].


        (y)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
            South Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2008-09 [RP 215-2009].


     8) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Consumer
           Tribunal for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Regulator
           for Compulsory Specifications (NRCS) for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for the seven-month period ending 31
           March 2009 [RP 153-2009].

     9) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting
           Standards Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP 63-2009].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud
           for Financial Services Providers for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and
           Fiscal Commission (FFC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP 183-2009].


        d) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
           Corporation Limited for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP 59-2009].


    10) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Government
           Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2008-09,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information of Vote 6 for 2008-09
           [RP194-2009].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic
           Media Institute of South Africa (Nemisa) for 2008-09, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2008-09.

    11) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on Labour
        for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Women, Youth, Children and People with Disability. The Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund
           (UYF) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.

    12) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Correctional Services for consideration and report. The Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 - Department of
           Correctional Services for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP 197-2009].

    13) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Basic
        Education for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
           Educators for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.

    14) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:

        Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Management of
           Job Applicants with a Criminal Record in the Public Service [RP
           20-2009].


    15) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
           Region of the People’s Republic of China concerning Mutual Legal
           Assistance in Criminal Matters, tabled in terms of section
           231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
           the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
           Republic of China concerning Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
           Matters.

        c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
           Region of the People’s Republic of China concerning the
           Surrender of Fugitive Offenders, tabled in terms of section
           231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
           of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Hong
           Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of
           China concerning the Surrender of Fugitive Offenders.


        e) Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mrs N E
           Ndamase, an additional magistrate at Pretoria in terms of
           section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
           1993).


        f) Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr C M
           Dumani, a magistrate at Graaff Reinet in terms of section
           13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    16) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        a) Report on the upliftment of the provisional suspension of a
           magistrate: Ms A Bacharam, an additional magistrate at
           Scottburgh.


    17) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Human
        Settlements for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Servcon Housing
            Solutions (Pty) Ltd for 2008-09, including the Report of the
            Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
            Performance Information for 2008-09.


    18) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural
        Development and Land Reform for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 - Department of
           Land Affairs for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 27 for 2008-09.

    19) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
        Committee on Trade and Industry, Portfolio Committee on Arts and
        Culture and Portfolio Committee on Tourism. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
           Council (IMC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09 [RP 134-2009].

    20) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the Committee
        on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
           Schemes for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09 [RP 67-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
           Laboratory Service for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.


        c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 - Department of
           Health for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           14 for 2008-09 [RP169-2009].
        d) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Commissioner
           for Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works for 2008-09,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


        e) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
           Research Council (MRC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP174-2009].

    21) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural
        Development and Land Reform for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board for
           2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP172-2009].

    22) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
        and Industry for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
        Committee on Higher Education and Training and the Portfolio
        Committee on Science and Technology. The Report of the Auditor-
        General is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
           Resources for Industry Programme (Thrip) for 2008-09, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2008-09.

    23) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
           Authority (TCTA) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP
           130-2009].


        c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 - Department of Water
           Affairs and Forestry for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 34 for 2008-09 [RP163-2009].


        d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
           Biodiversity Institute for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP165-2009].


        e) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
           Parks (SANparks ) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP148-2009].

    24) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee of
        Justice and Constitutional Development:

        a) Proclamation No R.50, published in Government Gazette No 32494,
           dated 14 August 2009: Commencement of sections 8 to 10 of the
           Judicial Matters Second Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 55 of 2003).


        b) Government Notice No R.841, published in Government Gazette No
           32494, dated 14 August 2009: Scale of fees payable in respect of
           matters referred to in section 80 of the Attorneys Act, 1979
           (Act No 53 of 1079).

    25) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Sport and Recreation for consideration and report. The Reports of
        the Auditor-General are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Drug-Free Sport
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements for 2008-09 [RP 99-2008].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 - Department of Sport
           and Recreation South Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 17 for 2008-2009 [RP 152-2009].


        c) Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2008-
           09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.

    26) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Communications:

        a) Report of the Auditor-General on an investigation at the South
           African Broadcasting Corporation [RP 237-2009].

    27) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Police for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 - Department of
           Safety and Security for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 22 for 2008-09 [RP 204-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Independent
           Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2008-09, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information of Vote 20 for 2008-09 [RP234-2009].

    28) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Reports of
        the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are referred to
        the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
        a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
           Energy Research Institute (Pty) Ltd for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09.


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
           Natural Scientific Professions for 2008-09, including the Report
           of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09.


        c) Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
           Council (HSRC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09 [RP 184-2009].


        d) Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
           Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09.


    29) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report.

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory Council
           on Innovation for 2008-09.

    30) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Report of
        the Auditor-General is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:
        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 - Department of
           Science and Technology for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 31 for 2008-09 [RP236-2009].

    31) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration
        and report. The Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
           Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09 [RP207-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 - Department of
           Provincial and Local Government for 2008-2009, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information of Vote 29 for 2008-09.

    32) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the Committee
        on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
           Deposits for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP201-2009].


        c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
           Bank for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2008-09.

        d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
           Service (Sars) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09 [RP238-2009].


        e) Report and Financial Statements of the Collective Investment
           Schemes for 2008-09 [RP202-2009].


        f) Report and Financial Statements of the Sasria (Ltd) for 2008-09,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


        g) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – National Treasury
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 7 for
           2008-09 [RP198-2009].


        h) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
           Board for Auditors for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP156-2009].

        i) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Pension
           Funds Adjudicator for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.


        j) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
           Centre for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09 [RP162-2009].


        k) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 - Statistics South
           Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           11 for 2008-09 [RP211-2009].


        l) Report and Financial Statements of the Bank Supervision
           Department of the South African Reserve Bank for 2008.

    33) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration
        and report and to the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture. The
        Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
           the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural,
           Religious and Linguistic Communities for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP212-2009].

    34) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 - Department of
           Communications for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 24 for 2008-09 [RP 209-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post Office
           (Ltd) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.


        c) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and
           Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2008-09, including
           the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           of Universal Service and Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA)
           and the Universal Service and Access Fund (USAF) for 2008-09
           [RP222-2009].

    35) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Social Development for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 - Department of
           Social Development for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 16 for 2008-09 [RP225-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
           Agency for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09 [RP 58-2009].


        c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Social
           Security Agency (Sassa) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP 29-2009].

    36) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Energy for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration.

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
           Regulator (NNR) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09 [RP 36-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
           Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP220-2009].


        c) Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group
           of Companies (CEF) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information of the Central Energy
           Fund Group of Companies for 2008-09 [RP186-2009].

        d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy Regulator
           of South Africa (Nersa) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP177-2009].


        e) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
           Energy Corporation Limited (Necsa) for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP141-2009].

    37) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Mining for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
           Council (MHSC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09 [RP8-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond and
           Precious Metals Regulator for 2008-09, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP132-2009].


        c) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
           (CGS) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09 [RP 55-2009].


        d) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 - Department of
           Minerals and Energy for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 28 for 2008-2009 [RP 240-2009].


        e) Report and Financial Statements of the Mintek Group for 2008-09,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP27-2009].


        f) Report and Financial Statements of the State Diamond Trader for
           2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP178-2009].

 38) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
     Finance:

        a) Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank - 17
           September 2009.


        b) Government Notice No.892, published in Government Gazette No
           32546, dated 31 August 2009: Determination of interest rate for
           purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of ‘‘Official rate
           of interest’’ in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, in terms
           of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


        c) Government Notice No R.918, published in Government Gazette No
           32582, dated 25 September 2009: Exchange Control Regulations:
           Cancellation of appointment of an authorised dealer in foreign
           exchange - Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft in terms of the
           exchange control regulations.

    39) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
           Rights Commission for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP65-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 - Department of
           Justice and Constitutional Development for 2008-09, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information of Vote 21 for 2008-09 [RP189-2009].

    40) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        International Relations and Cooperation for consideration and
        report. The Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
           Foreign Affairs for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 3 for 2008-09.


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance and
           International Co-operation Fund for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09.

    41) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
           Resources Agency (Sahra) for 2008-09, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP 184-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Arts and
           Culture for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09.


        c) Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
           Arts for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP192-2009].


        d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage Council
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP242-2009].

    42) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Department of Trade
           and Industry for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 32 for 2008-09 [RP 18-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
           Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2008-09, including the Report
           of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09.


        c) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP53-2009].


        d) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
           Intellectual Property Registration Office (Cipro) for 2008-09,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP115-2009].

    43) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for consideration and report.
        The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
           Council (ARC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09 [RP199-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
           Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2008-09, including the Report
           of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09.


        c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 - Department of
           Agriculture for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 23 for 2008-09 [RP210-2009].


        d) Report and Financial Statements of the Onderstepoort Biological
           Products (Ltd) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.


        e) Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for
           2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


        f) Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
           Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2008-09, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP192-2009].

    44) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 - Department of Public
           Service and Administration for 2008-09, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 8 for 2008-09 [RP190-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
           Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd (Sita) for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP47-2009].

    45) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence and Military Veterans for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
           Defence for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           19 for 2008-09 [RP193-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Castle Control Board for
           2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP165-2009].

    46) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Independent Auditors are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
           Company (Ltd) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Airways
           (Pty) (Ltd) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.

    47) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Works for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of Public
           Works for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           5 for 2008-09.


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
           Trust (IDT) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09 [RP 200-2009].

        c) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
           Development Board (CIDB) for 2008-09, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP 233-2009].


        d) Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa (ASA)
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09.


        e) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
           Environment (CBE) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.

    48) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Higher Education and Training for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
           Education (CHE) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.

    49) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Human
        Settlements for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
        General is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 - Department of
           Housing for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           26 for 2008-09 [RP136-2009].

    50) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the Committee
        on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
           Africa (Ltd) (ACSA) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
           Navigation Services Co Ltd (ATNS) for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2008-09.


        c) Reports and Financial Statements of the Ports Regulator of South
           Africa for 2007-08 and 2008-09, including the Reports of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2007-08 and 2008-09.


        d) Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
           (RSR) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09 [RP 158-2009].


        e) Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of
           South Africa and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company for
           2008-09.

        f) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
           Roads Agency Limited for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP145-2009].


        g) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
           Corporation for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09 [RP170-2009].


        h) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
           Rescue Organisation for 2008-09.

        i) Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund for
           2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP217-2009].


        j) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
           Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2008-09, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.
        k) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for
           2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP221-2009].


        l) Report and Financial Statements of the Passenger Rail Agency of
           South Africa (Prasa) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09 [RP157-2009].

    51) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 - Department of Home
           Affairs for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
           4 for 2008-09 [RP239-2009].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission for
           2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP60-2009].


        c) Report and Financial Statements of Film and Publication Board
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
           [RP224-2009].

    52) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications and the Committee on Public Accounts:

        a) Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 30 September
           2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, explaining the
           delay in the submission of the Annual Report of Icasa for 2008-
           09.

    53) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Correctional Services for consideration and report:


        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial Inspectorate for
           Correctional Services for 2008-09 [RP132-2009].

    54) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
        and Industry for consideration:

        a) Strategic Plan for the Companies and Intellectual Property
           Registration Office (Cipro) for 2009-10 – 2011-12.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The President of the Republic

    a) Report and Financial Statements of The Presidency for 2008-2009,
       including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


2.    The Minister of Higher Education and Training


    Report and Financial Statements of the National Student Financial Aid
       Scheme for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
       the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

National Assembly

1.    The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
    Constitutional Development

    SUBMISSION OF LEGISLATIVE PROPOSAL: MEMORANDUM IN
    TERMS OF RULE 238 OF THE RULES OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
    BY THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL
    DEVELOPMENT:


    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development is
    hereby requesting the permission of the House in terms of Rule 230(1)
    for the introduction of the following legislation in the House:


    (a)     Purpose of the Bill
        The purpose of the bill is to amend the Repeal of the Black
        Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Act, 2005, in
        order to substitute a date.


    (b)     Objects of Bill


        1. Section 1(3) of the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and
             Amendment of Certain Laws Act, 2005 (the Act), provides that
             the remaining provisions of sections 12 and 20 and the Third
             Schedule of the Black Administration Act, 1927 (Act No. 38 of
             1927), will be repealed on 30 December 2009 or on such date as
             national legislation to further regulate the matters dealt with
             in these provisions has been implemented, whichever occurs
             first. These sections deal with the judicial functions of
             traditional leaders.


        2. The Traditional Courts Bill, which regulates the matters dealt
             with in sections 12 and 20 and the Third Schedule of the Black
             Administration Act, 1927, is currently before the Portfolio
             Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development. It is
             foreseen that the Traditional Courts Bill would not be signed
             into law by the deadline of 30 December 2009. The Bill
             consequently intends extending the date of the application of
             the provisions of sections 12 and 20 and the Third Schedule of
             the Black Administration Act, 1927 to 30 December 2010.


        3. The same deadline has been determined in section 1(2), (4), (5)
             and (6) of the Act in respect of legislation which is
             administered by other Departments, namely the Department of
             Rural Development and Land Reform and Cooperative Governance
             and Traditional Affairs. These deadlines are, likewise, being
             extended from 30 December 2009 to 30 December 2010.


    (c)     Financial Implications for the state


        The proposed legislation will not lead to any expenditure for the
       state.


