---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 07 May 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-05-07
---

THURSDAY, 7 MAY 2009
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

Members assembled in the Chamber of the National Council of Provinces at
13:45.

The Usher announced the hon Chief Justice of South Africa, Justice Pius
Nkonzo Langa, who was received by members standing.

The Chief Justice took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 26.

                         OATH OR SOLEMN AFFIRMATION

The Chief Justice requested members to swear or affirm faithfulness to the
Republic and obedience to the Constitution in terms of section 62(6) of the
Constitution.

The following members made and subscribed the oath or solemn affirmation:
Adams, F; Bekker, J M; Bloem, D V; Boroto, M G; Chaane, T E; Chen, S S; de
Beer, C J; de Beer, O; de Villiers, M J R; Dikgale, M C; Faber, W F;
Feldman, D G; Gamede, D D; Groenewald, H B; Gunda, J J; Harris, T; Jacobs,
M P; Mabe, B P; Maine, M C; Mazosiwe, S S; Macpherson, R D; Matila, A G;
Mashamaite, T A; Makhubela, M W; Mahlangu, M J; Makgale, M W; Magadla, N W;
Mabija, L; Mokgoro, G G; Mashile, B L; Mlenzana, Z; Mokgobi, M H;
Montsitsi, S D; Mncube, B V; Mofokeng, T H M; Moshodi, M L; Mnguni, B A;
Memela, T C; Nesi, B; Nzimande, L P M; Ntwanambi, N D; Nyambi, A J;
Plaatjie, S H; Qikane, A N D; Ranto, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sinclair, K A;
Sibande, M P; Tau, R J; Themba, M P; van Lingen, E C; Watson, A; Worth, D
A; Zulu, M M M.

                      APPOINTMENT OF RETURNING OFFICERS

The Chief Justice announced the appointment of Mr M B Coetzee as Returning
Officer, and as Assistant Returning Officers, Adv M E Phindela, Adv B N
Nonyane, Adv J A Niekerk, Ms V H Mnana, Ms S Bowers, Ms S Ally, Mr M K
Skolo and Mr M C Mbebe.

          ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON OF NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

The Council proceeded to the election of a Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces.

The Chief Justice reminded the delegates that nominations had to be
submitted in the prescribed form and duly seconded.

The Chief Justice informed members that in terms of Item 4 of Part A of
Schedule 3 to the Constitution no debate would be allowed.

The Chief Justice called for nominations.

Ms N Kiviet, seconded by Mr G M Nkomfe, nominated Mr Mninwa Johannes
Mahlangu for election as Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chief Justice that the nomination
paper had been properly completed.

There being no further nominations, the Chief Justice declared Mr Mninwa
Johannes Mahlangu duly elected as Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces.

The Chief Justice, on behalf of all present, congratulated Mr Mahlangu on
his election as Chairperson and requested him to take the Chair.

The Usher conducted the Chairperson to the Chair and placed the Black Rod
in position at the Chair.

      ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY CHAIRPERSON OF NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, thank you very much. Chief
Justice and hon premiers present here today, may I start by congratulating
all premiers on being elected to their positions. To deviate a little bit:
I realised in the Third Parliament that there was a tendency, whenever
premiers were invited to the National Council of Provinces, for the women
speakers to respond immediately - and attend. I’ve quickly checked the
House and the majority of them are here. I want to thank you very much. I
hope that this will continue because we need each other to work together
with the provinces and the National Council of Provinces. Thank you very
much for attending. [Applause.] Also, remember that premiers are leaders of
special delegates, in terms of the Constitution, in order to fulfil the
mandate of this House.

I also thank Speakers that I see in the House. I see the Speaker from the
Eastern Cape. Some Speakers I might not have met. Speakers are my
counterparts in the National Council of Provinces. We have to make sure
that our programmes conform and ensure that we work together to fulfil the
objectives of the National Council of Provinces.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for electing me to this
position of Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces. I’m both
honoured and humbled by your confidence in me. I also wish to thank my
party, the ANC, and my province for giving me this opportunity to lead the
National Council of Provinces in the Fourth Parliament. I take the
responsibilities they have given me very seriously.

I thank colleagues and members of the previous term for their support. I
cannot forget the former Chairpersons of the National Council of Provinces
who laid the foundation for the work we did in the Third Parliament. I
would be failing if I did not extend a word of appreciation to the former
Speakers of the provincial legislatures with whom I worked very closely at
the Speakers’ Forum and also in carrying out the duties of this House. We
have cordial and special working relationships; together we laid the
groundwork for the new NCOP in the Fourth Parliament. We will not only
build on the work that was done, but increase our pace as we tackle the new
challenges we are facing.

Hon members, the NCOP has a different mandate. Its mandate is to represent
the provinces to ensure that provincial interests are taken into account in
the national sphere of government. Central to the carrying out of this
mandate is the challenging task of harmonising the interests of these three
spheres of government in the name of intergovernmental relations. Needless
to say, the National Council of Provinces will need to further enhance
liaison and working relationships with provincial legislatures. Its
permanent delegates must serve as agents for the promotion of a dynamic
link with the provinces. I want to emphasise this because we are
representing provinces here. Therefore, the perspective when we stand in
this House will always relate to our provincial perspective because that is
the reason we are here. And that is the reason, from time to time, we also
have to get mandates from our provinces.

The work of the National Council of Provinces in the previous term provides
a springboard from which to launch such a vibrant partnership in pursuit of
our development goals. The NCOP is, however, a small House in terms of
size. In order to make an impact, we need to understand and focus on our
mandate especially in the areas of concurrent national and provincial
competencies, such as education, health, agriculture and rural development.

Our approach to oversight should be informed by these realities and the
nature of this House. The activities of the National Council of Provinces
were informed by the expectation which we solicited from the provinces at
the beginning of the term. These were contained in Programme 2009 which
served as our guideline throughout the term. We will soon be developing, of
course, a new concept in dealing with this Fourth Parliament.

As we start our journey in the Fourth Parliament, our first task will be to
establish from provinces the broad key issues they would like us to focus
on during this term. This will inform our planning, which must respond to
the challenges faced by our people at this stage of our democracy. I would
like to see us working closely with the SA Local Government Association,
Salga, which has 10 seats in this Chamber. This will help us to understand
and better respond to the challenges facing our people. Local government is
a sphere of government that is at the coalface of service delivery. We need
to roll up our sleeves – all of us - have all hands on deck and make sure
that things are happening.

To the new and returning members: I hope that your induction over the next
week will prepare you for the work ahead. We are aware that the majority of
permanent delegates in the Fourth Parliament are new. I’m quite aware of
that. We will take you through all the steps in order for you to understand
what this House is all about so that we hit the ground running.

Let me take this opportunity to welcome you as permanent delegates to the
National Council of Provinces in the Fourth Parliament. I expect this to be
the most challenging but exciting term of this House. I’m hopeful that we
will all live up to our responsibilities. I also hope that together we will
push for less talk and more action. I want to repeat this: We will push for
less talk and more action, and that is the name of the game in this House.

I thank all of you for participating in these elections, and that is the
end of my speech for today. [Applause.] We now move to the speakers’ list
to allow permanent delegates to make a few comments. Each delegate has
three minutes.

       CONGRATULATIONS TO CHAIPERSON OF NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

The PREMIER OF THE EASTERN CAPE (Ms N Kiviet): Hon Chairperson, hon Chief
Justice, delegates here present, guests in the gallery, ladies and
gentlemen, good afternoon to you all. Let me also add my voice in
congratulating you, Chairperson, on being elected to represent hon members
of the various legislatures and the hon premiers from all the provinces,
especially abomama [the ladies]. [Applause.]

Today marks a very important occasion in the history of our democracy,
especially after the masses of our people spoke so clearly during the
fourth democratic elections of our country.

Your re-election, hon Chairperson, epitomises a vote of confidence by your
party, the ANC, and generally by the provinces represented in this House.
It points to your personal vibrant, consultative, accessible and visionary
leadership, and it embraces the principles of change and continuity.

Your previous record as a negotiator at the Convention for a Democratic
South Africa, Codesa, as a member of the Constitutional Assembly and as
Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP from 2005 speaks for itself and qualifies
you as a seasoned cadre in the struggle to improve the lives of our people.

I would be failing in my responsibilities if I did not remind you of the
tasks we have been dealing with in the Speakers’ Forum, which include the
finalisation of the formalisation of the sector policy with all nine
provinces and national Parliament - in fact, the critical issue there is
implementation more than formalisation - redefining the role of the sector
in deepening democracy and nation-building; and capacity-building of public
representatives in order to enable them to discharge their constitutional
obligations.

This House would agree that we still have the challenge of ensuring that
the legislative arm of government is taken seriously in all spheres of
life. It is, therefore, our duty to make sure that such seriousness does
prevail.

During the previous elections, the people of South Africa spoke and they
have spoken loud and clear. It is mainly up to this House, hon Chairperson,
to ensure that this government delivers on its promises. This House is
strategically positioned to see to it that our people are not disappointed.

Through your leadership, hon Chairperson, we shall be constantly reminded
that members of this House are not just ordinary Members of Parliament, but
delegates of provinces. And, in fulfilling their responsibilities, the true
meaning of the word “delegate” must be realised. The current existing
bridge between the three spheres of government should be history as our
democracy matures. Our people have worked so hard for our freedom, yet the
challenges of poverty, unemployment, HIV and Aids continue to undermine our
efforts, especially in provinces like the Eastern Cape.

It is high time we reviewed our strategies of involving the public in the
process of lawmaking, oversight and building co-operative government. The
level and approach to oversight needs to focus more on the impact of the
more than 1 000 pieces of legislation already passed. We need to ask
ourselves the question: What has the massive production of laws done for
our people?

In conclusion, hon Chairperson, on behalf of the people of the Eastern
Cape, I would like to congratulate you on your election and wish you all
the best in your service. I would also like to congratulate our President,
Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma, on his election yesterday and to wish him well
as he will be taking on the challenge of leading South Africa into being a
more democratic and peaceful country. I wish you all the best. Remember
that working together we can do more. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chair, Chief Justice, premiers, hon members, colleagues,
friends and family, I would also like to take this opportunity, on behalf
of the Free State delegates, to congratulate you on your nomination as
Chairperson. This shows that the ANC has confidence in you that you will be
able to push through all that we have committed to in our manifesto.
I would further like to welcome our fellow colleagues from the Free State
to Cape Town. It is a cold and exciting city. I hope you will find it very
interesting. However, our core function here as delegates is to make sure
that the executive is accountable and to make sure that our people lead a
better life and that we bring about a better life for all our people in
South Africa, especially in the Free State as the Free State delegates.

As the people have spoken, we know there are ideological differences, but
we know which processes to put in place. However, we might differ on the
technicalities and implementation. Chair, with these few words, I would
like to congratulate you and welcome all hon members. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The PREMIER OF GAUTENG (Ms N P Mokonyane): Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, Chief Justice Langa, premiers present here today, my
colleagues Premier Zille and Premier Kiviet, permanent delegates and
nonpermanent delegates of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen, fellow comrades,
I stand here in this important House, the NCOP, on behalf of the people of
Gauteng, to congratulate you, Chairperson, on being elected to this
particular position.

With regard to this House, we, the people of Gauteng, regard it as an
important institution in our democracy. We are quite confident that with
your election, the work we have done in the past 15 years will be taken to
even greater heights. The challenges facing us continue to be the creation
of decent work, providing quality health care and education, and fighting
crime and corruption, as well as ensuring rural development.

The ANC government will ensure that in the next five years these challenges
are addressed working together with our people, in partnership with the
private sector and in the promotion of foreign investment in South Africa.
I therefore wish you well in your responsibilities and will ensure that the
NCOP functions as expected.

Lastly, on behalf of the people of Gauteng, I also want to thank the
millions and millions of people of South Africa who have again affirmed the
responsibilities of the ANC through voting in greater numbers and ensuring
that indeed we defend our gains but include all the weaknesses we
experienced over the past 15 years. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, hon Chief Justice, premiers and delegates of
the SA Local Government Association, Salga, hon members, it’s always a
privilege to congratulate someone on such an important position. On behalf
of Cope, we feel privileged to congratulate all members that have been
sworn in here today. It’s also a privilege to congratulate you, hon
Mahlangu, on your election as Chairperson of this House. We trust and
believe that you will do what you did so very well in the previous term.
The political landscape in South Africa has changed dramatically and this
development will certainly also have an impact on this House, the federal
foundation of the provinces. Cope has become one of the leading political
role-players in South Africa. With seven members sworn in here today, I can
assure you that Cope will also have an impact on and role in the NCOP.

Although good and solid foundations have been laid, we must admit that a
lot of work still needs to be done in terms of monitoring and evaluating
service delivery and spending allocated budgets. You were right, hon
Chairperson, when you said that we must be agents for change. We agree with
you. We must be agents for the poor, the jobless people and the
marginalised people, but we must also be agents for the people that create
wealth and jobs in our country. We must be agents for the farmers, for the
teachers and for our society at large. So, if this is going to be the
mandate of this august House, Cope will be there to support you. I want to
once again congratulate you. Thank you.

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo omusha sha ... [Uhleko.] ... nomphathi omkhulu
wamajaji - engizwe lapha esifungisa ethi bakhaya - kuyimvela kancane ukuzwa
ijaji lithi mkhaya, oNdunankulu abakhona. SiyiKwaZulu-Natali, okokuqala
sihalalisela onke amalunga alo Mkhandlu akhethiwe. Okwesibili sihalalisela
uMhlonishwa u-Comrade M J Mahlangu ngokuphinde aqokwe yinhlangano yabantu
eqokwe yizigidigidi zabantu baseNingizimu Afrika ukubusa le minyaka
eyisihlanu ukuba aphinde ahole lo Mkhandlu. Sithi halala kuwe mfo
kaMahlangu, halala!

IKwaZulu-Natali eholwa nguDokotela Zweli Mkhize ikufisela ukusebenza okuhle
okunesithunzi, ukuzithoba kanye nokuhlonipha nomsebenzi oncomekayo
owenzayo. Okokugcina, sibongela inqola emasondosondo inhlangano yabantu i-
African National Congress eholwa nguMongameli, uMhlonishwa uJacob
Gedleyihlekisa Zuma ngokudla umhlanganiso okhethweni luka-2009. Hawu! Bantu
baseNingizimu Afrika into enhle nemnandi iyaphindwa, anophinda futhi
nangomuso. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: The brand-new Chairperson ... [Laughter.] ... Chief Justice
— whom I heard when he was swearing us in calling us homeboys; it is very
rare to hear a judge calling one a homeboy — and the premiers present here,
as KwaZulu-Natal, we would like to congratulate all the elected members of
this Council. Secondly, we congratulate the hon Comrade M J Mahlangu for
redeployment by the people’s party which was overwhelmingly voted in by
millions of people in South Africa to govern for the next five years, to
lead this Council. We are saying congratulations, Mr Mahlangu,
congratulations!

KwaZulu-Natal, under the leadership of Dr Zweli Mkhize, wishes you a good
term in office filled with dignity, humility, and respect, and recognises
the sterling work that you are doing. Lastly, we congratulate the giant
liberation movement, the people’s party, the African National Congress
which is under the leadership of the President, His Excellency Mr Jacob
Gedleyihlekisa Zuma, for winning the 2009 elections. Wow, people of South
Africa, one good turn deserves another: kindly do it again in future. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Hon Chairperson, hon premiers present here, hon Chief
Justice, members of this august House, I must remind this House that
Limpopo is a Garden of Eden, which simply suggests that it is a province of
peace, stability, happiness - everything.

Hon Chairperson, it is a great honour for us as Limpopo to also be given an
opportunity to join other provinces in congratulating you on being elected
as Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces.

This is history in the making. It is indeed the continuation of ensuring
that the national democratic revolution is still on course. This is indeed
furtherance of the ANC commitment, since the 1994 elections, to improving
the lives of all South Africans across the colour line.

Hon Chairperson, we feel that the five priorities that the ANC conference
identified at the Polokwane conference will be implemented under your
leadership, and as this august House we feel inspired and encouraged and, I
think, you will keep us on our toes.

Hon Chair, under your leadership we will also ensure that the policies and
the legislative gaps that were not addressed in the last 15 years are
addressed. We take this opportunity to congratulate you on your new
responsibilities, hoping that under your leadership this august House will
perform better than ever before and, of course, with the contribution of
members of this House.

Ba re: “Tau tša hloka seboka di šitwa ke nare e hlotša”. [It is said:
“Together we stand, divided we fall.”]

From Limpopo, we’d like to congratulate you on your new responsibilities.
We say, feel encouraged; you have our support behind you for the next five
years. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I don’t think you want an interpretation of
“tau tša hloka seboka di šitwa ke nare e hlotša” [together we stand,
divided we fall]. You all understand that. The next speaker is Mr Watson. I
know he will interpret that.

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon premiers present here today, hon members,
on behalf of the DA may I, first of all, welcome the special premier of the
new government of the Western Cape – she is here, where we are seated – the
hon Premier of the Western Cape, Helen Zille. [Applause.] I also rise to
congratulate you, Chairperson, on your re-election to this important
office.

Sihlalo, siyakuhalalisela ngokukhethwa kwakho. Sithembe ukuthi umthandazo
wethu uzohamba phambili, umsebenzi uqhubeke ukuze bonke abantu
baseNingizimu Afrika babone ukuthi thina lapha eMkhandlwini KaZwelonke
Wezifundazwe sisebenzela bona asisebenzeli izikhwama zethu. [Uhleko.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, we congratulate you on your election. We hope that our work
will take priority; our work must go on so that the people of South Africa
can see that here in the National Council of Provinces we are working for
them and not for our own pockets. [Laughter.]]

Voorsitter, ons is almal pas deur ’n baie felle stryd in hierdie
verkiesing. Dit het weer na vore gekom dat, ongeag die uitslag, die groot
uitdagings van die land van die verlede ons nog steeds in die gesig staar.
Ons het nog steeds werkloosheid, armoede, korrupsie, nepotisme, misdaad,
Vigs, en nou’s daar ook nog varkgriep wat ons dringend sal moet aanspreek.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, we have all just been through a very fierce contest in this
election. It has once again come to the fore, irrespective of the results,
that we are still faced with the country’s biggest challenges of the past.
We still have unemployment, poverty, corruption, nepotism, crime, Aids, and
now swine flu too that we will have to urgently address.]

Whilst it is true that we, as delegates, represent the provinces, it must
never be forgotten that we are part of these delegations precisely as a
result of the votes out there for our different parties. That must never be
forgotten.

Three million voters have entrusted their hopes and their aspirations to
the DA. My team and I - and I welcome them here as part of the team of this
House but especially as part of the DA’s team – will ensure that the trust
of the voters out there will never be betrayed.

In my province, Mpumalanga, when the new premier, Mr D D Mabuza, was
declared elected yesterday, one of the visitors in the audience shouted “At
last!” In his congratulatory speech, the leader of the DA in Mpumalanga,
Anthony Benade, said that he hoped that the remarks from those supporters
of Mr Mabuza did not mean, “At last we also have a seat on the gravy train;
at last, we also have a part of the spoils”. [Interjections.]

Our task – and we must all understand it very well – is to ensure, through
proper and diligent oversight, despite the shouts from my friend, Papi,
down here, that the spoils never ever go to anybody individually, that
nobody shares in the profits of this country, except that we all work
diligently to better the lives of the people out there, especially those
who are suffering. Only they should benefit from whatever we do as an
elected House, as a Parliament. In all our endeavours, we should also
ensure that true democracy is always practised in an open-opportunity
society.

We will work together with you and support you and the other parties for as
long as you, the governing party, remain true to those tenets. But we will
vigorously oppose you and anything that is contrary to that. Let us all
help to turn stumbling blocks into stepping stones.

Sebetsa ka kgotso, Modulasetulo, Modimo a be le wena. [Mahofi.] [Work well,
Mr Chairperson. May God be with you. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Watson, I appreciate that Papi is
your friend ... [Laughter.] ... But when you address him in this House he
is an hon member.

Mr A WATSON: Hon Papi. [Laughter.]

Mr M B MASUKU (Mpumalanga): Hon Chief Justice, hon Chairperson, hon
members, we in Mpumalanga also join the rest of the people in
congratulating you, Chairperson, on your election as Chairperson.

We view this House as the most important House of all, not because of the
work it does in lawmaking, but because of the contributions it has made in
the past terms. This House has served as a platform for us to share
experiences, lessons learnt and best practices. With regard to those
activities, Mpumalanga has benefited much from your leadership. We have
enhanced our performance in terms of budget management and project
management precisely because we were able to share the best practices of
other provinces.

Indeed, the votes of over 11 million people in South Africa serve as
acknowledgement of the good work that this House has done together with the
National Assembly. It is also an acknowledgement that the people voted for
education, health care, decent work, rural development and a party that is
able to fight crime.

When they say “At last!” they mean, “At last our branches have spoken; our
people have determined where they want to go; our people have determined
their agenda, and somebody has listened.” [Applause.]

It is for this reason that we congratulate you, along with the members of
this House, and will continue to work with you. There is still more to be
done and we believe that you will assist us to move forward, as you have
done in the past. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chairperson, hon Chief Justice, hon premiers here present
and hon members, the ID would like to congratulate Mr Zuma on his election
as President of South Africa and to congratulate the respective premiers of
the different provinces on their election. We would also like to
congratulate our Chairperson on again being elected NCOP Chairperson. It is
an enormous task to lead this House.

The ID would also like to add its voice to the voiceless – to that of Mr
Chabangu in the Northern Cape who cannot speak for himself. This House will
speak on his behalf to ensure that his desire for a better life becomes a
reality.

As the NCOP, we have a difficult task ahead in tackling the enormous
challenges we face in terms of addressing unemployment and poverty,
combating crime, improving health care and education, and improving service
delivery to all our people in the various provinces.

I would like to make the plea today that this House take these challenges
very seriously, especially in the Northern Cape. The Northern Cape is a
vast province with the least number of people in this country. This
province is rich in minerals which the people of the Northern Cape can
become the custodians of so that these minerals benefit them and better
their lives.

The ID acknowledges that there are many good ideas and policies, but the
key challenge is implementation. We hope that through this House we will be
able to show the necessary political will to drive implementation. As the
ID representatives in this House, we will continue to be vigilant and to
keep a close eye on government to ensure that it remains accountable and
transparent and upholds the letter and spirit of the Constitution. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms R N RASMENI: Chairperson of the NCOP, Chief Justice, premiers and
Speakers, members of the NCOP, all delegates, the people of South Africa
have demonstrated their everlasting trust, overwhelming support and
undoubted confidence in their leaders and parties. On 22 April 2009 they
cast their votes. The new political leadership has now been ushered in and
that is why we are here today.

Our response to the challenge before us is to do what the fourth President,
President Jacob Zuma, accentuated and alluded to in his speech yesterday -
we need to serve our people with dignity and respect and ensure that there
is unity.

It is our responsibility as leaders of different parties to ensure that we
forge unity and ensure that there is dignity and respect at all times. Key
to that aspect is delivering on our mandate. It is a great pleasure and
honour for us as the North West to be part of this crucial process and to
be associated with this team, a team geared towards bettering the lives of
all South Africans.

On behalf of the government of the North West, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Chairperson of the NCOP, the office bearer,
on his election today. A firm foundation has been laid by your predecessors
and previously by you. Please take advantage of the gains already made and
continue to improve the lives of South Africans with vigour, passion and
dedication. The North West commits itself to giving you, Chairperson, its
full support in all your endeavours and at all times. Let me also take this
opportunity to congratulate again President Jacob Zuma on his election as
President of the country.

Ndithi kuye simnqwenelela ubomi obude nempumelelo emsebenzini wakhe. [We
wish him a long life and success in his work.]

Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE WESTERN CAPE (Ms H Zille): Hon Chief Justice, hon
Chairperson Mahlangu, hon premiers, permanent and special delegates,
friends and guests, it is a very great honour to lead the Western Cape
delegation in this august House today. As Premier of the Western Cape, I
take this House and our provincial delegations from every province, who
have a crucial role here, very seriously indeed.

The National Council of Provinces plays a critical role in ensuring that
provincial interests are taken into account in this Parliament. This is
your constitutional mandate and one that must be at the heart of every
decision that this House takes. You must never forget that federalism,
comprising distinct spheres of government, was a key principle agreed to
during our constitutional negotiations.

The NCOP, as the conduit from the provinces to the national Parliament, is
the living embodiment of this compact. The mandate is to make provincial
voices heard. The mandate does not come from Polokwane, and it is essential
to begin to understand the distinction between the party and the state if
this democracy is to work. [Interjections.] [Applause.] Otherwise, this
democracy will fail.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon members! Order!

The PREMIER OF THE WESTERN CAPE (Ms H Zille): We don’t want to be a failed
democracy; let’s always remember that.

The NCOP also has a crucial role to play in the oversight of the executive.
I hope that every member of this House, regardless of political
affiliation, will strive to hold this government to account when it
falters. This is our duty to the citizens of this country. It must come
before any political loyalties or affiliation. It is not a question of my
leader or my party, right or wrong. It is our duties to the Constitution
and to the voters that matter.

A constitutional democracy such as ours requires that every institution
designed to provide a check and balance on power abuse does so all the
time, and we have seen the consequences already of some failures to do just
that.

We are mindful that the Western Cape is the only province not to be
governed by the ruling party nationally. I would like to take this
opportunity to assure the members of this House that we will, at all times,
work with every other sphere of government in the spirit of co-operative
governance as we are enjoined to do in the Constitution. But we will expect
that the letter and spirit of the Constitution are also demonstrated
towards us as well.

Finally, we congratulate you, hon Mahlangu, on your re-election as
Chairperson. We trust that you will continue to use your office to ensure
that the NCOP fulfils its constitutional mandate and that it exercises
oversight of the executive without fear or favour.

Chairperson, we believe that you have done a good and competent job in your
role in the past. That is why we did not oppose you in this election and,
indeed, we stood to applaud you. But may I also say that at this time it
was completely wrong for some hon members to chant “ANC”, which illustrates
that a lot of people have a lot to learn about the separation between the
party and the state, and the role of this august House. [Interjections.]
And they certainly, Chairperson, do not understand your role as an
independent Chair of this House. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, Mabhoko, ngiyakuhalalisela egameni leqembu
leNkatha Yenkululeko ukuthi ubuye, futhi bakwethembe kule Ndlu ukuthi uhole
umkhankaso wokuthi uphucule izimpilo zabantu bakithi. Ngithi kungumsebenzi
wethu sonke malunga ahloniphekile ukuba sisebenzele ukwethembeka ezweni
elihle eNingizimu Afrika.

Ukwethembeka kwethu kofuneka ukuthi sikwenze ngokuthi singakwazi ukuthi
siphazamisane ngezinhlelo zokusebenza. Thina njengabantu ebebecindezelwe
kuleli lizwe kufuze ukuba kubekhona ukubambana noma kuthiwa imibono yethu
yehlukene ukuze sikwazi ukufeza izidingo zaleli lizwe.

Ngikhuluma lapha hhayi njengenkosi yakwaZulu kodwa njengobukhosi bakwaZulu.
Hhayi njengenkosi Mhlonishwa Sihlalo, kusho ukuthi kubhaleke ngendlela
ekabi ngoba omunye umuntu uma esekubona uyokhuluma ukuthi ngafika ngathi
ngiyinkosi lapha, but I am a member of the Zulu Royal family [kodwa
ngiyilunga lase Ndlunkulu yobukhosi bakwa Zulu] kungakho ngithi Mabhoko
ngoba ungu mukhwe wethu ngokwakithi kwaZulu.

Ukuthunyelwa yisiFundazwe sa KwaZulu-Natali ngithi ku bafowethu
esihambisana nabo kofuneka sisebenzele izidingo zabantu ba KwaZulu-Natali.
Ukuthi imiqondo yethu yehlukene ngengokuthi iKwaZulu-Natali yiSifundazwe
esisodwa esingaphansi kweNingizimu Afrika eyodwa kofuneka sisebenzele
izidingo zabantu ba KwaZulu-Natali. Ukuhlukana kwemiqondo kuyobe kuxoxwa
kuSishayamthetho sa KwaZulu-Natali kodwa uma sesilapha kufuneka senelise
izidingo zabo bonke abantu ba KwaZulu-Natali ngengoba b eyakhele.

Ngithi Mabhoko ngiyakuhalalisela mnewethu esikhundleni sakho ukuba ukwazi
ukuphatha iqembu lakho likwethembe ukuthi uphathe iminyaka eyisihlanu.
Ngithi halala Mabhoko! [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, Mabhoko, on behalf of the Inkatha Freedom
Party, I congratulate you on being redeployed to your position and on this
House electing you to lead the campaign of making the lives of our people
better. I submit that it is the responsibility of all of us, hon members,
to strive for integrity in this beautiful country, South Africa.

We should strive for integrity in a manner that does not interfere with the
processes of service delivery. We, as the people who were oppressed in this
country, should be united regardless of having different views so that we
are able to meet the needs of this country.

I am speaking here not as the Zulu king, but as a member of the Zulu royal
family; not as the king, hon Chairperson, which means there was an error in
the writing of my title, because if someone sees this they will say I came
here to Parliament and introduced myself as the king, but I am a member of
the Zulu royal family, which is why I say “Mabhoko”, because you are the
father-in-law to the Zulu royal family.

As delegated by the province of KwaZulu-Natal, I would like to say to my
colleagues from the province that we will need to work for the needs of the
people of KwaZulu-Natal. The fact is that we have different views, such as
that KwaZulu-Natal is one province which belongs to one South Africa, but
we should work for the needs of the people of KwaZulu-Natal. Our different
views will be debated upon at the KwaZulu-Natal legislature, but when we
get here we need to fulfil the needs of all the people of KwaZulu-Natal as
citizens.

I am congratulating you, Mabhoko, my brother, on your position that allows
you to lead and on your party entrusting you with this duty for five years.
I say congratulations, Mabhoko! [Applause.]]

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chair, hon Chief Justice, hon premiers present, special
delegates from different provinces, may I take this opportunity on behalf
of the Premier or the Premier-elect of the Northern Cape, Comrade Hazel
Jenkins, to congratulate you on your re-election as Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces. Of course, we have worked with you. We know
the capacity that you have. We know the ability that you have. We know the
strength that you possess and the skills, of course, that have enabled you
to guide this institution from the time you were elected Chairperson of
this particular institution.

It is with that that we as the Northern Cape unequivocally and unashamedly,
on behalf of the ANC which is the organisation that has been given the
overwhelming mandate by the electorate in this country to govern, say to
you: Amandla kulo ndawo! [We support that!] Viva!

We hope that, with the strength the electorate has given you, with the
theme under which the ANC has gone out to mobilise the people of South
Africa to ensure that it returns it with more strength, we will be able to
say that together - not only with us in this House, but together with the
provinces, the municipalities, the premiers, the working class, the poor
and the unemployed in our rural and urban areas - we shall definitely do
more. We shall strengthen and entrench this institution. We shall
popularise it and ensure that all provinces and everybody in this country
understand the strategic role and the strategic location of the National
Council of Provinces.

Through that, we will, therefore, be able to position this particular
institution to be the kind of institution that the unemployed people and
the poor people will obviously look to to resolve their problems. Of
course, this will be together with them, not in isolation or as an
institution working in silos, but ensuring that it takes along the people
of South Africa in ensuring that we build a better life for all. In that
way, hon Chair, once again on behalf of the Northern Cape,
“Siyakuhalalisela baba” [we congratulate you; we will work with you]. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chair, on behalf of the ANC I stand here to congratulate
you. I also want to congratulate those women who have been elected premiers
in our country. However, I want to remind the premier of my province that
this is not an island. We don’t have an island in our country ...
[Applause.] ... and if we don’t respond to what she said, people will
assume that she is representing the people of the Western Cape. I must say,
she has won the election, but she has not won the minds and hearts of our
people. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

I want to say, Chair, and of course, hon Chief Justice, that I am not a
racist. If she wants to lead her race she has the right to do so. She has
won the race to lead, but not the people of my province. This is my home,
and she has to be very serious when she leads the people of this province.

Hon Chairperson, I want to say to those who don’t know the Chair — we here
in the ANC and in the NCOP call him M J; that is, people who know him very
well — that, having worked with him for more that 10 years now, I know how
good a leader he is. After the elections of 1994, the ANC deployed him in
the National Assembly. There he was Chairperson of Committees. To prove
that he can lead, he was then deployed to the NCOP in 2002. In 2005, after
the death of our leader, Joyce Kgoali, he was then deployed to be
Chairperson of the NCOP.

He has represented South Africa at many international conferences and
seminars in Germany, Sweden, the US and Kenya. And, of course, he was also
privileged in 2007 to be elected Chairperson of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association: Africa Region. He has served the ANC in
different capacities. For example, he served on one of the most important
committees of the ANC – the legislature and government subcommittee of the
national executive committees.

Chairperson, you know our House is constituted to ensure that provinces are
given an effective voice in the national legislative process. It also has a
specific function with regard to lawmaking and is required to bring a
different set of sensibilities to perspectives on lawmaking. In particular,
it must give a voice to the perspectives of the country’s nine provinces,
and provide a platform for local government to participate in the
legislative deliberations.

Our House has now reached new heights in mobilising the people to take part
in discussions that affect their lives, and holds government departments
accountable for the delivery of quality services to our communities. In
general, there has been an increase in and a positive response to the
NCOP’s programmes and public deliberations by the people of South Africa. I
think we all agree that this has happened under the keen and watchful eye
of you, M J, at the helm of the NCOP.

On behalf of the ANC, Chair, it is my honour and privilege to congratulate
you again on your election as Chairperson. This says, in other words, that
the ANC has confidence in you. I also want to say, Chair, you know that all
members in the House always support you. I must say that, for once, I agree
with the hon Watson - he does respect you. I agree with him here but that’s
the only thing we agree on.

Lastly, I want to say ...

... siyababulela bonke abantu base Mzantsi abaye bathi ngomhla wama-22 ku-
Apreli bavota. Ingakumbi abo baye bathi: Thina siyakuhlala sinje, sohlala
siyi-ANC. Ngabantu ke abo ababaziyo ubomi; abo baye bathi: Phatha Zuma
phatha! NgoMgqibelo siyambeka. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... we thank all the people of South Africa who voted on 22 April.
Especially those who said, “We will forever remain members of the ANC.”
Those are the people who have experience in life, those who gave Zuma their
mandate to govern. We will inaugurate him on Saturday.]

Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I must acknowledge some of the
former members of this House I see in the gallery. They have decided to
cross the floor and go to the National Assembly. But I’m sure very soon
they will want to come back. I see the former House Chairperson, the hon
Mildred, in the gallery. I saw Mr Ntuli there and I saw Mr Robinson there.
I don’t know what happened to Mrs Robinson. I think there are other people
there that I can’t see. Ms Nyanda is also there. All of you are welcome if
you want to come back. [Laughter.] They know that in the NCOP there are no
backbenchers; they know that. All of you have work to do. You will see that
next week when the ball starts rolling.

I must apologise to all members for our interpretation services failing us.
You may not have heard one or two things that were said in other languages.
Staff, can you please look into that? We shouldn’t be having all these
problems.

Ladies and gentleman, hon members, that concludes the business for the day.
Thank you very much.

The Council adjourned at 15:35.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            MONDAY, 23 MARCH 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Government Notice No 110 published in Government Gazette No 31872
        dated 6 February 2009: Stopping and reallocation of conditional
        allocations, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2008 (Act No
        2 of 2008).

     b) Government Notice No R. 144  published in Government Gazette No
        31892 dated 13 February 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1374) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).

     c) Government Notice No R. 145  published in Government Gazette No
        31892 dated 13 February 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/306)
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     d) Government Notice No R. 146  published in Government Gazette No
        31892 dated 13 February 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/307)
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (e)     Government Notice No 289  published in Government Gazette No
        32005 dated 11 March 2009: Notice in terms of paragraph 2C of the
        Second Schedule in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


    (f)     Government Notice No 290  published in Government Gazette No
        32005 dated 11 March 2009: Notice in terms of paragraph (b) of the
        definition of “living annuity” in section 1in terms of the Income
        Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    (g)     Report of the South African Reserve Bank of the annual general
        meeting of shareholders for 2008.

                           TUESDAY, 24 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 24 March 2009:


          a) Reform of Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of
             Related Matters Bill [B 10D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             76(1)).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Government Notice No 309 published in Government Gazette No 32013
        dated 20 March 2009: Technical changes of public entities, in terms
        of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     b) Government Notice No 310 published in Government Gazette No 32013
        dated 20 March 2009: Listing of public entities, in terms of the
        Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     c) Government Notice No 311 published in Government Gazette No 32013
        dated 20 March 2009: Listing of public entities, in terms of the
        Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Represented Political
        Parties’ Fund for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 262-2008].


     b) Report on the withholding of remuneration of Ms T C Oliphant, in
        terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
        of 1993).

                            FRIDAY, 27 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

         Report on the withholding of remuneration of Ms T C Oliphant, in
         terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
         of 1993).

    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration:



        The Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General of South
        Africa for 2009-2012 [RP 288-2008].
    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

        Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
        2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report.


        (a)      Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee (CAFCOM) for 2007-
             2008.

        (b)      Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme
             for 2007-2008.

    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for the year
             ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
             2008.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Namakwa Water Board for
             the year ended June 2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
             ended June 2008.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle Northern Water
             for the year ended June 2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
             ended June 2008.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the
             year ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
             2008.
        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the
             year ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
             2008.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
             ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
             2008.


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the
             year ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
             2008.


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of Pelladrift Water Board
             for the year ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
             ended 30 June 2008.



     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
    Finance:

        (a)      Government Notice No 1370 published in Government Gazette
             No 31726 dated 15 December 2008: Commencement dates in terms of
             the Insurance Laws Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 27 of 2008).

        (b)      Government Notice No 11 published in Government Gazette No
             31772 dated 9 January 2009: Commencement dates in terms of the
             Special Pensions Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 13 of 2008).

        (c)      Government Notice No 1373 published in Government Gazette
             No 31716 dated 19 December 2008: Designation of which the
             activities do not fall within the meaning of “the business of a
             bank” (“Ithala Limited”, a wholly owned subsidiary of Ithaba
             Development Finance Corporation Limited), in terms of the Banks
             Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


        (d)      Government Notice No R.1374 published in Government
             Gazette No 31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/640), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (e)      Government Notice No R.1375 published in Government
             Gazette No 31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1370), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1990 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (f)      Government Notice No R.1376 published in Government
             Gazette No 31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1371), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1990 (Act No 91 of 1964).
        (g)      Government Notice No R.1377 published in Government
             Gazette No 31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/315), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (h)      Government Notice No R.1378 published in Government
             Gazette No 31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule
             No 5 (No 5/89), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990
             (Act No 91 of 1964).

          i) Government Notice No 110 published in Government Gazette No
             31872 dated 6 February 2009: Stopping and reallocation of
             conditional allocations, in terms of the Division of Revenue
             Act, 2008 (Act No 2 of 2008).

          j) Government Notice No R. 144  published in Government Gazette No
             31892 dated 13 February 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1374) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).

          k) Government Notice No R. 145  published in Government Gazette No
             31892 dated 13 February 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/306) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

          l) Government Notice No R. 146  published in Government Gazette No
             31892 dated 13 February 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/307) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

        (m)      Government Notice No 289  published in Government Gazette
             No 32005 dated 11 March 2009: Notice in terms of paragraph 2C
             of the Second Schedule in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962
             (Act No 58 of 1962).


        (n)      Government Notice No 290  published in Government Gazette
             No 32005 dated 11 March 2009: Notice in terms of paragraph (b)
             of the definition of “living annuity” in section 1in terms of
             the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (7)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report and to the Select Committee on
        Local Government and Administration:


        Draft Municipal Budget and Reporting Regulations in terms of
        section 169(2) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
        Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (8)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration:


         Employment Equity Report of the Department of Home Affairs for 1
         October 2007 to 30 September 2008, in terms of section 22(2) of the
         Employment Equity Act, 1998 (Act No 55 of 1998).

    (9)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence:


      The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 9 January 2009
         to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces informing
         Members of the Council of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force for a service in co-operation with the South
         African Police Service.

    (10)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Pension Funds
             Adjudicator for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

        (b)      Report of the South African Reserve Bank of the annual
             general meeting of shareholders for 2008.

    (11)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2007-
        2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on Monies in
        Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2007-2008 [RP 282-2008].

    (12)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


        Submission by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
        Development of notices in terms of section 31 of the Regulation of
        Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-
        related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002).

    (13)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and the Select Committee Local Government
        and Administration:


        General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of
        Local Government for 2006-2007 [RP 5-2009].

    (14)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs:


          a) Government Notice No 71 published in Government Gazette No
             31832 dated 30 January 2009: Proclamation of the Cape Floral
             Region Protected Areas as a world heritage site and delegation
             by the Minister of certain powers and duties to the Director-
             General of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
             in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49
             of 1999).

          b) Government Notice No 72 published in Government Gazette No
             31832 dated 30 January 2009: Proclamation of Mapungubwe
             Cultural Landscape as a world heritage site and delegation by
             the Minister of certain powers and duties to the South African
             National Parks (SANParks), in terms of the World Heritage
             Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


        (c)      Notice No 22 published in Government Gazette No 31789
             dated 9 January 2009: National Environmental Management Act,
             2008 (Act No 62 of 2008).


        (d)      Government Notice No 182 published in Government Gazette
             No 31933 dated 20 February 2009: Publication of a board for
             Isimangaliso Wetland Park Authority, in terms of the World
             Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


          e) Government Notice No 190 published in Government Gazette No
             31912 dated 20 February 2009: Notice of intention to make
             regulations regarding fees for the provision of aviation
             meteorological services in terms of section 28 (b) of the South
             African Weather Services Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).

          f) Government Notice No R.209 published in Government Gazette No
             31962 dated 27 February 2009: Threatened or Protected Species
             Amendment Regulations, 2009 in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
             2004).

          g) Government Notice No R.210 published in Government Gazette No
             31963 dated 27 February 2009: Threatened or Protected Species
             Second Amendment Regulations, 2009 in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
             2004).


    (15)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration:


        National General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit
        Outcomes of Departments, Constitutional Institutions, Public
        Entities and other entities for 2007-2008 [RP 6-2009].

    (16)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        Government Notice No 27 published in Government Gazette No 31775
        dated 16 January 2009: Draft Regulations for the proper
        administration of the Knysna Protected Environment, in terms of the
        National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act
        No 57 of 2003).


    (17)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration:


          a) Government Notice No R. 832 published in Government Gazette No
             31302 dated 8 August 2008: Withdrawal of the Compulsory
             Specification for Articles Marked E.P.N.S. in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

          b) Government Notice No 939 published in Government Gazette No
             31389 dated 5 September 2008: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (c)      Government Notice No R. 1298 published in Government
             Gazette No 31658 dated 5 December 2008: Proposed amendment of
             the compulsory specification for Motor Vehicles of Category M1,
             in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).
        (d)      Government Notice No R. 1299 published in Government
             Gazette No 31658 dated 5 December 2008: Proposed amendment of
             the compulsory specification for Motor Vehicles of Category N1,
             in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (e)      Government Notice No R. 1392 published in Government
             Gazette No 31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of
             the compulsory specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories
             03/04, in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


        (f)      Government Notice No R. 1393 published in Government
             Gazette No 31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of
             the compulsory specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories
             M2/3, in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


        (g)      Government Notice No R. 1394 published in Government
             Gazette No 31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of
             the compulsory specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories
             N2/3, in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


        (h)      Government Notice No R. 1395 published in Government
             Gazette No 31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of
             the compulsory specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories
             01/02, in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


        (i)      Government Notice No R. 1396 published in Government
             Gazette No 31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed introduction
             of a compulsory specification for Single-Capped Fluorescent
             Lamps, in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (j)      Proclamation No 33 published in Government Gazette No
             31391 dated 1 September 2008: Commencement of Standards Act,
             2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


        (k)      Proclamation No 34 published in Government Gazette No
             31391 dated 1 September 2008: Commencement of the National
             Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
             2008).


    (18)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:


        (a)      Proclamation No 2 published in Government Gazette No 31808
             dated 21 January 2009: Referral of matters to existing special
             investigating unit and special tribunal, in terms of the
             Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).

        (b)      Proclamation No R. 3 published in Government Gazette No
             31811 dated 22 January 2009: Commencement of the South African
             Judicial Education Institute Act, 2008 (Act No 14 of 2008).

        (c)      Government Notice No R. 43 published in Government Gazette
             No 31809 dated 22 January 2009: Amendment of Regulations, in
             terms of the Judges’ Remuneration and Conditions of Employment
             Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of 2001).


    (19)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Local Government and Administration for consideration and report:


        Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
        Government Association (SALGA) for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 151-2008].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Proclamation No R 12 published in Government Gazette No 31930 dated
        19 February 2009: Commencement of section 13 of the National
        Prosecuting Authority Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 56 of 2008).

     b) Proclamation No R 13 published in Government Gazette No 31948 dated
        23 February 2009: Commencement of the Renaming of High Courts Act,
        2008 (Act No 30 of 2008).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
     a) Government Notice No R. 85 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Correction Notice: proposed amendment of the
        compulsory specification for motor vehicles of Category M2/3, in
        terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act,
        2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

     b) Government Notice No R. 86 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for motor vehicles of Category N2/3, in terms of the
        National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No
        5 of 2008).

     c) Government Notice No R. 87 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for motor vehicles of Category 01/02, in terms of the
        National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No
        5 of 2008).

     d) Government Notice No R. 88 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for motor vehicles of Category 03/04, in terms of the
        National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No
        5 of 2008).

     e) Government Notice No R. 89 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Amendment to the compulsory specification
        for electrical and electronic apparatus, in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).

    (f)     Government Notice No R. 90 published in Government Gazette No
        31844 dated 6 February 2009: Introduction of a compulsory
        specification for lamp controlgear, in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).

    (g)     Government Notice No R. 91 published in Government Gazette No
        31844 dated 6 February 2009: Amendment to the compulsory
        specification for personal flotation aids, in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).

    (h)     Government Notice No 201 published in Government Gazette No
        31925 dated 27 February 2009: Standards matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).

     i) Government Notice No 202 published in Government Gazette No 31925
        dated 27 February 2009: Standards matters in terms of the Standards
        Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


     j) Government Notice No 203 published in Government Gazette No 31925
        dated 27 February 2009: The South African Sugar Association, notice
        under clause 82 of the Sugar Industry Agreement, 2000.


     k) Government Notice No R. 206 published in Government Gazette No
        31926 dated 27 February 2009: International Trade Administration
        Commission of South Africa: Import control, in terms of the
        International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) Notice No 138 published in Government Gazette No 31884 dated 11
        February 2009: National Environmental Management: Integrated
        Coastal Management Act, 2008 (Act No 24 of 2008).


     b) Government Notice No R. 149 published in Government Gazette No
        31901 dated 13 February 2009: Waste Tyre Regulations - 2008, in
        terms of the Environment Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of
        1989).

     c) General Notice No 165 published in Government Gazette No 31885
        dated 13 February 2009: Draft Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: For public comment, in terms of the National
        Environmental Management Act, 1989 (Act No 107 of 1998).

     d) General Notice No 166 published in Government Gazette No 31885
        dated 13 February 2009: Listing Notice 1: List of activities and
        competent authorities identified in terms of section 24(2) and 24D
        of the National Environmental Management Act, 1989 (Act No 107 of
        1998).

    (e)     General Notice No 167 published in Government Gazette No 31885
        dated 13 February 2009: Listing Notice 2: List of activities and
        competent authorities identified in terms of section 24(2) and 24D
        of the National Environmental Management Act, 1989 (Act No 107 of
        1998).


    (f)     General Notice No 168 published in Government Gazette No 31885
        dated 13 February 2009: Listing Notice 3: List of activities and
        competent authorities identified in terms of section 24(2) and 24D
        of the National Environmental Management Act, 1989 (Act No 107 of
        1998).


    (g)    Government Notice No 148 published in Government Gazette No
        31899 dated 13 February 2009: Notice in terms of section 57(2), in
        terms of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act,
        2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

     h) General Notice No 170 published in Government Gazette No 31899
        dated 13 February 2009: Marking of rhinoceros horn and hunting of
        white rhinoceros for trophy hunting purposes, in terms of the
        National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No
        10 of 2004).

     i) Government Notice No R. 214 published in Government Gazette No
        31968 dated 2 March 2009: Norms and Standards for Biodiversity
        Management Plans for Species, in terms of the National
        Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
        2004).

     j) Government Notice No 248 published in Government Gazette No 31981
        dated 6 March 2009: Declaration of land to be part of the Garden
        Route National Park, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

     k) Government Notice No R. 249 published in Government Gazette No
        31982 dated 6 March 2009: Amendment of Regulations published in
        Government Notice No R 1111 of 2 September 1998, in terms of the
        Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

     l) Notice No 278 published in Government Gazette No 32000 dated 10
        March 2009: National Environmental Management: Waste Act, 2008 (Act
        No 59 of 2008).

     m) Government Notice No 263 published in Government Gazette No 31987
        dated 13 March 2009: The Identification of substances in Ambient
        Air and establishment of National Standards for the Permissible
        Amount or Concentration of each Substance in Ambient Air, in terms
        of the National Environmental Management Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of
        2004).

    (n)     Government Notice No 291 published in Government Gazette No
        32006 dated 16 March 2009: Guideline regarding the determination of
        bioregions and the preparation of and publication of bioregional
        plans, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

                           TUESDAY, 31 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B 1 – 2009] (assented to and
         signed by President on 25 March 2009).
      2) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
         Amendment Bill [B 3B – 2009] – Act No 8 of 2009 (assented to and
         signed by President on 25 March 2009).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Government Notice No 293 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 Natura pure gold coin series, in terms of the
        South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

     b) Government Notice No 294 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 Protea coin series, in terms of the South African
        Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

     c) Government Notice No 295 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 R2 pure gold coin series, in terms of the South
        African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

     d) Government Notice No 296 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 R1 pure gold coin series, in terms of the South
        African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

     e) Government Notice No 297 published in Government Gazette No 32007
        dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and compilation
        of, the year 2009 sterling silver coin series, in terms of the
        South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (f)     Government Notice No 298 published in Government Gazette No
        32007 dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and
        compilation of, the year 2009 “FIFA 2010 coin series,” in terms of
        the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (g)     Government Notice No 299 published in Government Gazette No
        32007 dated 13 March 2009: The dimension of, design for, and
        compilation of, the year 2009 crown size and 2½c sterling silver
        coin series, in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989
        (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (h)     Government Notice No R.321 published in Government Gazette No
        32014 dated 20 March 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/3/6),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (i)     Government Notice No R.322 published in Government Gazette No
        32014 dated 20 March 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/5/145),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (j)     Government Notice No R.323 published in Government Gazette No
        32014 dated 20 March 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/5/146),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (k)     Government Notice No R.324 published in Government Gazette No
        32014 dated 20 March 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No 6/14), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Government Notice No R.92 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Notice of Fixed Line Operators, in terms of
        section 31 of the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
        Provision of Communication-related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70
        of 2002).


     b) Government Notice No R.93 published in Government Gazette No 31844
        dated 6 February 2009: Mobile Cellular Operators, in terms of
        section 31 of the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
        Provision of Communication-related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70
        of 2002).

                            MONDAY, 20 APRIL 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Auditor-General on the special audit of the N2
        Gateway Project at the national Department of Housing – June 2008
        [RP 177-2008].


    (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of
        entities that are connected with government employees and doing
        business with national departments – August 2008 [RP 242-2008].

    (c)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of service
        delivery at police stations and 10111 call centres at the South
        African Police Service – March 2009 [RP 22-2009].

National Council of Provinces

 1. The Chairperson

    (a)     Notice issued in terms of section 139(1) of the Constitution of
        the Republic of South Africa, 1996, to dissolve Mnquma Local
        Municipal Council.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration for consideration and report.

                           TUESDAY, 21 APRIL 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)     Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill [B
        10B – 2007] Act No 49 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President
        on 19 April 2009).


      (2)   Companies Bill [B 61D – 2008] – Act No 71 of 2008 (assented to
        and signed by President on 8 April 2009).

      3) Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44D – 2008] –
         Act No 72 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 19 April
         2009).

      4) National Conventional Arms Control Amendment Bill [B 45B – 2008] –
         Act No 73 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 14 April
         2009).

      5) Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54D – 2008] – Act No 74 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 15 April 2009).

      6) Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70D – 2008] – Act
         No 2 of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 30 March
         2009).

      7) Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2B – 2008] – Act No 6 of 2009 (assented
         to and signed by President on 30 March 2009).

      8) National Land Transport Bill [B 51D – 2008] – Act No 5 of 2009
         (assented to and signed by President on 3 April 2009).

      9) Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 – 2009] – Act No 7 of
         2009 (assented to and signed by President on 19 April 2009).

     10) Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill [B 75D –
         2008] – Act No 9 of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 14
         April 2009).

     11) Reform of Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of Related
         Matters Bill [B 10D – 2008] – Act No 11 of 2009 (assented to and
         signed by President on 19 April 2009).

     12) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2009] – Act No 12 of 2009 (assented
         to and signed by President on 3 April 2009).

     13) Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill [B 12D – 2008]
         – Act No 70 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 19
         April 2009).

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

  1. The Chairperson

    (a)     President’s Minute 108: Appointment of the Inspector-General of
        Intelligence.
        Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs.

    (b)     Statement issued in terms of section 106(3) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
        allegations of maladministration, fraud and corrupt practices
        occurring within Umhlabuyalinga Local Municipality, Kwazulu Natal.


    (c)     Statement issued in terms of section 106(3) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
        allegations of corrupt practices occurring within Buffalo City
        Local Municipality, Eastern Cape.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration for consideration.

    (d)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996 to Alfred Nzo District Municipal Council,
        Eastern Cape.

     e) Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of the
        Constitution, 1996 to Koukamma Local Municipal Council, Eastern
        Cape.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration for consideration and report.


    (f)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for a service in
        fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the African Union as part of the African Union
        Observer Mission in Northern Uganda:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE AFRICAN UNION AS PART
        OF THE AFRICAN UNION OBSERVER MISSION IN NORTHERN UGANDA


        This serves to inform the Joint Standing Committee on Defence that
        I have extended the employment of the South African National
        Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to Northern Uganda, for a service
        in fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the African Union, as part of the African
        Union Observer Mission in Northern Uganda.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to participate in the African
        Union Observer Mission in Northern Uganda. The employment of these
        members will expire on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in
        Northern Uganda is not yet completed. The employment of 5 SANDF
        members is now extended until 31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and the National Council of Provinces, and wish to request that you
        bring the contents hereof to the notice of the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence.


        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

         Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs.


    (g)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for a service in
        fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the United Nations, as part of the United
        Nations Political Mission in Nepal:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS AS PART
        OF THE UNITED NATIONS POLITICAL MISSION IN NEPAL


        This serves to inform the Joint Standing Committee on Defence that
        I have extended the employment of the South African National
        Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to Nepal, for a service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the United Nations, as part of the United
        Nations Political Mission in Nepal.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to be part of the United Nations
        Political Mission in Nepal. The employment of these members will
        expire on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in Nepal is not yet
        completed. The employment of one SANDF member is now extended until
        31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and the National Council of Provinces and also wish to request that
        you bring the contents hereof to the notice of the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence.


        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

         Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs.


    (h)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for a service in
        fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the United Nations and the African Union, as
        part of the UN/AU Hybrid Operation in Darfur:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS AND THE
        AFRICAN UNION AS PART OF THE UN/AU HYBRID OPERATION IN DARFUR


        This serves to inform the Joint Standing Committee on Defence that
        I have extended the employment of the South African National
        Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to Darfur, for a service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the United Nations and the African Union, as
        part of the UN/AU Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in accordance
        with the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1769, dated 31
        July 2007.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to be part of the UN/AU Hybrid
        Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The employment of these members will
        expire on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in the DRC is not yet
        completed. The employment of 850 SANDF members is now extended
        until 31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and the National Council of Provinces and also wish to request that
        you bring the contents hereof to the notice of the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence.


        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

         Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs.


    (i)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for a service in
        fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the Democratic Republic of Congo:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
        CONGO


        This serves to inform the Joint Standing Committee on Defence that
        I have extended the employment of the South African National
        Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of
        Congo, for a service in fulfilment of the international obligations
        of the Republic of South Africa towards the United Nations for
        participation in the peace mission in the Democratic Republic of
        Congo.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to participate in the peace
        mission in the DRC. The employment of these members will expire on
        31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in the DRC is not yet completed.
        The employment of 1137 SANDF members is now extended until 31 March
        2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and the National Council of Provinces, and wish to request that you
        bring the contents hereof to the notice of the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence.


        Regards
        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

         Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs.


    (j)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for a service in
        fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the Democratic Republic of Congo:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
        CONGO


        This serves to inform the Joint Standing Committee on Defence that
        I have extended the employment of the South African National
        Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of
        Congo, for a service in fulfilment of the international obligations
        of the Republic of South Africa towards the DRC to assist with
        capacity building of the DRC Defence Force.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to assist the DRC Defence Force
        with capacity building. The employment of these members will expire
        on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in the DRC is not yet
        completed. The employment of 11 SANDF members is now extended until
        31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and the National Council of Provinces, and wish to request that you
        bring the contents hereof to the notice of the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence.


        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

         Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs.


    (k)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 March 2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for a service in
        fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the Democratic Republic of Congo:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
        CONGO


        This serves to inform the Joint Standing Committee on Defence that
        I have extended the employment of the South African National
        Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo
        (DRC), for a service in fulfilment of the international obligations
        of the Republic of South Africa towards the DRC, to assist with
        integration of the armed forces of the DRC.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed to assist the DRC with
        integration and training of armed forces. The employment of these
        members will expire on 31 March 2009. The SANDF’s mission in the
        DRC is not yet completed. The employment of 28 SANDF members is now
        extended until 31 March 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and the National Council of Provinces, and wish to request that you
        bring the contents hereof to the notice of the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence.


        Regards


        signed
        B MBETE
        ACTING PRESIDENT

         Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs.


