---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 August 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-08-27
---

THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 16:23.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I am trying to see where the hon Buthelezi is.
[Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, he had to catch a flight. I
apologise for his absence because I know what you have in mind.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh! Thank you, hon member. I think we omitted
celebrating his 81st birthday this morning. [Applause.] Can you convey our
birthday wishes to him?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I will convey them, Madam Deputy Speaker. I will also
add that he can come to your office to collect his present. [Laughter.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope that is a present which you will buy and bring
to my office! Thank you very much, hon member.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move the following motion on behalf
of the DA:

  That the House debates the benefits to citizens of the regular release of
  national crime statistics.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I did have an arrangement with the
Whippery in the House generally to propose a motion without notice to Dr
Buthelezi, wishing him a happy birthday. But you have superseded me. I now
stand down and say you have done it already. Thank you very much indeed.

    TWO SOUTH AFRICAN OPERA SINGERS AWARDED FELLOWSHIP STUDIES IN EUROPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr W G JAMES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –
     1) notes that Pretty Yende and Given Nkosi, two of South Africa’s most
        talented young opera singers, have recently been awarded
        fellowships to study in Europe;


     2) further notes that Yende, a soprano, recently won all four awards
        at the Hans Gabor Belvedere competition in Vienna, and Nkosi, a
        tenor, proceeded to the finals;


     3) recognises that these achievements are testimony to their talents
        and the efforts of the University of Cape Town’s Opera School and
        their professors, Virginia Davids, and Angelo Gobbato, the school’s
        founder; and


     4) wishes both Yende and Nkosi well during their studies.

Agreed to.

         EMERGING CONTRACTORS BUILDING SHODDY HOUSES IN EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz B N DAMBUZA (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, uMphathiswa woBonelelo loLuntu
ngeeNdawo zokuHlala uMnu Tokyo Sexwale, kwakunye nesekela lakhe, uMama uZou
Kota-Fredericks, bebetyelele iphondo leMpuma Koloni kule veki iphelileyo.
Kweli phondo bandwendwele iingingqi zaseSweet Waters, Reeston neyaseDuncan
Village. Iinjongo zolu tyelelo ibi kukujongana neemeko zezindlu ezakhiwe
ngurhulumente kweli phondo kwakunye nokunxulumana kwanokuthethisana nabantu
bezi ngingqi. UMphathiswa uthe, isebe lakhe liza kuchitha imali engumyinge
ongamawaka amathathu ezigidi zeerandi ekuphuculeni umgangatho wezi zindlu
esele zihlala abantu kweli phondo.

Unobangeli wesi sibhengezo sikaMphathiswa kukuba umgangatho wezi zindlu
ukwimeko engaginyisi mathe. UMphathiswa uphinde wayicacisa into yokuba
urhulumente uza kuthabathela amanyathelo amaqumrhu abucala angazange
awugqibe umsebenzi wolwakhiwo lwezindlu kwezo ngingqi.

Urhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC, ebambisene nabantu, uyazibophelela
ekuphuculeni iimeko zabo apho bahlala khona. Ndiyabulela. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Ms B N DAMBUZA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Human Settlements Mr
Tokyo Sexwale and his deputy, Madam Zo Kota-Fredericks, visited the Eastern
Cape province last week. They visited the areas of Sweet Waters, Reeston
and Duncan Village. The main aim of the visit was to inspect the condition
of RDP houses in this province and also to engage local communities in
those areas. The Minister said his department will spend an amount of R300
non-breaking space million to upgrade those houses that are in a poor
condition and already have occupants.
The reason the Minister made this announcement was because the condition of
these RDP houses is appalling. The Minister also made it clear that
government will take drastic measures against private contractors that did
not complete their task of building houses in those areas.

The ANC-led government, working hand in hand with the people, commits
itself to improving people’s lives where they are. Thank you. [Applause.]]

         SHOCKING BEHAVIOUR DURING PUBLIC HEARINGS ON LABOUR BROKING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J ELLIS (DA): Deputy Speaker, while participating in the public
hearings of the Labour portfolio committee for the past two days, members
of the Labour committee and business representatives witnessed shocking
behaviour by the chairperson and members of the public.

Members of the public insulted one another across the floor of the Old
Assembly Chamber next door. This is extremely unparliamentary. Business
leaders in the labour industry were depicted in insulting terms such as
“slave traders” and as engaging in human trafficking. Methods of
intimidation were also used by some trade unions against members of the
portfolio committee.
It was alarming to note that the chairperson of the committee, the hon
Yengeni, also used inflammatory and insulting language when speaking to
business leaders who were present at the public hearings. After an outcry
from representatives of the industry, the chairperson repeated these
insulting terms again. The DA believes that this kind of behaviour is
unacceptable from members of this Parliament, and that the rights of
individual members of the public were infringed.

The chairperson should have been controlling such behaviour in the
committee and protecting members of the public and members of the portfolio
committee from such insulting language and behaviour. This is worse than
just being unparliamentary. It is, in fact, undemocratic to allow people to
be intimidated in public hearings of this nature. Thank you. [Applause.]

               MEETINGS OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P B MNGUNI (Cope): Deputy Speaker, on 4 September, it will be a full
month since the Portfolio Committee on Public Works has met. This is
because the portfolio committee does not have anything to talk or meet
about. One questions the role of its oversight on the undertaking by the
department to ensure that it creates 500 000 jobs before the end of the
month. Will this happen? This raises questions as to whether this committee
is serious or not. I thank you.

                       TRANSFORMATION IN THE WORKPLACE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M A RANTSOLASE (ANC): Deputy Speaker and hon members, levels of
transformation in the workplace remain low and still have a long way to go
before they reflects South Africa’s demographics. This was indicated by the
Minister of Labour, hon Membathisi Mdladlana, when speaking at the launch
of the ninth annual report of the Commission for Employment Equity at the
department’s office. The report covering the period 1 April 2008 to 31
March 2009 was handed over to the Minister on 24 August 2009 by the
commission’s chairperson, Jimmy Manyi.

According to the report whites, who represent 12,5% of the country’s
economically active population, occupy 72,8% of top management positions in
the workforce profile as compared to Africans who occupy 13,6%; coloureds
who occupy 4,7%; Indians who occupy 5,9%; and foreigners who occupy 3,1%,
in the workforce profile respectively.

The report, for the first time, also looked at government compared to the
private sector. According to the report, government has done well in the
employment of African people in top management positions, coming in at
61,3% of the 74% employed African people as compared to the private sector,
which only employed 12,5% of African people. [Interjections.] [Time
expired.]

              CONDEMNATION OF SA NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Deputy Speaker, the IFP in the strongest possible terms
condemns the actions of the striking SANDF members, who embarked on an
illegal strike and caused chaos at the Union Buildings yesterday, as it
constitutes a serious breach of national security. The IFP believes that
the behaviour of the striking soldiers has no place within the democratic
South Africa and bears a resemblance to conduct one would find in a banana
republic.

The SANDF’s unprofessional and unethical behaviour yesterday amounts to a
violation of our Constitution. We therefore urge Minister Sisulu to take
the strongest possible disciplinary action against these soldiers. While
the IFP has sympathy with the plight of the soldiers, violence should never
be an option to resolve any dispute.

Furthermore, the IFP calls on the SANDF to return to the negotiating table
to resolve the wage dispute as a matter of urgency. We also call on
Minister Sisulu to remove all ill-disciplined members from the SANDF so
that we can restore the integrity and honour of the force. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                     VALUE OF RELEASING CRIME STATISTICS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr C P MULDER (VF Plus): Adjunkspeaker, die Citizens Council for Public
Security, CCSP, ’n nie-regeringsorganisasie in Mexiko, het gister bekend
gemaak dat hulle navorsing bevind het dat Kaapstad die vyfde dodelikste
stad in die wêreld is.

Syfers toon dat 62 mense per 100 000 inwoners in Kaapstad jaarliks vermoor
word. Bagdad, die hoofstad van Irak, het 40 moorde per 100 000 inwoners.
Dis ’n land met ’n oorlog, maar met minder moorde as Suid-Afrika, waar ons
’n stabiele demokrasie probeer vestig.

Navorsing deur die Suid-Afrikaanse misdaadkenner, mnr Antony Altbeker,
steun die bevinding van die CCSP. Sy navorsing toon dat Suid-Afrika onder
die twee of drie toplande met die hoogste moordsyfer ter wêreld is.

In die afwesigheid van die bekendmaking van gereelde en betroubare
statistiek deur die SAPS, word persepsies in die buiteland geskep wat die
land baie skade aandoen. Die Minister van Polisie het sy besluit dat
misdaad statistiek nie so gereeld beskikbaar gestel moet word nie, probeer
regverdig en steur hom nie aan die internasionale gemeenskap se persepsie
van geweld in Suid-Afrika nie. Hierdie persepsies word omgesit in die feit
dat die internasionale gemeenskap al hoe minder in Suid-Afrika gaan belê.

Indien misdaadsyfers meer gereeld deur die SAP bekend gemaak word, kan
hierdie verkeerde persepsies gekeer en reggestel word. Navorsing toon dus
dat Suid-Afrika gevaarliker is as ’n land waar daar tans ’n oorlog is. Die
regering slaag tans nie daarin om sy verantwoordelik teen die landsburgers
na te kom en hulle veilig te hou nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER (FF Plus): Deputy Speaker, the Citizens Council for Public
Security, CCSP, a nongovernmental organisation in Mexico, announced
yesterday that according to their research Cape Town is the fifth deadliest
city in the world.

Figures show that 62 people per 100 000 residents are murdered in Cape Town
annually. Baghdad, the capital of Iraq, has 40 murders per 100 000
residents. The country is waging a war, but it has fewer murders than is
the case in South Africa, where we are trying to establish a stable
democracy.

Research by a South African crime expert, Mr Antony Altbeker, supports the
finding of the CCSP. His research shows that South Africa rates amongst the
top two or three countries with the highest murder rate in the world.

In the absence of the announcement of regular and reliable statistics by
the SAPS, perceptions are created abroad that cause a lot of damage to the
country. The Minister of Police has tried to justify his decision not to
announce crime statistics regularly, and he does not care about the
perception of the international community of violence in South Africa.
These perceptions translate into the fact that the international community
will be investing less in South Africa.

If the SAPS were to announce crime statistics more regularly, these
inaccurate perceptions could be prevented and rectified. Research therefore
supports the fact that South Africa is at present more dangerous than a
country that is at war. Currently the government is not succeeding in its
responsibility towards the citizens of this country to keep them safe. I
thank you.]

                         SCHOOL NUTRITION PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs F F MUSHWANA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, I am going to speak about the
school nutrition programme. The ANC-led government continues to expand the
outreach of existing programmes such as the child support grants and the
school nutrition programmes to more children, in particular those at public
secondary schools.

Through the school feeding scheme funded by the government, children from
disadvantaged areas are guaranteed at least one meal a day. For the
overwhelming majority in certain schools, the programme is their lifeline.
The programme is already yielding positive results.

Amongst other things, it has resulted in the following: As the programme
reaches more schools, more and more children are now attending schools; and
it increases the level of concentration and encourages them to return to
school. The programme faces the challenges of underspending by the
departments, while children, in particular from certain rural areas,
continue to go hungry.

The ANC reinforces that working together with our people we will ensure
that school feeding schemes are extended to all poor primary and high
schools. A better life for all our people will become a reality. I thank
you. [Applause.]

          UNDESIRABILITY OF AND PROBLEMS RELATED TO MILITARY UNIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D J MAYNIER (DA): Deputy Speaker, following on from the hon Singh, the
DA believes that there is no place for military unions in the SANDF. The
legitimate problems of serving members of the Defence Force must be
resolved through its grievance system and within the chain of command of
the SANDF.

Earlier this year, the president of the SA Security Forces Union, Bheki
Mvovo, who is a serving officer in the Defence Force, called for the Chief
of the SA Navy, Vice-Admiral Modimo, to be dismissed. Now we have members
of the SA National Defence Union, Sandu, trashing the Union Buildings.

The violent clash between the police and military unions turned the Union
Buildings into what looked like a war zone. Therefore, we welcome Minister
of Defence and Military Veterans Lindiwe Sisulu’s commitments to take swift
and effective disciplinary action against members of Sandu.

However, the DA calls on the Minister to go further and review relevant
defence legislation and regulations with a view, so far as possible, to
limit the scope of military unions and that of the protest action of its
members within the provisions of the Constitution. [Applause.]

                       FIFA WORLD CUP WINNER’S TROPHY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M N MATLADI (UCDP): Hon Deputy Speaker, Fifa’s exclusive financial
services partner has showcased the 2010 Fifa World Cup winner’s trophy in
Johannesburg, at an event to celebrate the official launch of Fifa’s 2010
World Cup South African marketing campaign.

Inevitably, the star of the show was the most-recognised sports prize in
the world, the gold-plated replica of the 2010 Fifa World Cup winner’s
trophy, which will be retained by the winning team on 11 July 2010 after
the 18-carat gold original is returned to the home of Fifa in Zurich,
Switzerland. The trophy depicts two human figures holding up the world. The
current trophy was designed by Silvio Gazzaniga and was first presented to
West Germany’s captain, Franz Beckenbauer, in 1974.

As soccer fever heightens in the build-up to the World Cup, and with the
superb performance by the SA soccer team in the recent Fifa Confederations
Cup, many South Africans are becoming increasingly hopeful that there is a
chance that the Fifa World Cup trophy will remain in SA. I thank you.

                              WOMEN IN SCIENCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M L DUNJWA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC is of the firm view that
our freedom is meaningless without the full emancipation and participation
of women in all aspects of our lives, including science.

Studies conducted recently on the performance of children in maths and
science in schools discovered that boys do better than girls, because boys
are encouraged to do better. We require that the strategic interventions
that have been established, for example those at Dinaledi schools, be
strengthened to ensure that they assist girls in those schools to do
science.

Women students in scarce-skills faculties in schools need focus, support
and monitoring. We need interventions to manage career flexibility for
women in science. We need interventions in favour of developing women in
research and technology. The ANC believes that interventions are needed to
ensure that more women study to become scientists, and that they are able
to progress through the systems. We thank you.

                       COASTAL EROSION IN SALDANHA BAY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. A serious case of
coastal erosion is currently playing itself out in Saldanha Bay. At
Paradise Beach many homes are now only one or two metres away from
collapsing into the sea. A sewage pump station that serves several hundred
houses is facing a similar fate, threatening to severely contaminate the
bay.

A north-westerly wind combined with the spring tide will put paid to these
homes and the pump station overnight. Nevertheless, the ongoing coastal
erosion will lead to the same results in the coming months.

Management of responses to coastal erosion falls very firmly in the
competency of national government. For this reason, I call on the Minister
of Water and Environmental Affairs to act urgently and decisively to
prevent the further erosion of this coastline.

The situation requires an immediate engineering response which will require
authorisation from her department. This will buy time while a more
considered long-term engineering response can be found.

Local ratepayers’ associations have attempted to engage with the department
on this matter in the last few weeks, but have met with bureaucracy and a
lack of will on the part of the officials who have been asked to tackle the
problem.

It must be noted that the erosion occurring is not as a result of natural
processes. The tidal action was altered by the building of the breakwater
several decades ago as well as recent expansions in the harbour. This makes
it even more incumbent on the Minister to act on this erosion, which I hope
she will do soon. Thank you.

                  CLASHES BETWEEN MEMBERS OF SANDF AND SAPS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev H M DANDALA (Cope): Hon Deputy Speaker, in spite of the great moments
in sport recently, the self-esteem of the South African people has taken a
beating from the disorderly and often violent strikes and protests.
Yesterday’s violent altercation between the police and the disorderly SANDF
members is indicative of the anarchic trends taking root in our country.

A situation where those who are appointed to serve and protect the safety
of our people and the integrity of our national interest draw arms against
each other is, indeed, a new low. The lack of respect, order and discipline
that has become an endemic feature in South African society should never be
allowed in our security forces, a structure that is so central to the
sovereignty of a nation.

Threats by Ministers to punish perpetrators with the full might of the law
go unheeded and often have no impact. The Ministries concerned have got to
apply disciplinary measures resolutely.

Images of clashes between security forces can do irreparable harm and risk
our image as the leading constitutional democracy on the African continent.


The time has come to call the nation to do close introspection in order to
find a national consensus towards a safe and prosperous society. Thank you.

               ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL CO-OPERATION WITH INDIA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr G W KOORNHOF (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government believes that
economic and political co-operation with other countries can improve the
lives of our own people, and it will continue to work towards a better life
for all, a better Africa, and a better world without hunger, disease,
conflict and underdevelopment.

The bilateral relations between South Africa and India have developed over
time, and steps are being taken to consolidate and diversify the strategic
and economic partnerships between the two countries.

The Indian government has committed itself to expanding and diversifying
trade with South Africa. The need was identified by both Indian and South
African delegations to contribute to efforts on job creation and skills
development for the local economy.

India will also share its experience in rural development strategies. A
delegation led by the South African Minister of Rural Development and Land
Reform will visit India in the near future to consolidate the agreement.
This effort is part of the ANC government’s resolution to work together
with the countries of the South to promote relations and agitate for a
fairer and more humane international trade and financial system, and a just
world order. Thank you.

                SADESMO WINS MAJORITY OF SEATS AT UFS-QWAQWA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI (IFP): Deputy Speaker, thank you. The IFP wants this
House to be made aware of the fact that our student wing, the South African
Democratic Students’ Movement, Sadesmo, yesterday won the largest number of
seats in the SRC elections at the University of the Free State’s Qwaqwa
campus, beating Sasco, the ANC-aligned student movement.

This is the first time Sadesmo has outperformed Sasco on this campus, and
we believe it signals great things to come. I call upon this House to
congratulate Sadesmo on this historic victory. I thank you.

                 SANDF CRITICISED FOR BEHAVIOUR DURING MARCH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M H HOOSEN (ID): Deputy Speaker, the ID would also like to add its voice
to the condemnation of the appalling behaviour of some members of the SANDF
during yesterday’s illegal march to the Union Buildings.

This kind of behaviour by some of our national servicemen is a real
embarrassment to our country, to the extent that one national newspaper has
now branded our defence force a ”national disgrace force”. The ID
congratulates the Defence Minister for her decisive action in suspending,
without pay, those soldiers involved in the illegal march, and encourages
the Minister to make sure that every one of them is brought to book for
their atrocious conduct. I thank you.

         EMERGING CONTRACTORS BUILDING SHODDY HOUSES IN EASTERN CAPE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Deputy Speaker, the Minister of
Human Settlements visited the Eastern Cape and really saw the shoddy houses
being built by contractors. We are promoting the emerging contractors, but
sometimes the kind of work that they do is just a waste of government’s
money.

We are going to blacklist all companies that are doing completely low-
standard work; though there are some good-quality houses built by some
emerging contractors.

We are going to have a database of all those companies that are not giving
us the product that we need. We want to make sure that when we give houses
to our people, we give them homes and not lower-standard houses. The
Minister has left and therefore he could not answer these questions. He has
left because we have a women’s build in Mpumalanga. We are going to make
sure that in the month of women, we make them proud of the products we
build in terms of human settlements. [Interjections.]

Ndiza kukubetha, mna! [I’m going to cane you!] [Applause.]

                         SCHOOL NUTRITION PROGRAMME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I must say that we
have noted the different questions which will be relayed to our colleagues.
The one that I would like to respond to is the one which concerns the
school nutrition programme. I will leave my colleague, Deputy Minister
Surty, to speak about the maths and science. He is the one responsible for
government’s programme on maths and science. [Interjections.] No. Do you
want them written?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon Minister, please don’t respond.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think you are
right. As far as the school nutrition programme is concerned, I would like
to agree with the member that it is one of the most vital programmes that
we have. If you have looked at yesterday’s The Star newspaper, there was an
unsolicited article which mentioned both problems and compliments around
the programme. Indeed, wherever we have been able to investigate the
programme, it worked very well and is helping us to sustain children at
schools. In some instances, you will find that it is the only meal that
children have. It helps with quite a number of activities.

We also sadly admit or note that in some instances, as the member has
indicated, you find that there are unspent funds. As a department we have
committed ourselves to making sure that we monitor and ensure that
provinces spend funds. But what we also don’t want to do is to have
artificial spending. For instance, if Gauteng had fed all the kids, we
don’t want them to throw the rands in the air. It might be that it had
overbudgeted. I don’t think we should judge the success of the programme in
terms of whether it has spent or not. Perhaps it could be mismanagement on
the part of the department to overbudget for a programme.

What we also want to do around the programme is to make sure that it is not
only a feeding scheme, but also a nutrition programme, and that through it
we teach our kids healthy lifestyles and good nutrition programmes.

But again, we appreciate the questions and the comments. I have taken
notes. So, Baba, the note is what I have been writing down. It is what
people have been saying and which I have to relate to my colleagues. That
is what I have been writing, unless you want to see it. [Applause.]

               MEETINGS OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS

              CONDEMNATION OF SA NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE STRIKE

          UNDESIRABILITY OF AND PROBLEMS RELATED TO MILITARY UNIONS

                CLASHES BETWEEN MEMBERS OF THE SANDF AND SAPS

                 SANDF CRITICISED FOR BEHAVIOUR DURING MARCH
                SADESMO WINS MAJORITY OF SEATS AT UFS-QWAQWA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, I
would like to respond to the hon member from Cope who spoke about the 500
000 jobs to be created by the Department of Public Works. It is true that
the President has given the assurance that 500 000 job opportunities will
be created by the end of the year, and the month. I would also like to
assure the hon member that it is not only the Department of Public Works
that has been charged with this responsibility, but it is all of us.

In our rural development job creation model, we have indicated in this
House that it is based on households. We have started this programme and
are now in Riemvasmaak. There are about 800 households there. In all the
places that we will be going to, this is one area where we will be making a
lot of contributions.

The second matter is that of the Defence Force. I would like to remind hon
members of the House that the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans
yesterday responded very swiftly, clearly and emphatically on this matter.
We are a young democracy. All of these things are going to happen now and
then. We will see them as we are busy creating our vibrant democracy, but
we will settle because the government is firm on these issues.
Lastly, I want to respond to the hon member who spoke of the victory of
Sadesmo over Sasco and other democratic and progressive student movements.
I just want to say to the hon member that one swallow doesn’t make a
summer. I thank you. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

              CONDEMNATION OF SA NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE STRIKE

          UNDESIRABILITY OF AND PROBLEMS RELATED TO MILITARY UNIONS

                CLASHES BETWEEN MEMBERS OF THE SANDF AND SAPS

                 SANDF CRITICISED FOR BEHAVIOUR DURING MARCH

                SADESMO WINS MAJORITY OF SEATS AT UFS-QWAQWA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Deputy Speaker, I don’t know
whether it is parliamentary to say: You are covered. But I have been very
well covered by Ministers who spoke ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not covered, are you saying I am covered?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, no, I am talking about
myself. [Laughter.] I would just like to emphasise the point that the
Minister of Defence and Military Veterans issued an unequivocal statement
yesterday. We must thank hon members for their firm statements which we
will convey to the Minister, but government is already taking very swift
action on the matter and we are dealing with it quite seriously.

I would further like to say to the hon member from the IFP that the
Sadesmo victory, indeed, could very well be a short-lived excitement which
could turn out to be nothing but a pure mirage. They should celebrate it
while it lasts. Thank you. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

     REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF ENTITIES THAT ARE
    CONNECTED WITH GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES AND DOING BUSINESS WITH NATIONAL
                                 DEPARTMENTS

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to draw the attention of members to
the agreement at the Programme Committee this morning that the debate
should focus on the general principles of the matter, not on the specifics
which are currently before the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.
[Applause.]

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, as you have mentioned, the
Auditor–General’s report on a performance audit of entities that are
connected with government employees and doing business with national
departments has certainly raised alarming issues. As a Parliament that
takes its oversight role seriously, it is proper that we debate the issues
highlighted in this report and propose measures to enhance accountability
in the Public Service.

Briefly, the report identified 49 employees who were directors or members
of entities and doing business with national departments, but failed to
declare their financial interests or did not have approval to perform
remunerative work outside employment in government. Now, those are the
findings.

The rules are quite clear; let’s look at that. The code of conduct for the
Public Service states:

   Employees are expected to place their undivided attention, time and
   skills at the disposal of the Public Service as employer. The nature and
   demands of the job in the public sector are such that the interests of
   both the Public Service and community may be prejudiced by a public
   servant undertaking remunerative work outside official duties. It is
   therefore mandatory to obtain prior approval to perform remunerative work
   outside official hours.

Moreover, the Public Service Act of 1994 states very explicitly that:

   No officer or employee shall perform or engage himself or herself to
   perform remunerative work outside his or her employment in the Public
   Service, without permission granted by the relevant executive authority
   or an officer authorised by the said authority.

It is obvious that the conduct of the 49 identified officials is a clear-
cut violation of the law. To exacerbate the matter, the report of the
Public Service Commission entitled “Overview of the Implementation of the
Financial Framework for the Financial Year 2007-08”, generally states that
the compliance rate for directors-general and their deputies was low. Only
65% of senior officials submitted their disclosure forms after an extended
deadline, and only 48% by the due date on 31 May 2008.

Certainly, it then makes sense that the Public Service Commission advises
the relevant executive authorities, who are Ministers and MECs, to
institute disciplinary action and to charge transgressing heads of
departments with misconduct. The Auditor-General echoes these sentiments
advocating disciplinary action against officials who violate the rules.

Now, these are the findings and the recommendations of our independent
constitutional bodies. The question is: What does the executive say? I only
see Madam Minister Motshekga. I would like to hear her response on this,
later on. The Minister for the Public Service and Administration, Richard
Baloyi - I don’t see him here today - addressed the Anticorruption Learning
Network in Port Elizabeth last month. He said that this report of the
Auditor–General “was the most disturbing news in a long time”.

Minister Baloyi further acknowledges that corruption appears to be an
entrenched problem. The fact that between 2006 and 2007 reports of
corruption to the Public Service Commission’s National Anti-Corruption
Hotline increased by 46%, supports the Minister’s view of the extent of the
problem. However, the Minister also said that government needed to fight on
and improve its efforts to tackle this problem.

I firmly believe that most members would echo these sentiments. Therefore,
the purpose of this debate today is to urge the Minister to fight on. The
Public Service will only be able to deliver services effectively and
efficiently to all when the executive displays zero tolerance towards
corruption, and this was discussed in our Portfolio Committee on Public
Service and Administration. According to my judgment from the discussions,
this portfolio committee acknowledges the important oversight work done by
other committees, especially Scopa, on this matter.

According to my judgment, the portfolio committee also notes that the
Department of Public Service and Administration has already taken steps to
enhance accountability of senior officials in national departments and
urges the Minister for the Public Service and Administration to ensure that
disciplinary action is in fact taken against those officials who fail to
declare their financial interests or who did not have approval to perform
remunerative work outside their employment in government.

As Minister Baloyi also said at the anticorruption congress in Port
Elizabeth, we must raise a hand, raise a finger and do anything, but we
must never allow corruption to undermine our hard-won gains. Let us thus
heed the call of the Minister and raise a hand, or raise our voices and
stop corruption. The battle cry is: Phansi ngenkohlakalo! Phansi! [Down
with corruption! Down!]]

HON MEMBERS: Phansi! [Down!]

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, by supporting these sentiments,
Parliament is strengthening the fight against corruption and for an honest
Public Service. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs J C MOLOI-MOROPA: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. As we have already
outlined, this report, which we are presenting today, is confined to
specific terms we need to follow. We will definitely oblige, but there
might be a lot of similarities from succeeding members because the
confinement moves within particular lines.

Hon Deputy Speaker, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members, comrades
and compatriots, ladies and gentlemen, the report of the Auditor-General
provides Parliament with a distinct prospect to locate and become the
curator of the issues of high morality and societal values. On top of our
national agenda is our quest to build a nation with the highest level of
ethical conduct and integrity.

In pursuit of a culture of openness and our resolve to fight corruption,
the ANC has, since 1994, created a number of checks and balances to
disentangle the state from the pitfalls we had identified. The steps we
have taken to ensure accountability and transparency include the
establishment of a number of public institutions and systems. These include
the Public Protector; the Auditor-General, whose report is before the
committee and which we are interrogating; the Inspector-General of
Intelligence; the Directorate of Special Operations; the protection of
whistle-blowers; corruption tip-off lines that the President is very vocal
about; the Promotion of Access to Information Act of 2000; and there are
many more that deal with this.

This debate takes place on the occasion when portfolio committees across
the board in this Parliament are hard at work studying and interrogating
the Auditor-General’s findings, for purposes of oversight.

In addition, the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration
is occupied with the report of the Public Service Commission, which
presents an overview of the implementation of the financial disclosure
framework for the 2007-08 financial year.
The findings and the concerns of the commission reveal the enormity and
lack of discipline in the application of proper procedures within the
Public Service. Therefore, Parliament is called upon to assert its
oversight authority in this regard.

The Ministry representing the executive authority and the Department of
Public Service and Administration wrote letters requesting the implicated
department to indicate attempts to address the weaknesses we are talking
about. It is of great concern that most departments failed to meet the
deadline of 30 June 2009. This means that some of them could not respond on
time.

In this instance, we welcome the President’s commitment to treat this
matter with the urgency it deserves. Most members were in the House
yesterday when the President was responding on this matter, and we’ve all
realised that he takes this very seriously.

As the fourth Parliament, we are expected to robustly conduct oversight
over these departments that have not played their part. We will leave no
stone unturned in doing the duty we are mandated to perform. We are not
going to be spectators whilst the legislative instruments put in place by
Parliament are undermined by those meant to assist in the execution of
their duties.

Failure to do so will mean we have contributed towards the condition of
decay in moral values within government in particular, and within the state
in general. Parliament should not fail in its quest to effectively hold the
executive accountable to foster delivery of services to the citizens of
this country.

Chapter 3, section H of the Public Service Regulations clearly stipulates
that any designated official who fails to disclose his or her financial
interest, or wilfully provides incorrect, misleading details, is guilty of
misconduct.

This means that the designated state officials who are alleged not to have
declared their financial interests, have to prove that they did comply with
this legal requirement in a formal disciplinary inquiry.

We view this report of the Auditor-General against the bedrock of our
continuous call to those honoured to serve in public life to protect the
integrity and the trust of citizens in public institutions and governance
processes. The South African government has put in place these strong
measures, through anticorruption legislation and related codes of ethics at
different levels of the Public Service, not to catch wrongdoers but rather
to protect the state actors against the potential enticement of acting
outside ethical norms and standards.

The legislative instruments have been put in place by this august
Parliament. However, a parliamentary oversight on the implementation of
these measures was found not to be good enough. To remedy the parliamentary
oversight deficiency, Parliament must, through the portfolio committees
concerned, make an insightful assessment to ascertain the extent of the
impact these measures have or have not made.

The national executive, in conjunction with the provincial and local
counterparts, should be held accountable by Parliament and provincial
legislatures respectively in the implementation of these existing
anticorruption instruments.

Although the report of the Auditor-General does not pass judgment on the
guilt or otherwise of the outcome of any disciplinary inquiries that may be
instituted, transgression is alleged, and there might be those who have a
case to answer.

We must desist from calling for action even before guilt has been
established. In the process of correcting the deterioration in moral
standing, we should not undermine the rights of those who deserve the right
to substantive and procedural fairness.

The success of the South African state and the sustenance of our hard-
earned democracy depend on the commitment to observe and respect the
established rules and standards set to guide our behaviour and conduct, by
all who chose to serve the interests of the nation in public office.
When we discuss the report of the Auditor-General today, it should serve as
a broader developmental and unifying effort to cultivate a new culture for
social cohesion in order to unify our commitment towards a transparent and
accountable public life. We must do so for the poor who are the main
motivating force in the broad national developmental front and, therefore,
the main intended beneficiaries of the national Reconstruction and
Development Programme.

In our attempt to unravel the state from this scourge, the state should
institutionalise the requirements for accepting into its rank all who
commit and abide by its anticorruption policies and objectives.

Screening and vetting of potential state employees, for security clearance
and to assess their track record for high-ranking positions, is a regular
requirement in mature democracies. The NIA is an institution meant to
conduct such processes.

The committee will, in future, call those departments that are not
complying with the requirements to appear before it, in line with the
existing parliamentary oversight mechanisms. The measures put in place by
the Minister are most welcome and should also take into account the
legislative gaps that have been identified by the Auditor-General. This is
with an aim to restore the moral high ground that our people used to be
known for.

The future debate on this matter should be located within the context of
our broad national effort, as a nation united in our resolve to create a
people-centred, democratic, nonracial, nonsexist society and prosperity
while occupying the moral high ground. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ramatlakane, this is your maiden speech, isn’t it?
[Interjections.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: I thought, Madam Deputy Speaker, you would make a ruling
that during a maiden speech, in terms of tradition, there is no heckling.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That’s why, hon member, I am mentioning that they won’t
heckle you, but you must not provoke them.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. When the rot of fraud
and the fermentation of corruption started to eat away the trust of the
people in the state, Cope was regarded as a disgruntled lot.

When the call was made for the distinction between party and state in order
for those party deployees to be mindful that they are in the service of the
state and should not be rewarded, Cope was called a bunch of sore losers.

We are making this charge today because it is with a profound sense of
vindication that even Cosatu, only now, has identified tenders as "the
biggest enemy of the revolution".

Tenders, as the largest enterprise in our economy, have become a source of
great depression for the vulnerable youth of our country and a source of
more despair for the poor and aspirant SMMEs. This sordid state of affairs
is mechanised by some in the Public Service, especially in the SMS band,
who are entrusted with the confidence of the people to transact, on their
behalf, equitably and justifiably for the good of the greater society.

The government has failed to ensure compliance with the following
provisions of law: the Public Service Act of 1994 as amended; Public
Service Regulations; the Public Finance Management Act of 1999; the
Treasury Regulations and the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities
Act of 2004.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I must emphasise that, as the chairperson of the
committee has in fact indicated, the Minister was informed about this
violation of the Act and has so far not acted. This has now placed a black
cloud over the entire state when, in fact, it may not be necessary. These
laws were ratified by this very House after laborious deliberations.
However, enforcement is the noble duty of a government that is tasked by
the electorate - and this government is.
As Cope, we have been horrified by the fact that 434 officials in the
Public Service have failed to declare their commercial interests and
activities. The Auditor-General has reported on that. Of course, it is
suggested that R540 million is in question and this being verified. We are
further repulsed that 30 of these officials have acted against these
interests and activities in the very department where they, in fact, had
influence and authority.

In line with President Zuma’s statement yesterday, when he was responding
to the Cope leader hon Dandala, he said that government is committed to
rooting out corruption. In response, we are unsure whether this can be the
truth, but we want to make a call on the Minister to investigate the
allegation that a certain Mr Zondi, a director of acquisition in the SANDF,
might have vested interests in a company called Origin Exchange Consulting
(Pty) Ltd. This company appears to have the same registered address, 2
Jessica Place, Kloof, KwaZulu-Natal, as Mr Zondi’s company, Oak Trading 190
(Pty) Ltd.

Interestingly, Origin Exchange, which won the tender bid B/G/894/08, during
a moratorium period, did not meet the tender criteria of five years of
ordnance removal experience, and invoiced the Department of Defence on 22
June 2009 when the tender was only awarded in August this year!

These officials are fishing in the sink and dealing a double blow to the
country by hiding some ill-gotten riches and not paying tax as they are
keeping the money away from prying eyes.

In this regard, we are talking about an amount of over half a billion rand
that is in question in the fiscal year. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Madam Deputy Speaker, firstly, I want to congratulate hon
Ramatlakane on his maiden speech and I want to thank hon Dreyer for
ensuring that this motion is placed on the Order Paper, notwithstanding the
fact that the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa, has not
completed their report. But, as you said, hon Dreyer, Minister Baloyi on
some occasion said that the more people lift their hands, the more people
raise their voices and the more people create awareness against this
scourge of corruption, the better. And I am glad that this matter is being
discussed in this House this afternoon.

The government departments and employees are funded by taxpayers and they
should, therefore, have the best interests of the South African public at
heart. I would go so far as to say that they should be examples in ethical
business practices. The reality, however, could not be more different.
Corruption and nepotism are words that are synonymous with the way that
some of the national departments conduct their business practices, with
dishonesty and fraudulent behaviour rife amongst some employees.

The sad fact of the matter is that not all government employees are
corrupt, but because of the actions of some of their colleagues they are
deemed to be corrupt by association.

This behaviour not only affects the performance of the national departments
and their ability to fulfil their mandates, but it also contributes to the
negativity surrounding national departments and government employees, and
entrenches a culture of corruption within government.

Hon members and hon Deputy Speaker, these actions must be stopped and
anybody found guilty of unethical business practices must be dealt with,
regardless of who they know or who they are related to. Corrupt behaviour
must not be tolerated and this culture of dishonesty which seems to be
entrenched in some of our national departments must be weeded out.

The senior officials in national departments must lead by example and
realise that they are dealing with our money. The starting point in ridding
departments of corrupt behaviour, is to make examples of senior officials
found guilty of unethical behaviour and not let them get away. We cannot
expect the employees to be models of honesty when their supervisors are
corrupt.
To this end, we would like to propose a name and shame approach because if
any official is caught putting his hands in the cookie jar and fingers in
the till, then he or she must be named. The reason we are saying this is
that during our hearings we discovered that there were officials who were
moving from department to department, and some from the national department
to provinces. They were accused of unethical behaviour in some departments,
but they were employed by other departments down the line. So, if there is
a database of these employees, then everybody will be extra careful.

But, as I said yesterday, the responsibility lies with the executing
authority, and that is the Ministers. The Ministers have to see to it that
the directors-general ensure that senior managers adhere to simple things
like disclosure of financial interests.

And also, Madam Deputy Speaker, to hon members of this House, it is the
time of the year when annual reports are going to be tabled by all
departments. Some questions must be asked as a matter of course when annual
reports are being dealt with: Had all senior managers declared their
financial interest; does any senior manager in your department have
interests in any business and has that been declared?

Lastly, we would like to propose - and there has been news about this – a
moratorium on all senior officials of government departments when they
resign or leave the department to join the private sector with regard to
getting tenders from the departments in which they were working. We must
put an end to this and maybe there should be a grace period of one year or
so, when they can’t involve themselves in the private sector so that they
benefit from tenders. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M H HOOSEN: Deputy Speaker, this report by the Auditor-General presents
some very worrying results. Whilst there are insufficient legal provisions
in place to preclude public servants from doing business with the
government, it can’t be right that the government must provide employment
for its citizens, who then use state coffers as a cash cow to further their
own greed, especially in a country where millions of South Africans are
living in abject poverty.

The ID is firmly of the view that public servants are employed to serve the
people of our country and not to milk the state of its resources. Public
servants must decide whether they want to serve our country or go into
business with the government, but they must certainly not be allowed to do
both.

The millions of rands earned by government employees through business deals
with the government could have been better used to create opportunities for
the many micro businesses in our country that are already struggling to
survive.

The ID therefore calls for an urgent review of the Public Service
Regulations and calls on the government to implement urgent corrective
measures to prevent this abuse of our public resources. I thank you.

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Deputy Speaker and hon members, one of the central pillars
of ethical governance is that public servants should not have a conflict of
interest between their daily duties and their private business interests.
This principle is well established throughout the world because of the
obvious danger that such conflicts of interests will lead to collusion,
tender fraud and other forms of corruption.

This form of corruption also has an inevitable further negative
consequence, because in most such cases the service or product that is
delivered to or on behalf of the Public Service is usually of inferior
quality.

In our country we have seen widespread Public Service inefficiency and a
growing resentment at ground level about this, which translate into violent
community protests.

The UDM urges government to act swiftly to discipline, and where necessary,
prosecute, those public servants who are fingered in the Auditor-General’s
report. We also urge the ruling party to live up to its often-repeated ...
[Time expired.]
Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP wishes to thank the hon Anchen
Dreyer for raising this very important issue. We believe that public
servants who have businesses should not transact at all with the state as
there is clearly a potential for a conflict of interest. In our view it is
not sufficient for such public servants to obtain approval or disclose
their interests. The potential still remains for tender rigging, fraud and
corruption. And that potential is too high.

Why do we say that? The Public Service Commission’s director-general
advised Scopa during the hearing that in fact there is a regression in
disclosure and monitoring of conflicts of interest. According to her, in
some cases noncompliance has become habitual, with about 10% of senior
managers actively refusing to disclose their financial interests.

Over the past years several investigations by the Public Service Commission
and the Auditor-General have identified the same problems with no
noticeable improvement in the way the state conducts its business. On the
contrary, large numbers of serious breaches continue to be identified, such
as those being investigated by Scopa at present. Besides this being an
issue of probity and conflicts of interest, it also goes to the heart of
service delivery, with those having business interests undoubtedly spending
time on their businesses at the cost of service delivery.

In view of this the question arises whether public servants should be
allowed to run private companies at all.

During Scopa’s hearings the view was strongly expressed that serious
consideration should be given to completely outlawing outside remunerative
activities by public servants, and particularly senior managers.

The ACDP agrees with this. Such a step would simplify public administration
and reduce the ethical complexities and suspicion that continue to cloud
our public sector.

In view of the huge challenges facing us in regard to service delivery,
isn’t it time for such a step? Public servants, particularly senior
managers, should accept their often lucrative salaries and get on with
doing the job taxpayers have paid them to do instead of moonlighting;
perhaps then service delivery will improve. I thank you.

Ms S R TSEBE: Motlatsa Mmusakgotla, Motlatsa semesegole wa Kokoano
Bosetšhaba, Maloko a Palamente, ke a lo dumedisa. [Deputy Speaker, Deputy
Chief Whip of the Majority Party, Members of Parliament, I greet you all.]

Deputy Speaker, in 1995 our former President and icon, Nelson Mandela,
during his opening speech at the Business Initiative Against Corruption and
Crime in Kempton Park emphasised the following, and I quote:

   We need a collective sense of mission to change mindsets and to steer the
   nation away from a dangerous course. We need to take decisive measures to
   strengthen the moral fibre of our nation.

Again the national executive committee of the ANC in its January statement
of 2009 stated clearly that we need to defend the gains of the national
democratic revolution. Therefore, having said the above, as the ruling
party, we will do everything in our power to protect the interests of this
country. It is our mandate; it is our responsibility from Polokwane.

Again the President, who is also the president of the ANC, said yesterday,
and I quote: “We won’t tolerate or condone any wrongdoing; rules are
rules”. I really agree with him 100%.

Se ke bokao jo bo totobetseng jo bo bontshang gore puso e e eteletsweng
pele ke mokgatlho wa ANC e tsaya tshenyego ka tshisibalo, e bile ke rona re
tlileng ka ntlha ya tshenyego mo pusong. Ga go ope yo o tlileng go re
etelela pele mabapi le yona. Re tla nna re e setse morago. (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[This is evidence that the ANC-led government takes corruption seriously;
it is also us who came forward to expose corruption in government. No one
is going to lead us on this issue. We will keep on following it up.]

The hearings on 6 July 2009 before Parliament’s Standing Committee on
Public Accounts have provided us with disturbing accounts of activities by
senior public servants which need a coherent and united response as we
begin the fouth democratic Parliament. This unethical conduct by some
public officials - of course, it is not all of them - destroys the trust of
citizens in public institutions and governance processes. It is beyond
reproach and despicable. When dealing with this matter, both the corrupt
and the corrupted must be dealt with accordingly.

It is from this premise that we condemn all the acts of greed by some
senior officials for not declaring their interests when doing business with
government, as well as giving business to their families, friends and
relatives. Of course, the law allows them to perform remunerative work, but
there must be an approval in this regard. And in this case that the Auditor-
General referred to, there was no approval.

We also note that the critics say that several investigations by the Public
Service Commission and Auditor-General over the past years have identified
the same problems with no noticeable improvement. This clearly shows that
somebody somewhere is not doing his or her job in terms of the monitoring
and implementation of decisions taken by this highest institution.

The fact of the matter is that as government and as South Africa we have
good systems. Is the current framework tight enough and effective enough to
deal with the challenges? If not, something needs to be done to add spice
on this issue.

In conclusion, one recognises oneself as a member of the ANC and a member
of this House. My duties, amongst other things, are to represent the people
and ensure government by the people and, importantly for this debate today,
to scrutinise and oversee executive action.

The Polokwane conference resolved that the ANC must provide leadership to
society as a whole, including the opposition, in the fight against
corruption. In my view, this will ensure that we steer the nation away from
dangerous courses and we are charged with the spirit of faster and better
change, hoping all shall join us in the change of mindset, including
opposition parties.

Re rata go leboga kantoro ya Moruni Kakaretso wa Aforika Borwa mo tirong e
ntle e a e dirileng go fitlha fa. Ke a leboga. [We would like to thank the
office of the Auditor-General of South Africa for the good work that they
have done so far. Thank you.]
Mr M H STEELE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, we need to be clear on
what we are speaking about. Public officials, like MPs, own property, they
have retirement funds, they have pensions, and they own shares through
those pension funds. Those are legitimate private interests, and we are not
talking about those. We are concerned with public servants who own and
operate businesses which do business with government. That is the issue,
and that is the concern when it comes to the conflict of interest.

Madam Deputy Speaker, perhaps in an ideal world the political, business and
government sectors would all exist in neat little compartments but, of
course, they don’t. Despite our official policy of cadre deployment, South
Africa still has a form of government and a political culture which has
more in common with the Commonwealth than with the American model.

We continue to believe in the ideal of a Public Service which is impartial
and apolitical. Once appointed to a senior management position, we South
Africans honestly believe that public servants will operate in the best
interests of all citizens and will make decisions impartially and without
fear or favour. It is a sign of our continued optimism that even when this
manifestly is not the case, we can still be disappointed.

The Public Service Commission report reveals that many public servants have
either deliberately or negligently avoided making full declaration of their
personal and business interests. Some are even serial offenders who have
repeatedly refrained from making such disclosure. The Public Service
Commission report indicates that there are grey areas in our code of
conduct for public servants, concerning the precise definition of what
constitutes remunerative work.

The sheer size of some of the contracts awarded to companies linked to
officials who have not disclosed their interests demands that current
policy and procedures be thoroughly reviewed. At the very least,
nondisclosure must in future have serious disciplinary consequences for the
officials concerned.

I’d like to suggest some examples from elsewhere in the Commonwealth that
we could consider, for example, the use of inside information or insider
trading, to use the commercial parlance, which is now regulated in the
Australian code of conduct. Both Australia and Canada have created
positions for ethics or integrity commissioners, especially to enforce
compliance with their codes of conduct. Canada makes blind trusts
obligatory for public service office holders, while the 2007 code of
conduct for New Zealand public servants allows state departments to
prohibit certain types of financial interests as a condition of employment
by that department.

We, in Parliament, need to do more to ensure that the national and
provincial Ministers and MECs do what is required of them, which is simply
to hold their senior officials accountable. We need to take seriously the
problems uncovered by the Public Service Commission and the Auditor-General
and move swiftly to improve the way the risks of conflicts of interests are
managed, are reported on and are, above all, complied with by all public
officials at all levels of government. Madam Deputy Speaker, thank you.

Mrs M N MATLADI: Deputy Speaker, the research that was conducted with
government to check the number of employees who have companies and closed
corporations that are in business with government departments, has revealed
for the years 2005 to 2007 an amount of R615 million. Also, the research
indicates 2 319 government officials who had interests in companies and did
business with the government.

The UCDP, therefore, having listened to the debates and facts presented by
my colleagues and also members of Scopa, would like to support the
suggestion that the disclosure of interest should be compulsory for
employees; not only for them but also their related parties, including
family members and close friends. Another suggestion is that the SBD 4
Declaration of Interest form be amended to include spouses, directorships,
shareholding and memberships in companies that had transacted with the
state in the previous 12 months of the financial year, and that an
integration of the PSC system and the Companies and Intellectual Property
Registration Office, Cipro, be considered.
We would like to say, let the law take its course with the offenders so
that the taxpayers’ funds can be recovered.

Letsogo la molao le letelele. A ba ba sentseng ba tlhagisiwe, madi a
setšhaba a bolokesege. Re a leboga. [Legofi.] [The arm of the law is long.
Let those that have committed a crime be exposed, so that public funds can
be safe. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M E MBILI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, comrades and friends, our
area of deployment as Members of Parliament and Scopa, in particular, is to
make sure that the public purse is utilised for intended purposes, as
appropriated for by this House. In doing so, we analyse the past
performance and financial conduct in our public entities and departments in
order to produce the future outcomes that deliver value to citizens whose
hard-earned money we are enjoined by the Constitution to oversee.

That is why we interrogate the report of the Auditor-General with keen
interest. If the above supposition is correct, we then have to reflect and
honestly answer the question: Are we, as Parliament, heeding the call to
ensure that we perform clean audits of our departments and entities over
which we are charged to perform oversight? Is it morally defensible that 15
years down the line after democracy, corruption in our governance
structures remains something of a pandemic?

All of us here have no option but to root out corruption in all its
manifestations, lest our dream for an equal society and a better life for
all remains just that – a dream perpetually deferred. The time has come for
this House to raise the bar on its oversight role without pondering on
party-political positions.

Firstly, we need to send a very clear message out there, to all accounting
officers, that they must take the work of this Parliament and its
committees very seriously. We shall no longer allow shoddy preparations
when appearing before Scopa or any parliamentary committee, and we will
demand timeous and honest answers. Some of them simply just go there and
lie. Scopa, being charged to lead, can not tolerate that anymore.

It is not our business, though, to name and shame people, but we expect
administrators and managers to manage public funds and to work efficiently.
In this regard, we would like to endorse the call by the President for a
corruption-free society.

We all agree, even with the worst of the opposition, for the first time,
that this debate has matured. The report firstly came in August or
September last year. Scopa raised the matter very sharply, and we see that
everybody is talking about it and it is also a subject of the media. When
the member from the DA proposed this matter, we said: “Oh my God, this is
opportunistic!” We were still seized with the matter and were dealing with
it as effectively as possible.

There is a need for senior public officials to maintain high standards and
professional ethics. We cannot compromise on that one. There is a need for
regulations regarding financial disclosure, which are aimed at preventing
incidents of conflict of interest before they occur.

That’s where we have a problem with the current regulations, because our
job, as I have alluded to earlier, is a post-mortem issue. We come after
the act has been committed. In this regard, we appeal to the implicated
departments for an early-warning sign.

The new regulations require that there must be quarterly reports. That is
where we expect the departments to come on board so we can check these
things, because ours is really a post-mortem, but a very useful one in that
by interrogating them – some of them understand what it means to appear
before Scopa – we shape future occurrences.

The regulatory initiative did not occur in a vacuum. It is underpinned by
political objectives and choices. We have documents in this regard, and
they are ready to govern. In 1992 we said, on professional ethics in the
Public Service, that public servants should be impartial in their
functioning and should be accountable to both Parliament and the broad
community they serve.
The ANC further said in its National General Council in Pretoria in 2005,
that we needed to investigate measures to deal with potential conflicts of
interest. The ANC is equally serious about this. Like I said, if you have
followed the interrogations and the public hearings we’ve had, you will
realise that the ANC is as robust as any other party in those hearings, and
we want to own it because it is in our interest; this is our government. We
want to see the ANC winning its fight against poverty and corruption and to
make sure that we realise our long-standing dream of making a better life
for all.

That is why we are very serious about this. We said that we want to
investigate measures to deal with potential conflicts of interest relating
to access to work in the public sector.

Furthermore, in Polokwane, we resolved on ethics and the integration of the
Public Service. Furthermore, with regard to the development on policy, post-
tenure, the cooling-off period – I know hon Singh has referred to it – it
is our policy. We are raising it as the ANC because we want to make sure
that people are accountable; they don’t use their positions to enrich
themselves. We use every resource the country can amass to better the lives
of the people. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, today is indeed a historic day.
Parliament has entered a new phase in its life. By allowing this debate,
the Speaker has ensured that Parliament is taking its rightful place as an
oversight body that holds the executive to account. Moreover, Members of
Parliament have shown this afternoon that it is possible to stand together
on issues of national importance. [Applause.]

I will briefly highlight a few of the views expressed in the debate. Hon
Moloi-Moropa, chairperson of the portfolio committee, reiterated, once
again, her and the party’s support for accountability and transparency, and
she spoke in favour of the sentiments expressed in this debate. Thank you
very much, hon Moloi-Moropa.

Her feelings were echoed by the last speaker, hon Mbili, who said that
Parliament has matured, and that we should now look at raising the bar and
setting even higher standards for our public servants. I think this idea
has found general favour with some of the other speakers who also spoke
here today.

Hon Singh of the IFP, thank you for the compliment, by the way. Has he
gone? There he is. You expressed yourself unambiguously and strongly in
favour of this issue, and you also strongly want us to strengthen the hand
of the executive to enforce rules and regulations.

Hon Ramatlakane of Cope, in his usually quiet, considered and balanced
style, was giving his maiden speech today. He was a bit nervous, but said
something very important. He said that tenders have become the source of
depression; and I agree with him because it is especially affecting the
youth who are mostly unemployed. When there is corruption, it’s the poor
who suffer the most.

Hon Swart of the ACDP articulated his party’s support very coherently and
in a logical manner, like a true advocate. He also asked for a review of
the Public Service handbook. This was also echoed by other members in the
UCDP and ID. I think it’s an excellent idea.

In the end, what it boils down to is that all of us agree with Minister
Baloyi when he said that government should improve its efforts to tackle
corruption and to fight on for effective service delivery. Consequently, I
want to urge the Minister for the Public Service and Administration to
ensure that disciplinary action is taken against those officials who failed
to declare their financial interests or did not have approval to perform
remunerative work outside their employment in government.

Parliament has expressed itself firmly against corruption and for an honest
Public Service. Thank you for a lovely debate. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
The House adjourned at 17:48.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

   The following members have been appointed to the Joint Standing Committee
   on Defence in accordance with Joint Rule 120B:

   African National Congress


   Booi, M S
   Diale, L N
   Dikgale, M C
   Dlodlo, A
   Fihla, N B
   Gololo, C L
   Jordan, Z P
   Koornhof, G W
   Mabedla, N R
   Magau, K R
   Maine, M C
   Maunye, M M
   Mgabadeli, H C
   Mlambo, E M
   Mofokeng, T M H
   Montsitsi, S D
   Mtshali, E
   Ndabeni, S T
   Nyanda, M F
   Nzimande, L P M
   Oliphant, G G
   Radebe, B A
   Schneemann, G D
   Sibanyoni, J B
   Sunduza, T B
   Van Wyk, A
   Burgess, C V (alternate)
   Chikunga, L S (alternate)
   Nxesi, T W (alternate)


   Democratic Alliance


   Bekker, J M
   Lorimer, J R B
   Maynier, D J
   Pretorius, P J C
   Watson, A
   Steele, M H


   Congress of the People


   Bloem, D V
   George, M E
   Tolo, L J


   Inkatha Freedom Party


   Msimang, C T M
   Zulu, M M

National Assembly

The Speaker

1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

  1) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
     Finance:

      a) Government Notice No R.724  published in Government Gazette No
         32371, dated 10 July 2009: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule No 1
         (No 1/1/1380) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
         Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

      b) Government Notice No R.725 published in Government Gazette No
         32371, dated 10 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/645)
         in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
         91 of 1964).

      c) Government Notice No R. 749 published in Government Gazette No
         32406, dated 15 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No. 2 (No.2/318)
         in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
         91 of 1964), with effect from 15 July 2009.

      d) Government Notice No R. 762  published in Government Gazette No
         32416, dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Part 1 to Schedule No 1
         (No 1/1/1381) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
         Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

      e) Government Notice No R. 763 published in Government Gazette No
         32416, dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/646)
         in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
         91 of 1964).

      f) Government Notice No R.764 published in Government Gazette No
         32416, dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/318)
         in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
         91 of 1964),with effect from 10 June 2009.

      g) Government Notice No R.765 published in Government Gazette No
         32416, dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No 6/15) in
         terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
         of 1964), with effect from 10 June 2009.

      h) Government Notice No R.766 published in Government Gazette No
         32416, dated 24 July 2009: Amendment in terms of section 74(3)(a)
         of the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No 89 of 1991).

      i) Government Notice No R.793 published in Government Gazette No
         32444, dated 31 July 2009: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule No 1
         (No 1/1/1382) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
         Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

      j) Government Notice No R. 795 published in Government Gazette No
         32444, dated 31 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/319)
         in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
         91 of 1964).

      k) Government Notice No R.832 published in Government Gazette No
         32484, dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule No 1
         (No 1/1/1383) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
         Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

      l) Government Notice No R.833 published in Government Gazette No
         32484, dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule No 1
         (No 1/1/1384) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
         Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

      m) Government Notice No R.834 published in Government Gazette No
         32484, dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/319)
         in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
         91 of 1964).

      n) Government Notice No R.835 published in Government Gazette No
         32484, dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule No 1
         (No 1/1/1385) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
         Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

      o) Government Notice No R.836 published in Government Gazette No
         32484, dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/648)
         in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
         91 of 1964).

      p) Government Notice No R.837 published in Government Gazette No
         32484, dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/320)
         in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
         91 of 1964).

  2) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
     Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for consideration and report and
     to the Standing Committee on Finance. The Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Committee on
     Public Accounts:

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Land Bank for 2008-09,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Group Financial
          Statements of the Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South
          Africa for 2008-09 and Performance Information [RP 143-2009].
  3) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on Finance
     and to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry:

       a) Government Notice No 1103 published in Government Gazette No
          32489, dated 14 August 2009: Draft Preferential Procurement
          Regulations, 2009: For public comment in terms of section 5 of the
          Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act, 2000 (Act No 5 of
          2000).

       b) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
          Republic of South Africa concerning the Trade Development
          Cooperation Agreement Facility, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
          of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.

       c) Explanatory Memorandum to the Financing Agreement between the
          European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning the
          Trade Development Cooperation Agreement Facility.

       d) Agreement between the African Development Bank and the African
          Development Fund and the Government of the Republic of South
          Africa regarding the Establishment of the Regional Office of the
          African Development Bank and the African Development Fund on the
          Territory of the Republic of South Africa, tabled in terms of
          section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

       e) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the African
          Development Bank and the African Development Fund and the
          Government of the Republic of South Africa regarding the
          Establishment of the Regional Office of the African Development
          Bank and the African Development Fund on the Territory of the
          Republic of South Africa.

  4) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on Finance
     and to the Portfolio Committee on Labour:

      a) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
         Republic of South Africa concerning Employment Creation and Sector
         Policy Support to the Economic Cluster Programme of Action, tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of
         South Africa, 1996.

      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Financing Agreement between the
         European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
         Employment Creation and Sector Policy Support to the Economic
         Cluster Programme of Action.

  5) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Water
     and Environmental Affairs:

      a) 2008-09 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1) of
         the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of
         1998).


  6) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
     Service and Administration for consideration:

       a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Audit of
          Selection Processes in Selected Departments [RP 264-2008].

       b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Grievance Trends
          in the Public Service for the periods 1 April 2006 to 31 March
          2007 and 1 April 2007 to 31 March 2008 [RP 19-2009.

       c) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on an Overview of
          the Implementation of the Financial Disclosure Framework:
          Financial Year 2007-08 – April 2009 [RP 37-2009].

  7) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on Finance
     and to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development:

      a) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
         Republic of South Africa concerning the Legislative Sector Policy
         Support Programme [SA/006/07], tabled in terms of section 231(3)
         of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.

      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Financing Agreement between the
         European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning the
         Legislative Sector Policy Support Programme.

      c) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
         Republic of South Africa concerning Access to Justice and
         Promotion of Constitutional Rights, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.
      d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Financing Agreement between the
         European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
         Access to Justice and Promotion of Constitutional Rights.
  8) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
     Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Portfolio Committee
     on Police:

       a) Proclamation No 45 published in Government Gazette No 32380, dated
          3 July 2009: Commencement of the National Prosecuting Authority
          Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 56 of 2008).

       b) Proclamation No 46 published in Government Gazette No 32380, dated
          3 July 2009: Determination by the President of 6 July 2009 as the
          fixed date contemplated in section 43A(1)(b) of the National
          Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act No 32 of 1998).

  9) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
     Defence and Military Veterans for consideration and report and to the
     Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology:

       a) Protocol of Amendments to the Convention on the International
          Hydrographic Organisation (IHO), tabled in terms of section 231(2)
          of the Constitution, 1996.

       b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol of Amendments to the
          Convention on the International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO).

 10) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
     Enterprises for consideration and report. The Reports of the
     Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
     Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts:

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Ltd and the Group for
          2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.

       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Broadband Infraco (Pty)
          Limited for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2008-09.

       c) Report and Financial Statements of South African Express Airways
          (Proprietary) Limited for 2008-09, including the Report of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2008-09.

 11) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
     Enterprises:

       a) Letter dated 22 July 2009 from the Minister of Public Enterprises
          to the Speaker of the National Assembly, explaining the delay in
          the submission of the Annual Report of the Pebble-Bed Modular
          Reactor (Pty) Limited (PBMR) for 2008-09.

 12) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on Police
     for consideration and report:

       a) Proclamation No 16 published in Government Gazette No 31017, dated
          7 May 2008: Notification by the President in terms of section 26
          of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist
          and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of entities
          identified by the United Nations Security Council as being
          involved in terrorist and related activities.


       b) Proclamation No 18 published in the Government Gazette No 31034,
          dated 9 May 2008: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       c) Proclamation No 20 published in the Government Gazette No 31136,
          dated 10 June 2008: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       d) Proclamation No 21 published in the Government Gazette No 31179,
          dated 25 June 2008: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.


       e) Proclamation No 31 published in the Government Gazette No 31309,
          dated 8 August 2008: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       f) Proclamation No 38 published in the Government Gazette No 31416,
          dated 12 September 2008: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       g) Proclamation No 58 published in the Government Gazette No 31748,
          dated 30 December 2008: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       h) Proclamation No 59 published in the Government Gazette No 31748,
          dated 30 December 2008: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       i) Proclamation No 60 published in the Government Gazette No 31748,
          dated 30 December 2008: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       j) Proclamation No 61 published in the Government Gazette No 31748,
          dated 30 December 2008: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       k) Proclamation No 5 published in the Government Gazette No 31835,
          dated 3 February 2009: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       l) Proclamation No 6 published in the Government Gazette No 31835,
          dated 3 February 2009: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       m) Proclamation No 7 published in the Government Gazette No 31835,
          dated 3 February 2009: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

       n) Proclamation No 4 published in the Government Gazette No 31834
          dated 4 February 2009: Notification by the President in terms of
          section 26 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against
          Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004) of
          entities identified by the United Nations Security Council as
          being involved in terrorist and related activities.

 13) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
     and Constitutional Development for consideration and report:

       a) Code of Good Administrative Conduct tabled in terms of section
          10(5A) of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act
          No 3 of 2000).

 14) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
     and Industry and to the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military
     Veterans:

       a) Letter dated 14 August 2009 from the Minister of Trade and
          Industry, explaining the delay in the tabling the annual report of
          the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of
          Mass Destruction.

 15) The following paper is referred to the Committee on the Auditor-
     General for consideration and report. The Report of the Independent
     Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
     2008-09 is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts:
       a) The Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-
          General for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2008-09 [RP 173-2009].

 16) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Tourism
     for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee on Water
     and Environmental Affairs. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements and Performance Information is referred to the
     Committee on Public Accounts:

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
          Environmental Affairs and Tourism - for 2008-09, including the
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information of Vote 25 for 2008-09 [RP 149-2009].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
        Southern Africa (DBSA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 and the Report and Financial Statements
        of the Development Bank of Southern Africa Development Fund for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information of the Development
        Fund for 2008-2009.
2. The Minister of Tourism

      a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for 2008-
         2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

3. The Minister of Labour

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
         Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2008-2009,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 133-2009].




      b) Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail Sector
         Education and Training Authority (W&R-Seta) for 2008-2009,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 105-2009].



      c) Report and Financial Statements of The Insurance Sector Education
         and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2008-2009, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2008-2009 [RP 96-2009].
      d) Report and Financial Statements of Productivity SA for 2008-2009,
         including the  Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 139-2009].


      e) Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualifications
         Authority  (MQA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
         2008-2009 [RP 110-2009].

      f) Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
         Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
         Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2008-2009 [RP 98-2009}.


      g) Report and Financial Statements of Construction Education Training
         Authority (CETA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
         2008-2009 [RP 88-2009].

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

      (1)   The following private members’ legislative proposals were
           submitted to the Speaker on 26 August 2009, in accordance with
           Rule 234:
           (a)   Legislative proposal to amend the Commission on Gender
                 Equality Act, No 39 of 1996 (M P Mentor)


           (b)   Legislative proposal to amend the Human Rights Commission
                 Act, No 54 of 1994 (M P Mentor)


           Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
           Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report.


