---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 August 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-08-18
---

TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                  VACANCIES

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy which occurred in the National
Assembly owing to Ms B Mbete being unavailable to take up her seat, had
been filled by the nomination of Mr D D van Rooyen with effect from 27 July
2009; and that the vacancies which occurred due to the resignations of Ms L
D Zulu and Ms L M Odendaal had been filled by the nominations of Ms N D
Ngcengwane with effect from 29 July 2009 and Mr L Ramatlakane with effect
from 15 July 2009.

                                    OATH
The members made and subscribed the oath in the Speaker’s office on 6
August 2009.

The Speaker further announced that the vacancies which had occurred owing
to the resignation of Mr B M Balfour and Ms L B Hendricks had been filled
by the nomination, with effect from 5 August 2009, of Mr G G Oliphant and
Ms A van Wyk respectively.

Mr Oliphant and Ms Van Wyk, accompanied by Mr M Gungubele and Mr E M
Sulliman, made and subscribed the oath, and took their seats.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I welcome you to the National Assembly.
[Applause.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr D J MAYNIER: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move that the House debates the crisis in the
National Conventional Arms Control Committee and its implications for South
Africa.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move that the House
debates the meaning and implications of the activist Parliament and State
as propagated by President Jacob Zuma in his State of the Nation address
and subsequent gatherings, and how this is meant to fulfil the
developmental needs of all the people, in particular the poor and the
marginalised majority.

  CONGRATULATIONS TO ARCHBISHOP TUTU ON RECEIVING HIGHEST US CIVILIAN AWARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


      1) notes that Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu was awarded the  United
         States Presidential Medal of Freedom on Wednesday, 12 August 2009;


      2) further notes that this award, the highest civilian  award  in  the
         US, is awarded to people who have made  an  especially  meritorious
         contribution to the security or national interests of the US, world
         peace, cultural or other significant public or private endeavours;


      3) recognises that he has received this award for being  outspoken  on
         issues of concern  both  within  and  outside  government  and  for
         defending the interests of the people of this country;



      4) acknowledges the White House statement that he has  “an  unflagging
         devotion to justice, indomitable optimism and an unmistakable sense
         of humour, stirring the world’s conscience for decades”; and


      5) congratulates Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu  not  only  on  this
         great honour that has been bestowed  on  him  but  for  making  the
         people of South Africa proud and for continuing to be responsive to
         and outspoken on matters of national importance.


Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Dr T W Kambule)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –
     1) notes with profound sadness the death on Friday, 7 August 2009,  of
        Dr Thamsanqa Wilkinson Kambule;




     2) further notes that Dr Kambule, in his lifelong career in  teaching,
        has taught, amongst others, Nobel Prize winner  Archbishop  Desmond
        Mpilo Tutu, Jackie Selebi, Communications Minister General  Siphiwe
        Nyanda, Pansy Tlakula of the Independent Electoral  Commission  and
        Kaizer Motaung, to mention but a few;


     3) recognises that in 2002 Dr Kambule received an Order of the  Baobab
        in gold from former  President  Thabo  Mbeki  for  his  exceptional
        contribution  to  mathematics  education,  human  development   and
        community service;


     4) believes that he was a true teacher who inspired  his  learners  to
        aim high despite the daunting challenges of the time; and


     5) conveys its condolences  to  the  Kambule  family,  his  peers  and
        friends.

Agreed to.

     CONGRATULATIONS TO CASTER SEMENYA ON WINNING WOMEN’S 800 METRE HEAT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev K R J MESHOE: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that Caster Semenya from Limpopo stumbled over a fallen
         athlete from Kenya during the women’s 800 metre first heat event at
         the World Athletics Championships in Berlin on Sunday;


   (2)      further notes that the 18-year-old athlete came close to
         falling, but regained her composure and ended up winning the heat;


   (3)      congratulates Caster for her courage, brilliant race, great
         sportsmanship and winning the heat; and


   (4)      wishes her a speedy recovery from her ankle injury and hopes
         that she will be able to represent South Africa in the 800 metre
         final, which we know to be her greatest desire.

Agreed to.

                        CONGRATULATIONS TO SPRINGBOKS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I hereby move without
notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes the historic 2 - 1 victory of the Springboks over the
         British and Irish Lions in the recently concluded rugby test
         series;


   (2)      further notes the superb victories of the Springboks over the
         New Zealand All Blacks and the Australian Wallabies in the current
         Tri-Nations series that has taken our country to the no1 position
         in world rugby;


   (3)      congratulates John Smit on his achievement of becoming the most
         capped Springbok captain; and


   (4)      wishes the team well for the rest of the Tri-Nations series.


Agreed to.

                   GOOD WISHES EXTENDED TO RUBEN RAMOLEFI
                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev K R J MESHOE: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House –


   (1)      notes with great appreciation that on Sunday Ruben Ramolefi
         became South Africa’s first finalist at the 12th World Athletics
         Championships held in Berlin;


   (2)      further notes that Ramolefi dictated the pace from start to
         finish in the second heat of the 3 000 metre steeplechase on the
         second day of the competition;


   (3)      further notes that Ramolefi is oozing with confidence and is
         planning to bring a gold medal back home; and


   (4)      wishes him well in the finals and hopes he will record his
         fourth best time to make his dream come true.


Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                            (The late Mr V Moche)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes with profound sadness the untimely death of Mr Victor
         Moche on Saturday, 1 August 2009;


   (2)      recognises that, at the time of his death, Mr Moche was chairman
         of the Gauteng Economic Development Agency, Geda board; he Board
         was a former head of regulatory and government relations at Telkom
         and also ran a security company business;


   (3)      remembers that he returned to South Africa in 1991 after
         spending more than 20 years in exile where he worked for the ANC in
         several countries including Canada and Algeria;


   (4)      acknowledges that his untimely death has robbed South Africa of
         a dedicated and committed patriot;


   (5)      believes that he has discharged his responsibilities with
         dedication, discipline, diligence and humility; and


   (6)      conveys its condolences to the Moche family and the African
         National Congress.
Agreed to.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                         (The late Mr J P Phungula)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker I move:


   That the House –


   (1)      notes with sadness that on Sunday, 9 August 2009, Johannes
         Phumani “Past Four” Phungula passed away;


   (2)      further notes that “Past Four”, as he was known by his comrades,
         joined the African National Congress in 1952 and immediately became
         a volunteer at the height of the defiance campaign while working as
         a migrant worker at Joko Tea;


   (3)      recognises that in 1959 hon Phungula was deployed to work in his
         hometown of Hlokozi to revive political consciousness among the
         rural communities that had participated in the popular rural
         struggles and that he was instrumental in mobilising women’s
         protests in iXopo against the draconian pass laws;


   (4)      recalls that, together with President Jacob Zuma, hon Phungula
         worked tirelessly recruiting young people to join the African
         National Congress underground structures;


   (5)      remembers that in 1976 he left the country on the instructions
         of his movement, the African National Congress, and upon arrival in
         exile he was further instructed to go to the then Soviet Union to
         receive military training, and that on completion of his training
         he assumed many positions in uMkhonto we Sizwe ranks until his
         return to South Africa in 1993;


   (6)      further remembers that in 2004 he was elected to the National
         Assembly where he remained a member until the end of term of the
         third democratic Parliament, that “Past Four” had astute leadership
         qualities and that many of our public representatives were
         deferring to him for wise counsel;


   (7)      believes that hon Phungula has discharged his responsibilities
         with dedication, discipline, diligence and humility and that the
         life of this great leader epitomises heroism and commitment to the
         cause of the poor; and


   (8)      conveys its condolences to the Phungula family and the African
         National Congress.
Dr A LOTRIET: Mr Speaker, at moments such as this, we are faced by the two
great realities of human life, the promise and possibility of time, and the
finiteness of that time.

As human beings one of the greatest gifts we have is the time given to us,
and one of the greatest gifts we can give in return is the way in which we
use our allotted time. Some fail to make much impression or do much in
their time, others make the most of it and leave an impression on the lives
of others.

When looking at the life of the hon Phungula, one cannot but realise that
he made the most of his gift of time. At a young age he became involved by
joining the ANC and the defiance campaign. He left his mark by being
instrumental in various protest actions, such as the women’s protest
against the pass laws and the protests against the reapportioning of land
in rural areas.

These activities led to his being arrested and imprisoned, and eventually
living in exile where he was deployed in various positions in uMkhonto
weSizwe.

On his return he was actively involved in the rural areas, working closely
with traditional leaders. During this time and in his involvement in
different activities and positions, he distinguished himself as a leader
who was characterised by his warm and charismatic personality.

This life of service and dedication culminated in his election to the
national Parliament in 2004. Here he served with distinction until April
2009.
During his time as a Member of Parliament, he served on the Portfolio
Committee on Arts and Culture and alternatively on the Portfolio Committee
on Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence. He also
distinguished himself in terms of his leadership skills, honesty,
dedication and wisdom. His was thus a life where the time that was given
was used to the fullest, not only for the his own advancement but to
improve and shape the lives of others.

Through his life of service to his country and its people during the
struggle and in the democratic dispensation, he helped to shape his time.
We can use the example of his life in our effort to exercise a spirit of
service to the community.

The DA extends its heartfelt condolences to his wives, children,
grandchildren, great-grandchildren and the ANC. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mof C M P KOTSI: Modulasetulo, ke nka motsotso ona ho tlisa matshediso
lelapeng la ntate Phungula le motse wa hae o moholo le lelapa le leholo la
hae la ANC, ha kajeno tau e kgolo e wele, ha kajeno sefate se seholo se
wetse fatshe. Ntate J P Phungula e ne e le ntate ya hlomphehang eo re neng
re sebetsa le yena. Ha ke na ho bua ka hore o tswa hokae hobane mokgatlo wa
hae o se o buile hore na o tswa hokae. Empa ho rona ba ileng ba atamelana
le yena nako le motsotso, e ne e le ntate ya itlhomphang ya hlomphang le
batho bohle. E ne e le motho ya sedi ka dinako tsohle komiting eo a
sebetsang ho yona. A re ho leng bohlokwa ke hore batho puong ya bona kapa
nthong tseo ba di etsang, ebe ba tlisa phetoho maphelong a ba bang,
haholoholo maphelong a batho ba hlophehileng.

E ne ele ntate eo e reng ha ho buuwa are: “sekgowa sena se lokile empa ha
se sa tsebe ho arabela bofuma ba batho ha se etse letho”.  E ne e le ntate
eo e neng e re ha re tsamaya le yena ka nakonyana e nyane eo a neng a
sebetsa komiting ya Public Works, a re thabise hobane e ne e le motho eo
oka mo thabelang haholo ha o tsamaile le yena. Motho wa ditshehiso tse
ngata empa o ne are ha ho thuse letho hore tjhelete ya balefi ba lekgetho
re e sebedisetse ho theosa re nyolosa re sa tsebe ho etsa seo e leng thomo
ya rona Palamenteng.

Ke ntate ya neng a tseba hore ka nako eo a neng a lwana o ne a sa lwanele
yena le setjhaba sa hae feela empa o ne a lwanela setjhaba sohle sa Aforika
Borwa hore e be karolo ya phetoho ya lefatshe. O ne a tiile ka dinako
tsohle nthong eo a e emetseng. One a ka bua ka dintho tse pedi feela, e ne
e se motho ya buang haholo empa mantswe a hae a ne a phedisa batho bohle
ebile a ne a akaretsa diphetoho tsa rona kaofela mona lefatsheng la Aforika
Borwa. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho speech follows.)

[Ms C M P KOTSI: Chairperson, I would like to take this opportunity to
extend my condolences to Mr Phungula’s family, his community and his big
family of the ANC, because today the lion has fallen, the big tree has
fallen down. Mr J P Phungula was a respected man with whom we worked very
well. I will not talk about where he came from because his organisation has
already stated this earlier on, but to us who used to be close to him from
time to time, he was a self-respecting man who also respected other people.
He was always an observant person in any committee he worked for. He always
said that what was important was whether what we were saying or doing would
bring change in people’s lives, especially the poor people.

He used to utter these words when people were discussing matters:  “This
western culture is good but if it does not respond to the needs of the
poor, it becomes useless.” When travelling together during the short period
that we worked with him in the Portfolio Committee on Public Works, we
always enjoyed his company. He had a sense of humour but said that it was
not helpful to use taxpayers’ money for travelling all over the country
without achieving our mandate from Parliament.

He was a man who knew that when he was fighting, he was not only fighting
for himself and his community but he was fighting for the whole nation of
South Africa to be part of global change. He was always firm in what he
stood for. He would only say two things, as he was a man of few words, but
his words encouraged everybody and encompassed all the changes in our land
of South Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Speaker, on behalf of the IFP and its president,
Prince Buthelezi, I wish to join this House in expressing our condolences
to the ANC and to the family and friends of Johannes Phumani “Pass Four”
Phungula on his untimely passing, earlier this month.

Phungula’s premature death speaks directly to our past. It is during our
struggle for freedom that my party, the IFP, often referred to our comrades
in exile, such as Phungula, as our brothers. We were ridiculed for using
this term by organisations such as Jeugkrag. However, our vision and hunger
for a free, equal South Africa is what unified the different components of
this liberation struggle, helping it to achieve our common goal.

The National Cultural Liberation Movement, from which the IFP was born, had
as its aim a multistructural approach, for the freedom of our people and
for a united, nonracial, democratic country. This too was the vision of
Johannnes Phumani “Pass Four” Phungula. The IFP today honours Phungula as a
struggle veteran, a mentor to many South Africans and an honest leader, who
served this Parliament and his country with commitment, discipline,
dedication and vigour.

Let us not forget that our struggle will only cease once we have ensured a
better life for all; once we have reached a point where every human life is
valued and crime is not a crisis; once we have overcome HIV/Aids, poverty
and corruption; and once we are able to build a society based on strong
moral values. Only then will we truly be honouring the great South Africans
who came before us.

Izinyanya zakubo zize zimemukele kahle, alale ngokuthula. [May his
ancestors give him a warm welcome, may he rest in peace.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Hon Speaker and hon members, we are gathered once more to
undertake the sad duty of bidding farewell to a fellow member of this
Parliament, the late hon J P Phungula. We extend our heartfelt sympathies
to the late Phungula’s family, friends and colleagues.

In times such as these it is only the love and support of family that can
provide one with comfort. It is only the remembrance of a life well lived
that can provide consolation. We hope that part of that remembrance of his
family and friends will include the late hon member’s contribution to and
participation in this institution, and that his having been a part of this
democratic institution will give some consolation. On behalf of the UDM and
its leader, may his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

Ms C DUDLEY: Hon Speaker, the ACDP extends its condolences to the family of
hon Johannes Phungula who died on 9 August 2009. He played a significant
part in mobilising the women’s protests against the pass laws in Ixopo in
the late 50s, and he was elected to Parliament in 2004.

The ACDP recognises his courageous stand on the Civil Union Bill, as he
chose to break ranks with his party and abstain from voting. The ACDP also
extends its condolences to the ANC, and, indeed, to you, Mr President, in
your absence, understanding that you have lost a friend of nearly 50 years.
Thank you.

Ms I C DITSHETELO: Thank you, hon Speaker. God made us to live and stay in
this world but once and so the passing on of the hon member J P Phungula
has been a blow to us and to society. His work in the community and
politics will be greatly missed. The UCDP extends its sympathy to everybody
who knew and worked with him, especially his bereaved family. May his soul
rest in peace. Thank you.

Mnu D M GUMEDE: Somlomo, namalungu onke ePhalamende, ngiyanibingelela
ngenkulu inhlonipho.

Ubaba uPhungula wazalwa ngomhlaka 15 kuMashi ngo1932, eNhlazuka
ngaseRichmond, ezalwa yintombi yakwaShange. Ubeshadile futhi enemakhosikazi
amabili. Wajoyina uKhongolose ngo1952 eThekwini lapho aba ngelinye
lamavolontiya esebenza kwa-Joko Tea. Kulapho ahlangana khona namalungu
agqamile omzabalazo eSACTU, esebenza nobaba uMoses Mabhida, Steven Dlamini
nobaba uMtshali okhona la kuleNdlu.

Wagqugquzela amakhosikazi ekulweni nomzabalazo wamapasi obandlululo kanti
futhi wayebalulekile emkhankasweni owawulwa nokwephucwa umhlaba, eXobho
yizigagayi zobandlululo. Emumva kokuhlukunyezwa kaningi ngamaphoyisa
obandlululo wahamba waya ekudingisweni ngo1976 lapho khona wathunyelwa
khona eRussia ukuyoqeqeshwa ngezempi.

Ngemumva konyaka wabuyela eSwazini lapho bamenza khona umkhuzi wezempi
okusho ukuthi nguKhomanda ngesilungu wamabutho ayezongena eNatali ngaphansi
kukaJoe Modise noJoe Slovo. KwaKhongolose ubehlonishwa kakhulu yizozonke
izinkokheli zakhe ngobuciko bobuholi ayenabo. Kumalungu kaKhongolose
ubehlonishwa kakhulu nalapha ePhalamende ngoba ubethi uma ebona ukuthi
akuhambi kahle, asukume asho ngaphandle ukuthi ubani ophethe umhlangano
futhi uma ulalela ubone ubuhlakani bakhe.

Ubengayifuni into ebheke eceleni ngisho kuthiwa uzohlomula kangakanani
futhi engenasikhathi sobutofotofo nobucwebecwebe banoma yiluphi uhlobo.
Okusho ukuthi ngesiLungu ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D M GUMEDE: Speaker, and members of Parliament as a whole, I greet you
with due respect.

Mr Phungula was born on 15 March 1932, at Nhlazuka near Richmond; he was
born by the maiden of Shange. He was married and had two wives. He joined
the ANC in 1952 in Durban where he was one of the volunteers, working at
Joko Tea. That is where he met the prominent members of the struggle,
SACTU, working with Mr Moses Mabhida, Steven Dlamini and Mr Mtshali, who is
present in this House.

He encouraged women to fight the apartheid pass laws and he also played a
pivotal role in the campaign aimed at fighting against land deprivation, in
Ixopo, by the apartheid veterans. After being traumatised by the apartheid
police he went into exile in 1976, where he was deployed to Russia to
receive military training.

After a year he came back to Swaziland where he was made a military
commander of the MK detachment that was going to be deployed in Natal under
the command of Joe Modise and Joe Slovo. In the ANC, he was respected by
all of his leaders for the leadership expertise he possessed. Among the
members of the ANC he was highly respected even here in Parliament because
whenever he suspected that there was something wrong, he would stand up and
raise it, no matter who was chairing the meeting, and when you listened
attentively you would see his intelligence.

He could not stand something that was out of order no matter how much he
would benefit from it and he did not have any time for luxury and material
things of whatever nature. Which means in English ...]

... he was not a materialist. He was principled, disciplined and had no
time for dishonesty. For parliamentary meetings he was always on time, all
the time. He had respect for authority and yet had no fear of anyone. He
was a brilliant strategist with a wonderful emotional intelligence.

Yebo, silahlakelwe yinsizwa ezinsizweni,indoda emadodeni! Iqhawe lamaqhawe!
Siyohlala simkhumbula ngobuqotho bakhe, ngesibindi sakhe, ngokwethembeka
kwakhe, ngokuzithoba kwakhe nangokuzinikela kwakhe kuyo yonke into
ayenzayo. KwabakaPhungula sithi: Lalani ngenxeba; akwehlanga lungehliyo.
Indima yakhe uyilimle wayiqeda, okwethu asibonge uMdali ngokwesipho sakhe
esiyigugu asinika sona ngokuthi, kuthi lapha ezweni lethu elinezingqinamba
ezingaka asinike igugu lokuxazulula izinkinga esinazo.

KuKhongolose sithi: Umkhonto oyigugu uwile; abeza ngemuva kwakhe
abawucoshe, bawusebenzise njengaye bawuphathe njengezikhali zamaNtungwa.
Siyakhuleka kuwe gosa lamagosa, qhawe lomkhonto ulale ngoxolo. Siyohlala
sikukhonzile, sikuthanda qhawe lalaqhawe! Mdlovu usikhonzele koTambo,
koModise, koMahabane, koDube ubatshele ukuthi basibheke, masibonise indlela
ngaso sonke isikhathi. Ngithi kuwe ndlelanhle! (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Of course, we have lost a young man among young men, a man among men! Hero
among heroes! We will remember him for his reliability, his bravery, his
loyalty, his humbleness and his commitment to everything he did. To the
Phungula family we say: Accept what has happened as fate, God has given,
God has taken. He has lived his life to the fullest, ours is to be grateful
to God for His precious gift He has given us, when we had so many
difficulties in our country He provided us with a treasure to solve our
problems.

To the ANC we say: the precious spear has fallen; those who come after him
should pick it up, utilise it just like he did and handle it with great
care. We salute you, steward among stewards, hero of uMkhonto we Sizwe,
rest in peace. We will always pay respect to you and love you, hero of
heroes! Mdlovu please send our regards to Tambo, Modise, Mahabane, Dube and
tell them to guard us and show us the way every time. I bid farewell to
you!]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                           (The late Mr M J Phala)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, I
move:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes with sadness that on Thursday, 30 July 2009, Mahwidi John
         “Mokgomana” Phala passed away;


   (2)      further notes that hon Phala joined the African National
         Congress in 1953 and immediately became part of the people who
         moved from village to village to solicit inputs for the Freedom
         Charter and also attended the historic Congress of the People that
         adopted the Freedom Charter;


   (3)      recognises that in 1954 hon Phala, together with leaders such as
         Flag Boshielo, Elias Motsoaledi, Lucas Kgaphola, Oriah Maleka and
         Mogaramedi Sekhukhune, to mention but a few, formed an organisation
         called Sebatakgomo to organise migrant workers from Sekhukhuneland
         who were working in areas around Johannesburg;


   (4)      recalls that Sebatakgomo played a leading role in a militant
         uprising in May 1958 against the apartheid regime’s attempts to
         introduce the diabolic scheme of extending race discrimination by
         introducing Bantu homelands, a scheme that included the curtailing
         of cattle numbers, fencing, land partitioning, Bantu regional and
         territorial authorities and enthroning and dethroning of chiefs by
         the apartheid state;


   (5)      remembers that in 1961 “Mokgomana”, as he was known by his
         comrades, was amongst the first to join uMkhonto weSizwe and was
         part of the Mzimhlophe unit before he went on to organise his own
         units in areas such as Moletsane and Naledi;


   (6)      further remembers that in 1976 he was arrested and sentenced to
         thirty years on Robben Island and while on Robben Island he shared
         a prison cell with Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe;


   (7)      acknowledges the great contribution that the late John Phala
         made as a Member of a Provincial Legislature from 1994 to 1999 and
         of Parliament since 1999 and also that he served in various
         portfolio committees;


   (8)      believes that hon Phala was an honest leader who leaves behind a
         legacy of dedication and hard work; and


   (9)      conveys its condolences to the Phala family and the African
         National Congress.


I thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Madam Deputy Speaker, we, from the DA, would like to associate
ourselves with the tributes paid to the late Mahwidi John Phala. Mr Phala
had a long and distinguished career as an activist, a trade unionist, an
organiser of community resistance, a member of MK, and as a public
representative in the provincial legislature and in this National Assembly.


He was born to poor parents in the deep rural areas, and he did not have
the advantage of a formal education, and yet he was a natural leader of the
various organisations to which he belonged and the campaigns in which he
was involved. Yet, throughout his life he remained humble and dedicated to
the constituency he wished to serve, and whose lives he wished to better.

Naturally his role in the struggle exposed him to periodic prison
sentences, including a 30-year sentence served in part on Robben Island, in
the same cell, I understand, as the hon Deputy President. Perhaps because
of his experience of prisons and of being a prisoner, he was a natural and
very well-informed member of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional
Services, which is how I came to know and like him.

The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services is not a glamorous
committee. Much of its work is concerned with the oversight of the 237
correctional centres, and oversight tours are long and frequently quite
exhausting.
The late John Phala was already 80 years of age when he joined the
committee, yet he accompanied us on most of the oversight visits and we
benefited greatly from his experience and his insights. He was also an
extremely conscientious member of the committee and insisted on attending
all meetings, even when he was very ill.

I remember one evening when we were visiting the KwaZulu-Natal prisons in
2006, we were staying in a hotel in Durban and Mr Phala went for a walk on
the beach front. During the course of this walk he was mugged and his cell
phone was stolen. I remember thinking how outrageous it was that somebody
who had given so much and who was so passionate about rehabilitating
offenders should be the victim of this senseless and violent crime. Yet
even this experience did not diminish his determination to develop an
effective prison system in South Africa.

Mr Phala lived a very full life and he had the satisfaction of living to
see the things he had fought for realised in South Africa. We extend our
condolences to his family and his friends, and to his colleagues in the
ANC. May he rest in peace. [Applause.]

Ms C M P KOTSI: Madam Deputy Speaker, as we reflect on a 100 days of the
present administration led by President Zuma, let me take this opportunity
to join other South Africans in conveying our deepest condolences to Ntate
Phala and his family.

Ntate Phala was a formidable member of the ANC and uMkhonto we Sizwe, and
during the struggle distinguished himself as a mentor, a visionary and
someone who had unquestionable credentials. Because of his quest to free
South Africa, he was detained on Robben Island.

After the first democratic elections in 1994, he served in the Limpopo
legislature for one term and later served two terms in the National
Assembly, until April 2009. Some of us knew him as a man of dignity, a
mentor and a father figure. I’m sure as we were sitting in this House many
of us gained valuable knowledge and useful information through his vast
experience.

During the third democratic Parliament, my office was next to Ntate Phala’s
and he would always come and greet me and ask how my family was. This then
showed him as a caring father and perhaps very outstanding in that way.

I do want to say Ntate Phala was a respected and dignified man. People
would remember something that happened in this Parliament, when there was
the Travelgate scandal and for some reason Ntate Phala saw himself
entangled in this thing. We couldn’t imagine how Ntate Phala could be
involved.

When there was money that was to be paid in he was prepared to pay that
money, even though he did not actually get in on the act of Travelgate. If
it were not for hon member Komphela, he would have actually paid money that
he did not even owe. He was so dignified and thought that we could not, and
he, himself, could not be seen to be involved in this. Of course he was not
and somehow it’s good that that matter was laid to rest and was dealt with
amicably.

In celebrating his life in politics - and we say he lived the life and was
the change he wanted to see in the world, especially South Africa and
Africa - we hope our sons and daughters can emulate him and also Ntate
Phungula to forge ahead in the building of the truly nonracial society we
all fought for. The dedication of a free society for all who live in it
should be based on that which the two veterans have actually shown us.

Following the passing of Ntate Phala, we extend our deepest condolences to
his family and the ANC. Re re robala ka kgotso. [May his soul rest in
peace.] I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the IFP and our
President Dr M G Buthelezi, today we are mourning the death of a man, uBaba
uJohn Phala, chiefly known as Mokgomana, who has contributed so much to the
struggle for the freedom of our country. It has been a great loss to South
Africa as a whole, because to lose a man of his stature affects us all.

To the family of uBaba uPhala ... kanjalo nakuKhongolose, sithi ... [...
and also to the ANC, we are saying that ...]

... we extend our heartfelt condolences. May his soul depart in peace.
Siyabonga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Deputy Speaker, Deputy President and hon members, today we
are required to pay our respects to hon member M J Phala. Allow me, on
behalf of the UDM, to extend our condolences to his family, friends and
colleagues during this time of bereavement. It is not possible to ease your
sense of loss, but we hope that you will find solace amongst one another.
And in the long run your sadness will be lessened by memories of his
achievements.

He joins the ranks of those other great South Africans who have passed
away, but who will be remembered for contributing to the building of a
democratic and free South Africa.

Robala ka khotso, senatla. [Rest in peace, mighty one.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The ACDP notes the
significant contribution to the history of South Africa of Mr John Phala
who passed away last month. As a member of the provincial legislature and
this House, he leaves a legacy of dedication and hard work. The ACDP
extends its condolences to the Phala family and to the ANC on the loss of a
long-time friend and comrade. Thank you.

Ms M N MATLADI: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. The UCDP conveys its
condolences to the bereaved family of the late hon M J Phala for the loss
of their beloved son, beloved brother and beloved father.

Hon M J Phala served as a member of the provincial legislature in Limpopo
from 1994 and joined the national Parliament in 1999 until April 2009. His
contribution in building the democratic South Africa will always be missed.
The UCDP says: “Lalang ka ntho madi a tshologe.” [May his soul rest in
peace.] Thank you.

Mna L N DIALE: Motlatša-Sepikara, Motlatša-Mopresidente, maloko ao a
hlomphegago a Ntlo ye kgethwa ye, ke eme mo ke tlile go hloboša lapa la
mogale wa bagale, e lego Morena Mahwidi John Phala, yo a re tlogetšego.

Morena Phala, bjalo ka ge go šetše go boletšwe mo, o tsenetše mokgatlo wa
go lwela khutšo mengwageng ya bo50. Se ke therešo. Ke mo tsebile ka dinako
tšeo ge re be re katana le mmušo wola wa maloba wa kgethollo. Re ile ra
timelelana ka ge re be re šoma ka sephiri, gomme mmušo o be o ntšhintše ka
ga tšhwene o swara ebile o bolaya. Phala o ile a tsena bjangbotala le rena
ra tsena bjangbotala, gomme ra timelelana.

Ke ile ka kwa ka ga yena ge rena le ba bangwe gona ka mo –boTokyo Sexwale -
re emetše thapo kua Tshwane Kgorongkgolo ya tsheko. Re be re seka gomme le
yena a seka kua Kgorongkgolo ya tsheko ya Springs. Ba bangwe ba rena re ile
ra phomelela gomme ra tšwa kgolegong. Eupša yena le ba bangwe ba ile ba
ahlolwa - bjalo ka ge go šetše go boletšwe fa.

Mahwidi Phala o be a ikgafetše go lokolla naga ye le setšhaba sa yona
bophelong bja gagwe. Mahwidi Phala e be e le motho yo a bego a rata gore
Afrika-Borwa e be naga e tee ka fase ga mookamedi o tee. E be e le
maikemišetšo a gagwe ao. O be a na le maitshwaro gomme a rata batho. Eupša
ge a be a ka hwetša gore o sehwirihwiri gomme o lebelela morago mokgatlong
le tseleng ya ntwa, o be a go tlogela. O be a re: “Ke tša gago tšeo, rena
re tšwela pele. O tla šala o di bona, sehwirihwiri tena!” E be e le motho
wa go bolela ka tsela ye. Ke ka fao ke mo tsebago ka gona.

Mahwidi Phala o rile go tšwa kgolegong kua Robben Island – bjalo ka ge go
šetše go boletš we – nna le Tonakgolo ya Maphelo, Ngaka Aaron Motswaledi,
le ba bangwe re ile ra mo direla mokete wo mogolo lapeng la gagwe gomme ra
mo amogela. Go tloga fao, Mahwidi o bile le rena gomme ra bopa mokgatlo wa
ANC ka tlase ga maitshawaro a magolo le lerato la go tšwetša mokgatlo wo
pele gore re lokolle naga ye. O ile a ba yo mongwe wa go bopa mokgatlo wo
kua Limpopo nakong ya ge e sa le “Northern Transvaal”. Gantši o be a tsebja
ka la “the lion of the north”. O be a šoma kudukudu mokgalabje Phala.

Go ile gwa fihla nako yeo e lego gore mokgatlo wo o a boya ka morago ga
ditheriš ano. Morena Phala e bile leloko la Palamente, bjalo ka ge le šetše
le tseba ka moka ga lena. O šomile kua Limpopo le mo Kapa go fihlela ge a
robala.

Morena Phala e be e le motho yo a ratago batho kudukudu. Eupša ge e le
mokgatlo wa gagwe wona, o be a o rata go feta dilo tše ka moka. Bjalo ka ge
mokgalabje a robetše ka la30 Julae, re mo phuthile monyanyeng wa go keteka
bophelo bja gagwe. Le a tseba gore ge motho a šetše a na le mengwaga ye 85,
ga e sa le dillo, ke keteko ya bophelo bja gagwe ka gore ge motho a tlile
lefaseng, ka nako ye nngwe ke tshwanelo gore a fete.

O tlogela mediro ye megolo go rena re lego Ntlong ye, setšhaba le bana ba
gagwe gore re tšwele pele go aga naga ye ya Afrika-Borwa ka fase ga
Mopresidente o tee le naga e tee bjalo ka ge a re tlogeletše wona mantšu a.
Ge re be re le kua moketeng wa gagwe, re be re na le motlatša mookamedi, e
lego Kgalema Motlanthe. Ke yo. O be a le gona. Re mo phuthile semmušo. Ka
mantšu a mangwe o humane poloko ya semmušo.

Bjalo re rata gore – pele ga bana ba gagwe le lena ka moka –a robale ka
khutšo mogale wa bagale. Rena bao re šetšego mo, re swanetše go tšea
tlhabano ya gagwe gomme re tšwele pele go bopa naga ye, re tlogele
mabarebare. Naga ye e nyaka mašole a go tia a go swana le Morena Phala. Re
swanetše go kgokagana re age naga. O re tlogeletše yona taba ye. Re
swanetše go e swara ka matsogo a mabedi gomme re tšwele pele. Go se ke gwa
ba le bohwirihwiri. O be a sa rate bohwirihwiri, Phala. O be a sa rate go
lebelela morago, eupša a rata go lebela pele.

Re re go bana ba gagwe le lena ka moka, a robale ka khutšo. Ke a leboga.
[Magoswi.] (Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr L N DIALE: Deputy Speaker, Deputy President, hon members of this august
House, I am standing here to extend my condolences to the family of a hero,
that is Mr Mahwidi John Phala, who has passed on.

Mr Phala, as has already been indicated here, joined the party that fought
for freedom in the 50s. This is a fact. I got to know him in those days
when we were fighting against the previous apartheid regime. We lost touch
as we were operating underground, and the government was up in arms
arresting and killing. Phala disappeared, and we also disappeared and we
eventually lost touch.

I heard about him again when myself and some people here - people like
Tokyo Sexwale – were waiting in the Tshwane High Court to be hanged. We
were on trial; he was also on trial in the Springs High Court. Some of us
were released from prison but, judgement had already been passed on him and
some other people, as has already been indicated here.

In his lifetime, Mahwidi Phala sacrificed himself to free this country and
its nation. Mahwidi Phala was a kind of person who wanted South Africa to
be one country under one leader. Those were his intentions. He was well
behaved and someone who loved people. But should he find out that you were
a hypocrite and that you did not commit your life to the party and to the
struggle, he would leave you. He would say:” That is your problem, we are
continuing. You will see where your life will end up, you hypocrite!”

After Mahwidi Phala was released from prison on Robben Island - as has
already been indicated - the Minister of Health, Dr Aaron Motsoaledi, and I
and others organised a huge welcome back party for him at his home. From
there, Mahwidi has been with us and we formed the ANC because the purpose
was to free this country. He was one of those people who built this party
in Limpopo in those days when it was still called “Northern Transvaal”. He
was mostly known as “the lion of the north”. Mr Phala was a hard-working
person.

There came a time when this organisation went back to the table. As we all
know, Mr Phala was a Member of Parliament. He was deployed to Limpopo as
well as Cape Town until he passed on.

Mr Phala loved people, but when coming to his organisation, he excelled
because he loved this organisation to the extreme. As an old man, he died
on 30 July, and we laid him to rest. We did not mourn his death but we
celebrated his life as we all know that he was 85 years old and it was time
for him to pass on.

He bequeathed great deeds to us in this House, the community and his
children so as to carry on to build our country South Africa under one
President and as one nation as this was what he cherished. The Deputy
President, Kgalema Motlanthe, was also among those who were present at the
funeral. He was given a state funeral. We buried him formally. That is to
say, we accorded him a state funeral.

At this juncture, we say to his children and everybody – let him rest in
peace, he is a hero among heroes. All of us who left behind, have to pick
up his baton and continue building this nation, and stop listening to
destructive words. This nation needs strong soldiers like Mr Phala. We have
to unite and build the nation. He left us with this idea of building the
nation. We have to cherish and uphold this idea and continue to fight. Mr
Phala did not like deceitfulness or roguery but instead committed his life
to the organisation and did not look back.

We say to his children and everybody, may he rest in peace. Thank you
[Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

                          WOMEN’S DAY CELEBRATIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B N DLULANE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, 9 August this year marked the 53rd
anniversary of the heroic march by 20 000 women to the Union Buildings in
1956. This year’s commemoration was inspired by the theme: Working together
to empower women for development and gender equality. The Ministry of
Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities was launched by
President Zuma in Vryheid. President Zuma further committed the government
he leads to working tirelessly for women’s emancipation.

On this day, South Africans remembered the sacrifice, the commitment, the
dedication and the unity in action of women of the 1950s who demonstrated
that women are strong, powerful, special and valuable. The commemoration of
this day continues to remind us of women’s resilience and their amazing
struggle spirit. It also reminds us of the high price that was exacted from
those who went before us in order to create the environment we live and
work in today.

However, despite our achievements, women continue to face challenges,
particularly women workers and those who reside in rural areas. Amongst
their challenges are the following. The first challenge is the feminisation
of poverty, underdevelopment and unemployment. Much has been achieved, but
women continue to bear the brunt of poverty and deprivation.
Secondly, the objectification of women in society, especially in and by the
media in particular, continues to be a major challenge. There is also the
casualisation of women workers, where business relegates women to casual
work and renders them vulnerable to retrenchments, outsourcing and
casualisation. Now, with the current global financial crisis, women are
relegated to the entry level of the economy and in the main do not own the
means of production. Thank you. [Time expired.]

       SA’s ARMS TRADE IN CONFLICT WITH FOREIGN POLICY ON HUMAN RIGHTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D J MAYNIER (DA): Deputy Speaker, when former President Nelson Mandela
announced that human rights would be the light that guides our foreign
affairs, we made a clear break with our foreign policy past. To give effect
to the principle that human rights should be the foundation of our foreign
policy, we passed a law regulating the sale of conventional arms.

In the preamble to that law, we say that our country is a responsible
member of the international community and will not trade in conventional
arms with states engaged in repression, aggression and terrorism. And yet
it now emerges that we are dealing with some of the most repressive regimes
in the world.

We sold conventional arms to Libya, Syria and Venezuela. We are attempting
to sell conventional arms to Syria and Zimbabwe. We also demonstrated
military support equipment in North Korea. In the end we did this, not
because there is a crisis in our conventional arms control regime - and
there is a crisis - but because this government has never found a dictator
it doesn't like. That is why we need an urgent debate on the crisis in the
National Conventional Arms Control Committee and its implications for South
Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

                         PAYMENT TO FORMER SABC CEO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P D DEXTER (COPE): Deputy Speaker, the recent payout of R14 million to
the former Chief Executive Officer of the SABC, Mr Mpofu, is nothing short
of a scandal. During his tenure, when he led the SABC for a number of
years, the SABC was beset by problems and was always in the news itself,
mostly for controversial reasons.

In recent times it has become clear that what was once an institution that
generated revenue has become a bottomless pit into which the taxpayer’s
money is routinely thrown away.

Given the allegations of mismanagement and wasteful expenditure during his
term, this payment should be stopped until all these matters have been
thoroughly investigated. Cope notes the irony of Cosatu congratulating Mr
Mpofu on his payout. It is interesting to see that the trade union
federation has now become one that represents the interests of management.
Cope hopes that Cosatu will explain to workers at the SABC that this R14
million will probably come out of their next meagre salary increase. Thank
you. [Applause.]

        PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS TO NATIONAL PRESIDENTIAL RELIGIOUS SUMMIT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr M S MOTSHEKGA (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, when President Jacob Zuma
addressed the National Presidential Religious Summit on 27 November 2008,
he called on faith communities to structure themselves in all provinces so
as to be inclusive and service-oriented partners with government.

He has openly embraced faith communities and proceeded to invite them to
join hands with government in its sense of urgency in tackling service
delivery issues that have been prioritised. After a long process of
consultation, religious leaders and workers from all provinces met at the O
R Tambo International Airport on 27 July 2009 where they adopted a motion
for the foundation of the National Interfaith Leaders Council. This council
met again on 10 August 2009 to prepare for a meeting with the President.

We wish to applaud you in absentia, Mr President, on your efforts to reach
out to all sectors of our society, which has been reaffirmed at your recent
meeting with this council at the Union Buildings on 11 August 2009. In this
meeting the President endorsed the formation of the council and was very
pleased with the appropriation of the interfaith concept as it denotes
inclusivity and co-operation amongst people of faith. Religious leaders
also agreed to continue to mobilise all the faith-based groups and
communities to join this council at all levels.

Deputy Speaker, we welcome this faith council and hope that it will help
with the moral regeneration movement programmes. Thank you. [Applause.]

         BY-ELECTION RESULTS SHOW IFP STILL A STRONG POLITICAL FORCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, by-elections are an
important part of our electoral process and a good indicator of the support
which the political parties have.

Over the past few years, particularly after the recent general elections,
there have been many prophets of doom and critics who have continued to
write off the IFP as a spent political force and attempted to consign us to
an early grave. The reality of the situation is that the IFP continues to
defy these pessimists and maintains a strong support-base amongst the
electorate. The recent by-elections in KwaZulu-Natal bear testimony to this
fact.

The IFP is proud recently to have won four by-elections out of five across
KwaZulu-Natal; namely, Umvothi Ward 9, Indaka Ward 6, Okhahlamba Ward 1,
and Nquthu Ward 5, despite expectations by many that we would fail. These
results should serve as a timely reminder that the IFP should not be
underestimated and is still a political force to be reckoned with.
[Laughter.] I thank you. [Applause.]

         CONDEMNATION OF BEHAVIOUR OF SOCCER FANS AT CAPE TOWN MATCH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J J MCGLUWA (ID): Hon Speaker and hon Deputy Speaker, the ID strongly
condemns the disgusting behaviour of some of the fans at this weekend’s
soccer match in Cape Town between Kaizer Chiefs and Ajax. Hooligans, who
were unhappy with the decision of the referee, began hurling bottles and
vuvuzelas onto the pitch. They ripped out more than 500 seats and threw
them at the referee.

We cannot condone such disgusting behaviour by some South African fans in a
country that is only 296 days away from showcasing our ability to host an
internationally acclaimed event, the 2010 Fifa World Cup. We are concerned
that only two unruly fans were arrested by the police, as this brings into
question our ability to prevent similar occurrences in the future.

This unruly behaviour is becoming a national trend and we call on Safa to
take strong action against both the clubs and the fans involved in this
disgusting behaviour. I thank you. [Applause.]

         SOUND EDUCATION SYSTEM ESSENTIAL FOR SA ECONOMY AND SOCIETY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MADLALA (ANC): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The ANC-led government is
of the firm view that education is a means of promoting good citizenship,
as well as preparing our people for the needs of a modern economy and
democratic society.

In our election manifesto, the ANC committed itself to, amongst other
things, working together with educators, learners, parents, school
governing bodies and other stakeholders to make education the priority of
all; introducing a sustainable early childhood education system that spans
both public and private sectors, and gives children a headstart in numeracy
and literacy; promoting the status of teachers, ensuring the employment of
adequate numbers, and improving their remuneration and training as an
important part of our drive to ensure that quality teaching becomes the
norm rather that the exception.

Together with trade unions, we need to ensure that teachers are at school,
in class, on time and teaching and that there is no abuse of learners and
no neglect of duty.  Lastly, we need to embark on the reopening of teacher
training colleges, where appropriate.

The meeting with the principals on 7 August this year was attended by 1 500
school principals from throughout the country. This was a fulfilment of the
promise made by the President. Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

             CALL FOR INVESTIGATION INTO SA ARMS DEAL WITH LIBYA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J R B LORIMER (DA): A preamble to the law that regulates the sale of
conventional arms states that our country is a responsible member of the
international community and will not trade in conventional arms with states
engaged in repression, aggression and terrorism. But now it emerges that
we’ve been selling glide bombs to Libya, Mr President, which could be used
to deliver nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. We’ve also been
selling multiple grenade launchers to Libya.

Human Rights Watch, HRW, says that Libya has no free press and no
independent organisations. Libyans continue to face arrest and torture for
expressing peaceful criticism of the government and its undisputed leader.
The HRW continues to note that in Libya, rape victims risk prosecution for
adultery or fornication if they attempt to press charges.

We call on the Minister to urgently investigate this arms deal that has
been authorised by the National Conventional Arms Control Committee, NCACC,
and to stop the export of weapons if they have not already been delivered.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I note, perhaps for the purposes of the next DA
speaker, that the topic that has been raised by two DA speakers is equal to
anticipation; it’s on the Order Paper and on the Question Paper. I’m sure
you know that you are not supposed to be discussing that particular
question. Can I call on the UCDP.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, can I address you on your ruling?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: A comment and not a ruling!

Mr M J ELLIS: I need to say that this is a matter of great importance. We
are not aware of any particular Rule that says because a question is on the
Order Paper, we are then breaking the Rule of anticipation if we raise it.
We were expecting that we would be able to make further statements on this
particular matter this afternoon.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is, in fact, in the Rules that no member shall
anticipate the discussion of a matter appearing on the Order Paper, and you
know very well that this matter appears on the Order Paper. However, I
don’t think this should be the point of discussion. I was pointing out that
two members, instead of bringing views in broad statements, were talking
about the same item, which is a question and also on the Order Paper.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am not aware of the fact that it is
on the Order Paper; it certainly is on the Question Paper. In actual fact,
we have proposed a motion this afternoon, but it is not yet on the Order
Paper.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Ellis, the Question Paper is part of the Order
Paper. You know that. Can we move to the UCDP.

         PLIGHT OF WOMEN IN SA FIFTY-THREE YEARS AFTER WOMEN’S MARCH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M N MATLADI (UCDP): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. August 9, 2009 was the
53rd anniversary of the Women’s March. This was the day when 20 000 women
from all corners of South Africa staged a march on the offices of the then
Prime Minister J G Strijdom, who was unable to receive them in the Union
Buildings.

Those courageous women left numerous petitions containing over 100 000
signatures on the door of the Prime Minister’s office. The message to the
Prime Minister was that the women of South Africa would not rest until they
had restored for their children their fundamental rights and freedom,
justice and security.

Today, as we celebrate this women’s month, they continue to face challenges
in their lives. They face challenges of poverty, abuse and illiteracy. They
are still victims of discrimination, oppression and suppression. Studies
reveal that one in every four South African women is assaulted by her
boyfriend or husband every week. One in every five women is battered by her
partner.

The average woman stays in an abusive relationship for ten-and-a-half years
before leaving. One in three women in South Africa will be raped. Only one
out of every 25 women who are raped report it to the police. In 1993,
27 056 rapes were reported; only 8 988 were prosecuted. Thank you. [Time
expired.]

               PARTICIPATION OF SA IN MADAGASCAR PEACE PROCESS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr T W NXESI (ANC): Deputy Speaker, in line with our objective of bringing
about a humane, peaceful and equitable continent in the world order, the
Cabinet approved South Africa’s participation in the facilitation of the
peace process in Madagascar last week. South Africa will be represented by
Mr Charles Nqakula in the facilitation process. This comes after the
leaders agreed on Sunday, 9 August 2009, on a 31-member unity government in
a power-sharing deal that will cede control of the exotic Indian Ocean
Island to an interim government with elections to be held in 2010.

Under international mediators, four previous Malagasy heads of state agreed
in Maputo on the formation of a transitional government to organise
presidential elections by the end of 2010. The agreement made in Maputo has
been welcomed and is widely considered as a milestone in the return to
peace and stability that the population has been deprived of.

The ANC will continue to work with the entire continent and the rest of the
world to ensure that peace and stability prevail. It will continue to seek
a path of hope and human solidarity to pursue the resolution of conflict
through dialogue and peaceful means, and to promote mutual friendships
among the people of the world. As Parliament, we look forward to working
with the elected representatives of the Malagasy people. Thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Deputy Speaker, in terms of your ruling, we will not make
another statement this afternoon.

           IMPACT OF POSSIBLE CHOLERA OUTBREAK ON SOCCER WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF (Cope): Madam Deputy Speaker, as South Africa is
preparing for the Soccer World Cup that will take place next year, it is of
the utmost importance that we are prepared at all levels.

Last summer, we experienced a serious outbreak of cholera in this country.
It is now time to prepare and make sure that we do not have the same
intensive outbreak this coming season. Therefore, we urge the necessary
departments timeously to engage with our neighbouring countries to make
sure that they are taking the necessary precautions to prevent another
outbreak.

It is also important that the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs
starts preparing for the testing of all rivers flowing into the Kruger
National Park to make sure that these rivers remain cholera-free. Any
negligence and poor planning will create an opportunity for visiting
journalists to send bad-news stories from South Africa that will harm South
Africa’s image as a sport tourist destination weeks before the kick-off of
the Soccer World Cup. [Applause.]

     IMPACT OF POVERTY, INEQUALITY AND JOBLESSNESS ON RURAL SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H T MAGAMA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, poverty, inequality and
joblessness are the consequences of centuries of underdevelopment and
exploitation consciously perpetrated on the majority of the population ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Can you hear?

Mr H T MAGAMA (ANC): I should get a loudhailer, Madam Deputy Speaker!

Poverty, inequality and joblessness are the consequences of centuries of
underdevelopment and exploitation consciously perpetrated against the
majority of the population, which had a most destructive and enduring
impact on rural South Africa. Recognising this challenge, President Jacob
Zuma was in the dusty Muyexe village in Limpopo this week, to launch a
programme aimed at radically transforming rural areas.

The programme is aimed at achieving social cohesion and development in the
rural parts of our country. Muyexe is one of the poorest villages in our
country. It has no basic services like water, electricity and roads and
there is no housing development. For many villagers such as 52-year-old
Dick Magezi Mabasa, small-scale livestock farming is the only means of
survival.

The initiative is based on three key pillars: co-ordinated and integrated
broad-based agrarian transformation; an improved land reform programme; and
the strategic ... [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

         BORDER CONTROL NECESSARY TO STEM RHINO POACHING IN RESERVES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R N CEBEKHULU (IFP): Deputy Speaker, hon members, it is with great
disappointment that I note that parts of our protected areas continue to
suffer big losses to poachers. There have also been disturbing newspaper
reports of poachers having killed a sizeable number of rhinos in these
protected areas. These areas include the Kruger National Park, the Thula
Thula Game Reserve, the Zulu Nyala Game Lodge, including Ezemvelo KwaZulu-
Natal Wildlife.

These animals are a source of great pride to South Africa. This country has
assisted in nature conservation to protect wildlife and started
distributing rhinos, with the assistance of the World Wildlife Fund, WWF,
to other parts of Africa and within South African provinces. Therefore, our
government should be trying hard to guard our borders and harbours to
ensure that the culprits responsible for mowing down these animals purely
for their horns, are caught and brought to book.

A concerted and integrated effort is needed from many departments and
stakeholders if real inroads are to be made in protecting our wildlife and
stopping poachers from selling their ill-gotten gains. If the legislation
that we have in place is inadequate to deal with this scourge, then we must
strengthen it by ensuring that the organisations tasked with protecting our
wildlife and other natural resources have the resources that they need to
perform their duties effectively, including funds and skilled staff. I
thank you.

           100 DAYS IN OFFICE OF PREMIER ZILLE AND PRESIDENT ZUMA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B H HOLOMISA (UDM): Deputy Speaker and hon members, 100 days have
elapsed since the election of the new national and provincial executives.
The UDM congratulates both President Zuma and Premier Zille on their first
100 days in office. We will not judge them too harshly now, because we know
that we can’t solve this country’s problems in 100 days. However, now is
the time to get down to work.
Already we have seen that the issue of ethnicity, gender and racial
representation in executive appointments has reared its ugly head. We would
have thought that by now leaders would be able to manage these issues. The
appointment of Cabinet members and senior public servants should not become
such an endless battleground that it undermines nation-building.

Perhaps we require a system of parliamentary vetting of senior appointments
similar to that applied in the US, with senate confirmation hearings, in
order to ensure that we appoint the best and most appropriate candidates.

Loo nkqubo iya kuphelisa le ngxolo ikhoyo kwiqela elilawulayo, apho bakhala
ngoMsholozi besithi abantu abamnyama banikwe izithuba ezingabafanelanga.
Abanye bade bamtyhole bathi ngokubhekiselele ekutyumbeni iinkokheli
kwicandelo lezokhuseleko nokonyulwa kweJaji eyiNtloko, uthe: (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[That programme will bring an end to the existing noise within the ruling
party complaining about Msholozi, saying that black people have been given
jobs that they do not deserve. Some even accuse him of saying, regarding
the appointment of leaders in the Department of Police and the appointment
of the Chief Justice, ...]

“Cha, ngeyasekhaya ke le.” [“Yes! This is my homeboy!”]

“Bangabona ukuba mabathini na kwezinye iindawo.” Enkosi. [“They can see
what to do in the other positions.” Thank you.] [Applause.]

                         PAYMENT TO FORMER SABC CEO
         CONDEMNATION OF BEHAVIOUR OF soccer fans AT CAPE TOWN MATCH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Deputy
Speaker, I would like briefly to respond to two statements: the first one
made by the hon sinister Dexter, who has left the House. [Laughter.]

I think that we will be broadly in agreement, safe to say, that the
agreements between the former Chief Executive Officer of the SABC and the
board are contractual; there may have been bad contracts but they are
contractual.

The board has exercised a choice between costly and protracted litigation
and early resolution, and early resolutions are always costly. And I think
that, in recognising how difficult these issues are when the contracts are
poorly structured, we also recognise what the cost would be in the case of
protracted litigation. So in that context it is very important that members
of this House accept the circumstances.

With regards to the hon member from the ID, I think we would all agree that
the behaviour of the fans at Newlands Stadium on Saturday was quite
unacceptable, not only because 2010 is looming, it is generally
unacceptable. I think by the same token we should also take a view on the
behaviour of spectators and sometimes on-field incidents in amateur rugby
in this country.

I think part of the joint responsibility that we must take, is to build
strong communities that are far more tolerant of what happens on the field;
and ensuring that there is an intolerance of bad behaviour in respect of
spectators. I think that that is not a party-political issue or an
executive responsibility, it is something that all of us, as elected
representatives of our people, should take on board. Thank you.

   SOUND education SYSTEM ESSENTIAL FOR SOUTH AFRICAN ECONOMY AND SOCIETY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Deputy Speaker, I welcome
the statement by the hon member Maggie Madlala on government’s commitment
to prioritising education. I wish to tell this House that earlier,
immediately after the elections, there was a national teacher education
summit that was very successful. It reached all the teachers’
representatives and their unions and they committed themselves to the non-
negotiables of being in class on time and teaching.

We recently saw the first-ever gathering of school principals addressed by
the President of the Republic, during which the school principals committed
themselves to making sure that our schools are functional. I also wish to
say that the President will soon be meeting with the Vice Chancellors of
all the universities as well as all the rectors of the Further Education
and Training Colleges.

I would also like to say that, in relation to other matters on our
educators, we are currently exploring modalities for enhancing teacher
development, including the possibility of opening teacher training
colleges.

Yesterday the South African Democratic Teachers Union, Sadtu, representing
about 70% of the teachers, signed the Occupation Specific Dispensation
agreement. [Applause.] All these developments show that despite those who
are cynical and have no responsibility for governing the country, all
stakeholders are responding positively to government’s initiative to make
education a priority.

Allow me to conclude, Deputy Speaker, by saying that I hope the hon
Mpontshane will tell us, at some stage at the next available opportunity:
If the IFP is so stable, what was the IFP youth doing or symbolising by
their march yesterday in Durban? Siyabonga. [Thank you.]

     IMPACT OF POVERTY, INEQUALITY AND JOBLESSNESS ON RURAL SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Deputy Speaker, I wish
first to thank the hon members of this House who yesterday attended the
launch of the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme at Muyexe Village
in Limpopo presided over by the President. We appreciate their presence
there.

Indeed, the programme has kicked off and it did so in a very good
atmosphere. Members of the community appreciate the contribution that the
government is making to improve their lives. We want to emphasise to this
House that the issues that have been raised here are real. It is true that
there is no water there and that even the underground water is of bad
quality. We are at the moment working very hard to solve that problem.

The district municipality has already put forward R5 million. We have
engineers working very hard in trying to identify a site where we could
build a reservoir so that we could harvest water to be purified there. We
are working on road construction and we have a model that is based on
households where we will employ, as the President was saying yesterday,
members of the community to construct those roads.

We are dealing with these matters and I hope that in due course we will
again invite hon members to come, inspect and see how we are proceeding
there. Thank you.

       SA’s ARMS TRADE IN CONFLICT WITH FOREIGN POLICY ON HUMAN RIGHTS
           IMPACT OF POSSIBLE CHOLERA OUTBREAK ON SOCCER WORLD CUP
           100 DAYS IN OFFICE OF PREMIER ZILLE AND PRESIDENT ZUMA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Deputy Speaker, with regard to the
first matter that I wish to respond to, you have assisted me by referring
to Rule 68 of the National Assembly Rules which the hon Ellis is fully
aware of.

The fiction that is being propounded with respect to these comments about
the National Conventional Arms Control Committee, NCACC, will be dealt with
in the portfolio committee and through the regular parliamentary process.
But I do assert that it is fiction.

Could I then move on to deal with the matter ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: You have ruled
today on the Rule of anticipation. The hon Minister is addressing the
issue. Whether she pretends she is not addressing the issue or whether she
is in fact addressing it is not quite clear. But, nevertheless, I would
suggest that she herself is in breach of the Rule of anticipation that you
have ruled on this afternoon.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Yes, the hon Ellis is made
uncomfortable by his inability to have advised his members properly as a
Whip.

I would then like to agree with the hon member from Cope who indicated a
need to prepare to address any outbreaks of serious diseases that may occur
in particular seasons. I say to the hon member and all members that I think
all of us should assist communities with an information campaign during our
constituency periods because such an alert is not just the work of
government, but also the responsibility of all public representatives.
There is information available that members of Parliament could use to
assist communities to ready themselves to meet these challenges.

Finally, the hon Holomisa began rather well, but I think he lost it along
the way. I am not sure why he conjoins the hon President with the Premier
of the Western Cape in his congratulations. I couldn’t quite understand
that link. It might be evidence that we are seeing that he may be speaking
of his future leader and really trying to disguise this by way of this
statement. [Applause.]

Could we say that we believe the President has made appropriate
appointments? I believe that it is most unfortunate to refer to the
President as having made a practice of ethnicity in appointments. I think
it is a pejorative reference which is totally unnecessary. May I also say
that if we were to move to the vetting that has been proposed by the hon
Holomisa, we mustn’t just extract that which we want from the American
system.

We would have to take the entire system, which would include the following:
members of the executive would not be appointed from elected public
representatives and would be nonserving members; the President would have
veto powers; and so on and so forth. So I think we should have an
appreciation of the strength of our democracy and ensure, as public
representatives, that we make it work. Our President has appointed,
appropriately, persons who are competent to the task that must be
undertaken. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

         BY-ELECTION RESULTS SHOW IFP STILL A STRONG POLITICAL FORCE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF STATE SECURITY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want to
respond to hon Mpontshane’s statement. I agree with the hon Mpontshane that
free, fair and peaceful by-elections are an essential part of our
democracy. They are a good indicator of the electoral support of any
political party in a democracy.

Indeed, it would be wrong to write the IFP out of our political landscape
while it managed to retain four out of five of its former wards in KwaZulu-
Natal. However, Mr Mpontshane left out two of the most glaring facts with
regard to these elections. The first one is that the IFP, while it has won
some of the elections, has shown a considerable decline in both actual
percentages and numbers in those wards.

Yet the other party, the ANC, has made considerable strides in all those
wards in terms of the actual numbers and percentages of people voting for
the ANC. In fact, in addition, the ANC has taken one of the wards in
Mnambithi from the IFP.

The second glaring fact is that the IFP must stop this cheap political
point-scoring. Indeed, the time has come for the IFP to get into serious
discussions with the ANC if we want to stabilise South Africa in KwaZulu-
Natal. Thank you. [Applause.]

The House adjourned at 15:35.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           WEDNESDAY, 8 JULY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill, 2009, submitted by
         the Minister of Sport and Recreation. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Sport and Recreation and the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     1.     The Minister of Sport and Recreation

         (a)     Safety at Sports and Recreational Events  Bill [B 7 –
              2009] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75)


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Sport
             and Recreation of the National Assembly, as well as referral
             to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in
             terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

3.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 8 July 2009:


          a) Appropriation Bill [B 5B – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 77).


 4. Membership of Committees
    (1)     Mr  B A Mnguni has replaced Mr T E Chaane as Co-Chairperson of
        the Constitutional Review Committee with effect from 8 July 2009.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (1)     A request dated 8 July 2009 has been received from the Minister
        of Justice and Constitutional Development for the appointment of
        persons to the South African Human Rights Commission in terms of
        section 193(5) of the Constitution.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development for consideration and report.

2.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Committees:

         PC on Communications


         Appointed:


         ANC


         Kholwane, Mr S E
         PC on Home Affairs


         Appointed:


         ID


         McGluwa, Mr J J


                            THURSDAY, 9 JULY 2009

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
    consideration of a shortlist of candidates for appointment to the Board
    of the Human Sciences Research Council, dated 8 July 2009:

    The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having considered
    the shortlist of candidates for appointment to the Board of the Human
    Sciences Research Council (HSRC) in terms of section 5 of the HSRC Act
    (Act No 17 of 2008), which was referred to the Committee on 8 June
    2009, reports as follows:


    The Committee held meetings on 23 June, 1 July and 8 July 2009 on the
    above subject. The Act provides for a selection of up to 20 shortlisted
    candidates. The Department received 32 applications and shortlisted
    only 13 of the 32.  The Committee was concerned that the list submitted
    by the Department did not incorporate the full set of criteria in the
    Act, and therefore recommended that the number be increased.


    During its deliberations the Committee found that the criteria on which
    the 13 candidates were shortlisted, were not as prescribed in the Act,
    specifically on the issue of the demographics of the South African
    society. The Committee subsequently requested that the Department
    review the shortlist to include persons with the requisite academic and
    experiential qualification, which should form an important criterion.
    The Committee was presented with a supplemented list.


    Based on the above, the Committee recommends that the House approves
    the following shortlist:


      1. Ms PN Gasa
      2. Prof R Hassan
      3. Prof MT Leshabari
      4. Dr P Gobodo-Madikizela
      5. Mr TP Masobe
      6. Dr FG Netswera
      7. Ms P Ntombela-Nzimande
      8. Prof T Pillay
      9. Prof L Qalinge
     10. Mr A Samassekou
     11. Prof A Sawyerr
     12. Dr S Zinn
     13. Prof P Zulu
     14. Prof A Lourens
     15. Dr BO Tema
     16. Prof P Naidoo
     17. Prof EC Webster


    The Committee, cognisant of the aspect of separation of powers, further
    notes that:


    1. Within the science and technology portfolio there are considerable
       differences in the legislation governing the appointment of members
       to Boards.
    2. There are differences across portfolios in respect of appointments
       of personnel to statuary bodies.


    The Committee recommends that:


    1. The Minister considers reviewing legislation with the purpose of
       bringing in line legislation, which has bearing on the appointment
       of members to Boards so that there is a uniform approach with regard
       to the appointment processes.
    2. As the oversight authority, Parliament should consider facilitating
       discussion, research and review around the standardisation of
       legislation which deals with procedures for appointing Boards.

Report to be considered.

                            FRIDAY, 10 JULY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

   1. Chairperson of Multiparty Women’s Caucus

    Ms B N Dlulane has been appointed as Chairperson of the Multiparty
    Women’s Caucus with effect from 26 May 2009.

National Assembly

The Speaker

   1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Basic Education and to the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education
        and Training:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Departments of Education for 2009–13
             and the Operational Plan of the Departments of Education for
             2009–10.


    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises and to the Portfolio Committee on Energy:
        (a)      Eskom’s Amended Pricing Structure and Retail Tariffs for
             2009-10, tabled  in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003) and supporting documents required in terms of section
             42(3) of the same Act.


    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water and Environmental Affairs:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Water Affairs for
             2009–14.


    (4)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Office of the Public Protector for 1
             April 2009 to 31 March 2012.


    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance:


        (a)      Government Notice No R.646 published in Government Gazette
             No 32299, dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/378), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (b)      Government Notice No R.647 published in Government Gazette
             No 32299, dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/316), in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
        (c)      Government Notice No R.648 published in Government Gazette
             No 32299, dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Rules 2 (No 2/317),
             in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (d)      Government Notice No R.643 published in Government Gazette
             No 32297, dated 5 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/315), in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (e)      Government Notice No R.670 published in Government Gazette
             No 32309, dated 9 June 2009: Amendment of Part 3 of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/3/7), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (f)      Government Notice No R.671 published in Government Gazette
             No 32309, dated 9 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 8 (No
             8/7), in terms of section 60 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (g)      Government Notice No R.678 published in Government Gazette
             No 32319, dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1379), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (h)      Government Notice No 618 published in Government Gazette
             No 32280,  dated 29 May 2009: Determination of interest rate
             for purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official
             rate of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to
             the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


        (i)      Government Notice No 642 published in Government Gazette
             No 32280, dated 4 June 2009: Determination of interest rate
             for purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official
             rate of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to
             the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962): Correction
             Notice for Venda and Zulu translations.


        (j)      Government Notice No 582 published in Government Gazette
            No 32246, dated 22 May 2009: The dimension of, design for, and
            compilation of, the year 2009 “FIFA 2010 coin series”, in terms
            of section 19(1)(a) of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989
            (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (6)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry:


        (a)      General Notice No 503 published in Government Gazette No
             32229, dated 15 May 2009: Invitation for public comments on
             debt counselling regulations in terms of section 171 of the
             National Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).


    (7)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2009-10 to
             2011-12.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (1)     Report of the Auditor-General on audit outcomes of local
        government for the year ended 2007-2008 [RP 110/2009].

                           THURSDAY, 16 JULY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill [B 7 – 2009]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning Financial Co-operation in 2006, tabled in terms of
        Section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
        1996

     b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financial Co-operation between the
        Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic of Germany.


    (c)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
        concerning Financial Co-operation in 2008, tabled in terms of
        Section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
        1996.


    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Financial Co-operation between
        the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic of Germany.

                           THURSDAY, 23 JULY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

   1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled:

      (1)   The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
           Finance and to the Standing Committee on Appropriations:


           (a)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Appropriation Bill, 2009:
                 Preliminary outline on Inter-Departmental Function Shifts –
                 10 June 2009.

      (2)   The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
           Finance:

           (a)   Government Notice No R.685 published in Government Gazette
                 No 32322, dated 19 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3
                 (No 3/644), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
                 Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

           (b)   Government Notice No R.686 published in Government Gazette
                 No 32322, dated 19 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4
                 (No 4/317), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
                 Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (3)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
           Finance for consideration:


           (a)   Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department of the
                 South African Reserve Bank for 2008.

      (4)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry:


           (a)   Government Notice No 380 published in Government Gazette
                 No 32067, dated 3 April 2009: Introduction of a compulsory
                 specification for the preservative treatment of timber in
                 terms of section 13(1)(a) of the National Regulator for
                 Compulsory Specification Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

           (b)   Government Notice No 559 published in Government Gazette
                 No 32233, dated 22 May 2009: Standards matters, in terms of
                 the Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


           (c)   Government Notice No 560 published in Government Gazette
                 No 32233, dated 22 May 2009: Issue of new standards in
                 terms of section 16(3) of the Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8
                 of 2008).


      (5)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry and to the Portfolio Committee on Health:


           (a)   Government Notice No 596 published in Government Gazette
                 No 32253, dated 29 May 2009: Notice of an application by
                 the Health Professions Council of South Africa for an
                 exemption in terms of Item (2), Part A of Schedule 1 of the
                 Competition Act, 1998 (Act No 89 of 1998).

      (6)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Public Service and Administration for consideration:

           (a)   Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the State
                 of the Public Service for 2009 [RP 49-2009].

      (7)   The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Co-
           operative Governance and Traditional Affairs:

           (a)   Report of the Auditor-General on audit outcomes of local
                 government for the year ended 2007-08 [RP 110/2009].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      a) Government Notice No R.712 published in Government Gazette No 32357
         dated 1 July 2009: Regulations in terms of section 86 of the
         Cooperative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).

      b) Government Notice No 697 published in Government Gazette No 32344
         dated 26 June 2009: Determination of interest rate for purposes of
         paragraph (a) of the definition of “official rate of interest” in
         paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the Act, in terms of the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

2.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Proclamation No R.20 published in Government Gazette No 32130 dated
         2 April 2009: Commencement of the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment
         Act, 2008.


      b) Proclamation No R.21 published in Government Gazette No 32091 dated
         2 April 2009: Commencement of the Constitution Fourteenth Amendment
         Act, 2009.


      c) Proclamation No R.22 published in Government Gazette No 32091 dated
         2 April 2009: Commencement of the Constitution Fifteenth Amendment
         Act, 2009.


      d) Proclamation No R.23 published in Government Gazette No 32091 dated
         2 April 2009: Commencement of the General Laws (Loss of Membership
         of National Assembly, Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council)
         Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 55 of 2008).

      e) Proclamation No R.24 published in Government Gazette No 32091 dated
         2 April 2009: Amendment of Regulations of Public Funding of
         Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No 103 of 1997).

                           THURSDAY, 30 JULY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

          1. Membership of Committees:

   (1)      The following members have been appointed to the Ad Hoc
       Committee to nominate a person for appointment as Public Protector:


       ANC


       Masutha, Adv T M
       Sibanyoni, Mr J B
       Malale, Mr M I
       De Lange, Adv J H
       Dlodlo, Ms A
       Sunduza, Ms T B
       Makhubela-Mashele, Ms L S
       Ramodibe, Ms D M


       DA


       Smuts, Ms M
       Michael, Mrs N W A


       COPE


       George, Mr M E
       Kotsi, Ms C M P (Alt)


       IFP


       Ndlovu, Mr V B


       UDM


       Ntapane, Mr S Z


       ID


       Hoosen, Mr M H

   (2)      The following change has been made to the membership of the
   Committee below:

       PC on Public Service and Administration


       Appointed:


       COPE


       Adams, Ms L H

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
        handling of confiscated abalone at the Department of Environmental
        Affairs and Tourism [RP 116-2009].


2.    The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2009 - 2012 [RP
        30-2009].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on an Assessment
        of the State of Professional Ethics in the Limpopo Provincial
        Government – March 2009 [RP 14-2009].

    (b)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Analysis
        of Performance Agreements as an Effective Performance Management
        Tool– December 2008 [RP 16-2009].

     c) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Assessment of
        Public Participation Practices in the Public Service – December
        2008 [RP 15-2009].

                          WEDNESDAY, 5 AUGUST 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Appropriation Bill [B 5 – 2009] – Act No 16 of 2009 (assented to
         and signed by President on 28 July 2009).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     2008-2009 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1)
        of the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998 (Act No
        107 of 1998).

 2. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No R. 724  published in Government Gazette No
        32371 dated 10 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1380),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (b)     Government Notice No R.725 published in Government Gazette No
        32371 dated 10 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/645), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (c)    Government Notice No R. 749 published in Government Gazette No
         32406 dated 15 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No. 2 (No.2/318) in
         terms of the    Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R. 762  published in Government Gazette No
        32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1381),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R. 763 published in Government Gazette No
        32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/646), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R.764 published in Government Gazette No
        32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/318), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
    (g)     Government Notice No R. 765 published in Government Gazette No
        32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No 6/15), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No R. 766 published in Government Gazette No
        32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment in terms of the Value-Added
        Act, 1991 (Act No 89 of 1991).


    (i)     Government Notice No R. 793 published in Government Gazette No
        32444 dated 31 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1382),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (j)     Government Notice No R. 795 published in Government Gazette No
        32444 dated 31 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/319), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

                            FRIDAY, 7 AUGUST 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     Mr C V Burgess was appointed as chairperson of the Joint
          Standing Committee on Intelligence on 9 July 2009 in terms of
          section 2 of the Intelligence Services Oversight Act, 1994 (Act No
          40 of 1994).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)    The following members were appointed to the Joint Standing
          Committee on Intelligence on 9 July 2009 in terms of section 2 of
          the Intelligence Services Oversight Act, 1994 (Act No 40 of 1994):

          Fihla, Nkosinathi Benson            (ANC)
          Landers, Luwellyn Tyrone            (ANC)
          Maake, Jerome Joseph                (ANC)
          Ndabeni, Stella Tembisa       (ANC)
          Sithole, Sheila Coleen Nkhensani    (ANC)
          Coetzee, Theo Willem                (DA)
          Shilowa, Mbhazima Samuel            (Cope)
          Msimang, Christian Themba           (IFP)
          Kganyago, Ntopile Marcel            (UDM)

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled
  1) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
     Finance:

        (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
             concerning Financial Cooperation in 2006, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
             Africa, 1996.


         (b)      Explanatory Memorandum on Financial Cooperation between
             the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic of
             Germany.


          c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
             concerning Financial Cooperation in 2008, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
             Africa, 1996.


          d) Explanatory Memorandum on Financial Cooperation between the
             Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic of Germany.


          e) Government Notice No 697 published in Government Gazette No
             32344, dated 26 June 2009: Determination of interest rate for
             the purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “official
             rate of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the
             Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

     2) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration:

          a) Government Notice No R.712 published in Government Gazette No
             32357, dated 1 July 2009: Regulations made in terms of section
             86 of the Cooperative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).


     3) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development:

          a) Proclamation No R.20 published in Government Gazette No 32130,
             dated 2 April 2009: Commencement of the Constitution Sixteenth
             Amendment Act, 2008.


          b) Proclamation No R.21 published in Government Gazette No 32130,
             dated 16 April 2009: Commencement of the Constitution
             Fourteenth Amendment Act, 2009.


          c) Proclamation No R.22 published in Government Gazette No 32130,
             dated 16 April 2009: Commencement of the Constitution Fifteenth
             Amendment Act, 2009.


          d) Proclamation No R.23 published in Government Gazette No 32130,
             dated 16 April 2009: Commencement of the General Laws (Loss of
             Membership of National Assembly, Provincial Legislature or
             Municipal Council) Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 55 of 2008).


          e) Proclamation No R.24 published in Government Gazette No 32130,
             dated 16 April 2009: Amendment of Regulations made in terms of
             section 10(1) of the Public Funding of Represented Political
             Parties Act, 1997 (Act No 103 of 1997).

     4) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture,
        Forestry and Fisheries:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
             handling of confiscated abalone at the Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism [RP116-2009].

     5) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour:

        a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2009-12 [RP30-
           2009].

     6) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:

          a) Public Service Commission (PSC): Report on an Assessment of the
             State of Professional Ethics in the Limpopo Provincial
             Government – March 2009 [RP14-2009].


          b) Public Service Commission (PSC): Report on the Analysis of
             Performance Agreements as an Effective Performance Management
             Tool – December 2008 [RP16-2009].


          c) Public Service Commission (PSC): Report on the Assessment of
             Public Participation Practices in the Public Service – December
             2008 [RP15-2009].

     7) The following reports, tabled on 10 March 2009, are referred to the
        Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development for
        consideration and report:


          a) Report on the suspension of Ms T C Oliphant, an additional
             magistrate at Wynberg, Western Cape, in terms of section
             13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


          b) Progress report on the inquiry into allegations of misconduct
             of Ms A Bacharam, dated 16 February 2009, in terms of section
             13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

TABLINGS

National Assembly

                         1. The Speaker

    (1)    A letter dated 31 March 2009 has been received from the then
          Minister for Intelligence, Dr S C Cwele, informing the Assembly
          that the term of office of the Inspector-General of Intelligence,
          Mr Zolile Thando Ngcakani, will expire on 31 December 2009.

          Referred to the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence for
          consideration and report.

      (2)   Letter from the Minister of Communications, dated 7 July 2009,
          requesting the National Assembly to advise the President on 12
          candidates for appointment as non-executive members of the Board
          of the South African Broadcasting Corporation in accordance with
          the relevant provisions of the Broadcasting Act, 1999 (Act No 4 of
          1999).


          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
          consideration and report.

                          WEDNESDAY, 12 AUGUST 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill
         [B 67B – 2008] – Act No 15 of 2009 (assented to and signed by
         President on 10 July 2009).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)    The following members have been appointed to serve on the Joint
          Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests, viz:

          ANC

          Dlodlo, A
          Landers, L T
          Luyenge, Z
          Mangena, M S
          Mlangeni, A
          Ngcobo, B T
          Nhlengethwa, D G
          Radebe, B A

          Democratic Alliance

          Dreyer, A M
          Kohler-Barnard, D

          IFP

          Van der Merwe, J H

          COPE

          Shilowa, M S

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
        Republic of South Africa concerning the Trade Development Co-
        operation Agreement Facility, tabled in terms of Section 231(3) of
        the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade Development Co-operation
        Agreement Facility between the European Community and the Republic
        of South Africa.


    (c)     Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
        Republic of South Africa concerning Legislative Sector Policy
        Support Programme [SA/006/07], tabled in terms of Section 231(3) of
        the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996


    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to Legislative Sector Policy Support
        Programme between the European Community and the Republic of South
        Africa.


     e) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the Republic
        of South Africa concerning Access to Justice and Promotion of
        Constitutional Rights, tabled in terms of Section 231(3) of the
        Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.
     f) Explanatory Memorandum to Access to Justice and Promotion of
        Constitutional Rights between the European Community and the
        Republic of South Africa

     g) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the Republic
        of South Africa concerning Employment Creation, Sector Policy
        Support to the Economic Cluster Programme of Action, tabled in
        terms of Section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of
        South Africa, 1996.

     h) Explanatory Memorandum to Employment Creation, Sector Policy
        Support to the Economic Cluster Programme of Action between the
        European Community and the Republic of South Africa.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Audit of
        Selection Processes in Selected Departments [RP 264-2008].

    (b)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Grievance
        Trends in the Public Service for the periods 1 April 2006 to 31
        March 2007 and 1 April 2007 to 31 March 2008 [RP 19-2009].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T090812e-insert1 –PAGES 464-485

                          THURSDAY, 13 AUGUST 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Constitution Seventeenth Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 74) [Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 32311 of 17
             June 2009.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

      a) Proclamation No 45 published in Government Gazette No 32380 dated 3
         July 2009: Commencement of the National Prosecuting Authority
         Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No. 56 of 2008).

      b) Proclamation No 46 published in Government Gazette No 32380 dated 3
         July 2009: Determination of fixed date under section 43A of the
         National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act No 32 of 1998).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND
      ADMINISTRATION ON THE NOMINATIONS OF NATIONAL PUBLIC SERVICE
      COMMISSIONERS, DATED 7 AUGUST 2009.

Parliament is obligated in terms of the Constitution of the Republic of
South Africa, 1996 and the Public Service Commission Act (No. 46 of 1997),
to recommend candidates for appointment as National Public Service
Commissioners. The request from the presidency to fill two vacancies on the
National Public Service Commission was referred on the 18 June 2009 to the
Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration, for consideration
and report.

The Portfolio Committee appointed a multi-party sub-Committee from its
members to conduct the short-listing and interviews of applicants. The sub-
Committee consisted of the following members: Hon. J.C. Moloi-Moropa (ANC),
Hon. E. Rasool (ANC), Hon. E. Sulliman (ANC), Hon. N.E. Gcwabaza (ANC),
Hon. A.M. Dreyer (DA) and Hon. L. Adams (COPE).

541 applications were received. 14 Candidates were short-listed. Of the 14
candidates, Mr. T.I. Nzimakwe and Ms. S. Singh subsequently withdrew their
applications. The following 12 candidates were interviewed on the 05 and 06
August 2009:

   1. Dr. V Gumede
   2. Mr. B. Mthembu
   3. Adv. R.K. Sizani
   4. Ms. M.J.J. Matsomela
   5. Mr. G. Mokate
   6. Mr. G. Aboobaker
   7. Mr. M.B. Dube
   8. Mr. T.P. Layman
   9. Mr. B. Matomela
  10. Ms. P.K. Mkhombo
  11. Mr. L.S.H. Ngcobo
  12. Dr. T.J. Schalk

The Sub-Committee developed standard questions that were put to all
candidates. The candidates were scored accordingly on a score-sheet that
the sub-Committee developed. The sub-Committee gave due consideration to
candidates’ experience, qualifications, gender, age, knowledge of the
Public Service and the Public Service Commission. The sub-Committee
reported back to the Portfolio Committee on the outcome of the interviews,
on the 07 August 2009.

After consideration of the sub-committee’s report, the Portfolio Committee
recommends the following candidates for nomination as National Public
Service Commissioners:
   1. Ms. M.J.J. Matsomela
   2. Mr. B. Mthembu

In the event that these candidates are not available to serve on the
National Public Service Commission, the Committee recommends that the
following candidates be considered for appointment, in the order they
appear below:

   3. Adv. R.K. Sizani
   4. Mr. G. Aboobaker

Report to be considered.

                           MONDAY, 17 AUGUST 2009

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No 1103 published in Government Gazette No
        32489 dated 14 August 2009: Draft Preferential Procurement
        Regulations, 2009:  For public comments, in terms of the
        Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act, 2000 (Act No 5 of
        2000).


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Land Bank for 2008-2009,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Group Financial
        Statements of the Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South
        Africa for 2008-2009 and the Performance Information [RP 143-2009].

                           TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Protection of Personal Information Bill, 2009, submitted by the
         Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and
         the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans

     a) Protocol of Amendments to the International Hydrographic
        Organisation (IHO) Convention, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
        the Constitution, 1996.

     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol of Amendments to the
        International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO) Convention.

 2. The Minister of Public Enterprises

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Ltd and the Group for
        2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Broadband Infraco (Pty)
        Limited for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-2009.


     a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Express Airways
        (Proprietary) Limited for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.



