---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 January 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-01-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 JANUARY 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The Deputy Speaker announced that the vacancies which had occurred in the
National Assembly owing to the resignations of Ms L M Mashiane and Ms C M P
Ramotsamai had been filled with effect from 9 December 2008 by the
nomination of Ms B T Shongwe and Mr R P Zondo respectively.

The members had made and subscribed the oath or affirmation in the
Speaker’s office.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Mrs Helen Suzman)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House –


      1) notes with profound sadness the death of Helen Suzman on 1 January
         2009;


      2) acknowledges the significant contribution she made to the
         attainment of democracy in South Africa by fearlessly fighting
         against the apartheid government during her time as the only
         Progressive Party MP in Parliament;

      3) recognises that since her retirement from Parliament in 1989 she
         has stood four-square behind the ideals that animate the South
         African Constitution and stood up without fear or favour for human
         rights and civil liberties in South Africa and in the wider world;

      4) further acknowledges that she has left a rich political legacy that
         will inspire all South Africans in the years ahead; and
      5) conveys its condolences to her family and friends and expresses the
         assurance that she will truly be missed.


I thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I acknowledge the presence in the gallery of the
following members of the Suzman family: Mrs F Jowell, daughter of Mrs Helen
Suzman; Ms P Suzman, daughter of Mrs Helen Suzman; and Prof J Jowell, son-
in-law of Mrs Helen Suzman. [Applause.] You are most welcome in the
National Assembly.

Mr A J LEON: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon colleagues, on New Year’s Day 2009,
South Africa and the world mourned the death of Helen Suzman. Yet today in
Parliament, we should celebrate her long-lived life and her public service
- public service of undoubtedly one the most distinguished parliamentarians
of the past century.

Helen Suzman embodied and fought for the essential principles of our own
Constitution. Her tireless efforts on behalf of the disenfranchised, the
disadvantaged and the downtrodden shone a bright and noble light in the
darkness of the apartheid Parliament.

She has bequeathed to us a mighty legacy of achievement, a potent example
of holding power to account and proved, in fact, that the power of
convictions can, over time, defeat the convictions of power.
This exceptional, intensely human and very humorous woman was a unique
politician. We should look upon her and learn from her. We will not see her
like again.

Her 36 years as the Member of Parliament for Houghton, which for 13 years
in pre-democratic South Africa was the only white parliamentary
constituency to return a liberal member, were unrivalled in their energy
and courage, singular in their commitment to the principle and the cause of
pugnacious opposition. Alone in the House of Assembly, although protected
by a surprisingly supportive Speaker, and aided by an affirming media, she
confronted the juggernaut of the apartheid state. She did not stop its
enactments or excesses in all cases, but she exposed its perversities and
its prejudices. She kept alive the democratic values which that system so
assiduously undermined.

Her dissent, however, was never mechanical or knee-jerk: her iron-clad
belief in simple justice and the rule of law impelled her opposition and
provided her moral compass. As she once observed with so much accuracy: “If
you don’t know what to do, go and look for the principle.” And she
practised what she preached. Clad in the armour of principle, armed with a
plethora of facts and buttressed by her first-hand visits to the furthest
reaches of South Africa’s dark empire of racial discrimination, she set the
benchmark for conscientious public and parliamentary service.

Ironically, for all its democratic defects, of which this House is only too
aware, the previous Parliament in which she served offered her, as a single
member in a very hostile Chamber, almost unlimited opportunity to perform
the role of a doughty fighter, despite the fact that she never belonged, at
any stage in her career, to the party in power. She proved, by her example,
something we are apt to forget: government holds no monopoly on wisdom and
enjoys no exclusive franchise on patriotism. Often the reverse is true and,
in the cruel light of hindsight, we have an indication that frequently,
during Helen Suzman’s time and afterward, South Africa and its national
interest is sometimes better served from the opposition benches, than from
anywhere else.

Although she retired from Parliament in 1989, just before the dawn of the
new South Africa, she remained actively and vigorously engaged in the
politics and the public affairs of our country, first as a human rights
commissioner and later as a commentator, and, yes, even at the age of 90,
as an agitator. In the words of one of her election slogans, “she fought to
put things right”. Refreshingly, she had no time for the modern fashion of
political correctness or other pretentious and ultimately self-defeating
attempts to cut corners on principle and to adjust views, or even bend
history itself, to fit current needs or to court majority opinion.

On a more personal level, Helen was the inspiration for my own first
political involvement in this country’s politics 40 years ago. She enthused
an entire generation of then young South Africans, including the Chief Whip
of the DA, who was then the leader of the Young Progressives, as I recall,
and persuaded many that the progressive cause was worth fighting for and
that the system of apartheid was worth fighting against. Then, 20 years
ago, in 1989, I had the very daunting task of succeeding her as the Member
of Parliament for Houghton. I realised that I was standing on the shoulders
of a political giant: her legacy, even while she was alive, was writ large
and stood in inverse proportion to her very slight physical stature.

There is little doubt or debate that Helen Suzman has, after her death,
ascended into the pantheon of liberal greats. But it is perhaps worth
noting, in fixing her legacy and honouring her contribution, that she was
in fact no ideologue. She summed up her philosophy with the simple premise:
“I hate bullies.”

Although a liberal, “finish and klaar”, as we would say, some of her
stances on social issues were radical and she was in other respects a
conservative: she believed, for example, in conserving institutions, from a
Parliament populated with serious-minded, honest and hard-working members,
to courts of law presided over by sober-minded and independent jurists.

While she celebrated the fact that she lived long enough to see the system
which she so vigorously opposed collapse and witness the birth of a new
constitutional order, she always maintained a steadfast and unsentimental
eye on current developments and remained utterly unafraid to confront the
government, whether this one or the previous one, when warranted.

This led to something of a clash in 2004, between her and our previous
President, Mr Thabo Mbeki. He accused her of being in favour of change, but
determined to resist it. On this matter, in fact, I think he was wrong. For
what Mrs Suzman opposed, was not change itself, but the knock-it-all-down-
and-begin-everything-anew approach.

Helen Suzman’s funeral, on 4 January 2009, at the Jewish Cemetery at
Westpark, Johannesburg, brought together the current political good and the
great and the perhaps not-so-great, of the governing elite, the opposition
and civil society. Someone wistfully remarked after her funeral, “It’s as
though the country is searching for a true heroine.” At her graveside they
did not have to look any further. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members,
this is just one of the great lessons we take upon ourselves as Members of
Parliament, that some of us have never thought we would ever have an
opportunity to talk about such a great person. During our youthful days she
remained one of the shining examples and part of our own resistance.
She was one of those women whom we could rely on during very difficult
times. We could always look up to her during the dark days of apartheid and
ask, “What can we do? Who can we speak to?” when we lost some of our own
brothers as young as they were. Sometimes it was very difficult for us to
explain to the families of our colleagues where they had gone. I was still
young in 1976 when some of these things were beginning to unfold and impact
on families in a manner that was difficult to explain.

When we resisted apartheid, we were never able to say whom we would be
friends with and who would remain a part of our families. We lost some of
our colleagues during the night, trying to creep towards a house, and we
would say we had not seen so-and-so for such a long time. As members of the
Congress of South African Students, we did not understand what had happened
to some of our best friends. There were claims that they had crossed the
border; claims that they had been arrested by the security branch, so we
didn’t know where they were.

Typical of her and her leadership, she would listen to us and give us an
opportunity to give her that information, at any time of the night. When we
had finished, she would follow up on our behalf, and take it back to
Parliament and to the public eye, so that we could know what had happened
to some of our own brothers.

Some of them we lost, buried by the apartheid regime. She helped us to
identify some of them, so that we were able to relate to the families what
had happened to those student leaders who were part of our own leadership.

We will always remember Helen Suzman for the contribution she has made to
our own society. She may have stood up and come to a Parliament that we
ourselves had been battling with and fighting against, but she remained an
inspiration to us as young people at that time. We were able to say that
this was one woman and one leader we could rely on.

We stand here as the ANC to say that she made her contribution to society
and we are very thankful for what she has done for us, because without her
we would never have known what had happened to some of our colleagues.
Without her we would never have known how to relate to people on Robben
Island. It had always been very difficult, but she always shed light and
provided us with help. As the ANC we are very thankful for the type of
leadership she provided throughout the difficult period when we resisted
apartheid.

Helen Suzman will remain a shining example to our society of how we should
stand up when it is very difficult to do so. She will remain an example to
the fact that during difficult times one should never abandon the human
soul. One should be able to stretch out one’s hand to an individual. One
should be able to say to a human soul: “I am still around. I will reach out
my hand to you and hold on, even if there are ideological differences, even
if there are difficulties.” She did it and she enabled us to carry the
responsibility during very difficult times. This is the type of example we
have set for ourselves.

As Members of Parliament, she has shown us that we can stand up as an
institution and unite, that we are able to mobilise and use this platform
in a very progressive manner, so that we can attain the goals set by
different people. As a Member of Parliament she set that example and, as
the ANC, we want to say to her that the contribution she has made to our
society will not be forgotten or overlooked, because to build a Parliament
and be able to sustain this type institution is invaluable to society. It
is invaluable to the poorest of the poor of our society. She was able to
reach out to them and set that type of example. We say to her: Wherever you
go, let them look after you. Let the role that you played in our society be
protected. As the ANC, we are really grateful for the contribution you have
made.

And I would like to say to the Members of Parliament, let us learn from
what Helen Suzman has done for our society. We might have had our own ideas
and battles about how we viewed her during those days of apartheid and
beyond, but her contribution cannot be forgotten by this society. She
contributed to different walks of life.

I explained to one of the veterans, who will be speaking after me, about
how important it is for him to contribute to this particular debate,
because she helped us during difficult times by letting us know who was on
Robben Island. We were then able to inform the families of those who were
arrested on the borders as to their whereabouts, since nobody knew that
they had been arrested and sent to Robben Island.

We would approach her and speak to her and explain that this was a rural
family and these were the circumstances that confronted this particular
rural family; that the police had been making it difficult for us to reach
out to that particular family. However, because she was driven by the needs
of humankind, she was able to stand up and say, this is what I have been
able to establish about this particular individual, and this is what
happened. That is what drove her, the passion to make sure that humanity
triumphs even under difficult circumstances.

We as the ANC say that this type of contribution cannot be reversed and
thrown into the sea. We should take the good from it, and use it to build a
better society. The lesson that she has been able to teach us is that as an
individual one can set a good example under difficult conditions so that
everybody can learn something positive, without politicising the role that
you play in society, because without that, society would never be able to
look back.

I am saying on behalf of the ANC that there was a lot that Helen Suzman
showed us in our youthful days, that resistance without purpose can also
create problems. But, because she had the purpose to save and help
humankind, she helped us during the very difficult days of apartheid and
today, as we stand here, we thank her for the role she has played within
our society. We thank her for being able to hold us together. We have been
able to quote her many times. We have been able to interact with her,
because of her leadership and the role she played during that particular
period.

Those were very difficult and dark days. I remember one of the children we
lost was Dlomo from Cosas in Soweto. She was the only one who was able to
help us trace the whereabouts of Dlomo. She was the only one who was able
to help us after the 1976 Soweto uprising by bringing to light the
atrocities of apartheid.

She continued to be a liberal, which I respect. It demonstrates the fact
that she was principled in terms of what she believed in and in her vision;
she always knew that there were human beings behind and beyond principles
and they had to be protected. That is why we will always remember her at
the ANC. That is the type of example we would want to learn from and be
able to hold up to our own society and to our children. We can tell our
children: Learn from this, that there were some human beings, even under
the apartheid regime, who were able to come together and bring light when
it was very difficult. Without her, some families would never have known
what happened to their children.

We say to you Helen Suzman, in isiXhosa:

Hamba kakuhle, Nkosikazi; hamba kakuhle, Mama. Into osenzele yona, siya
kusoloko siyijongile; yinto esiya kusoloko siyithanda. Sithi kuwe, ulenzile
igalelo lakho phakathi kwabantu bethu kwaye asisayi kulilibala. Sohlala
sikunye nawe, sikukhumbula. Siyabulela. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Go well, Madam; go well, Mother. What you have done for us, we will always
appreciate. We will always cherish and acknowledge the contribution that
you made amongst our people. We will always be with you in spirit, we will
miss you. Thank you.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, I rise today to
honour the memory of Helen Suzman. Being aware, as I am, that I may be the
last one left in this House of my generation who worked closely with Mrs
Suzman, I feel the burden of conveying the full measure of our country’s
loss.

Let us not mourn the loss of her life, but rather reflect on her
breathtaking bravery, firm convictions and profound integrity so that her
life may inspire us all again.

In the narrative of our liberation struggle, Mrs Suzman’s role is yet to be
fully appreciated. This should not be the closing of a chapter, but rather
the opening of a new one in which this House solemnly proclaims the
importance of her role, to inspire future generations and dignify us all in
sharing such a great compatriot.

When they came to power, our ruling party took down a beautiful portrait of
Mrs Suzman which adorned the walls of this building and some of us felt
that it was a desecration of our liberation heritage. I would like to
congratulate the Speaker, because I see that Mrs Suzman’s picture has re-
emerged in our corridors.

Mrs Suzman transcended all the barriers of segregation and discrimination
to soar above the bigotry and injustice of her age, colleagues and context.
As a white politician, she rejected the philosophy of apartheid and
forcefully advocated full human rights and political franchise for the
oppressed masses. She was one of the few white liberals who shared my view
that the tricameral system was not a small step in the right direction, but
a major setback which entrenched the racial mindset.

As a woman, she shattered the sexist cultural and legal paradigms of our
country which saw all women as lesser individuals. She proved her
leadership capacity, which few of her male colleagues from any walk of
political life have matched. As a Jewish intellectual, she projected an
internationally admired image of professionalism, progress and higher
morality, which brightened an often fragmented parochial and myopic white
political milieu.

Her formidable skills in the procedures of this House remain unmatched -
whether she used her well-reasoned arguments to expose the immorality of
discrimination or merely to expose the idiocy of the system. By quoting the
Home Affairs reclassification statistics, for instance, I remember her
showing how many people in the preceding year had turned from black into
coloured and from coloured into Indian or white.

In the eyes of the world she became the doyen of our liberalism. Someone
who tirelessly chipped away at the foundations of apartheid and, indeed,
the whole world honoured her in many ways. As a political agenda,
liberalism is far from complete. Her teachings should continue to mark the
path of our country’s growth and development.

The task before her was not easy. She could have demurred from the burden
imposed by history by saying: “Oh, I am a woman” or “I am only one person”.
Yet, in a country racked by atrocities against the poor, the innocent and
the disenfranchised, her convictions dictated her duty. She proved that a
single committed person can indeed make a huge difference for a whole
country.

Perhaps it is this that drew me most to Mrs Suzman. I know what courage it
takes to commit one’s life to the good of others in the face of peril. In
this Mrs Suzman and I were kindred spirits.

During the 1976 unrest, tensions were running high at Mzimhlophe township
in Soweto between the youth in the township and the hostel dwellers. Dr
Beyers Naudé phoned me and we agreed that I should come to Johannesburg. He
sent Rev Cedric Mayson, who flew me up in a small single-engine plane. When
the commissioner of police was made aware of my intention to go to
Mzimhlophe the following day, he ordered me not to go there. He even
threatened to take action against me if I defied. Mrs Suzman, with whom I
was continually in touch, called me and stated: “Please don’t go; it is too
dangerous.” It was one of those occasions when I had to defy the police
commissioner, regardless of the consequences.

A decade earlier, I had been arrested as I returned with my brother-in-law,
Dr Mafu Dotwana, from a seminar of the Progressive Federal Party. I was
driven to the security police office, but someone had contacted Mrs Suzman
and she immediately demanded my release, which was granted, not because
anyone within the apartheid regime would do her a favour, but because they
feared the international repercussions of her taking up my case.

Her friendship with Madiba - our doyen and icon - is well known, as are the
visits that she paid him on Robben Island. She did all this at a time when
being associated with black politicians was plainly dangerous. Her
character would not allow her to sit in silence or pursue personal
ambitions when so many were suffering. For this, we must continue to hold
her memory as an example for future generations. For instance, I would like
this House to resolve that one of our schools, or any other appropriate
thing, be named after her.

I would like to be personal and say that my wife, Irene, and I never forgot
the many occasions that she and her husband, Dr Mosie Suzman, accommodated
us in their home, because during the apartheid era as blacks we could not
stay in hotels.

When she clocked 21 years as a Member of Parliament, Mr Colin Eglin, the
then leader of the Progressive Federal Party, invited me to Cape Town to
propose the toast at a function in honour her.

She never despaired, never gave up, never faltered, never felt that her
energies or resources were inadequate to the task and never rested. Even in
her twilight years she pursued many causes which were insufficiently
attended to by our post-liberation government, ranging from HIV/Aids to the
fight against poverty. She knew that her work was never finished and
indeed, colleagues, it isn’t finished.

Mrs Suzman and I walked along the same path for half a century and I feel
the burden of the work which remains to be done. For as long as South
Africans suffer in poverty, despair and indignity, the struggle must go on.

Madam Deputy Speaker and colleagues, I think it would be wrong not to pay
tribute to her wicked sense of humour - she had a wicked sense of humour. I
remember her recalling an incident in the House where Horace van Rensburg
gave advice to a very bulky and fat farmer, who was a Member of Parliament
here. She told me that Horace said to this gentleman: “Please go to the gym
and exercise, then you will see something that you haven’t seen in a long
time.” [Laughter.]

With these thoughts, I offer my condolences to Jowell, Patty and all of
them in the family, as well as to my party, on the passing of this
brilliant patriot and great leader. May her life continue to inspire us
all. INkosi isikelele iAfrika! [God bless Africa!] [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the ID I would like also
to pass our condolences to the family of the late Helen Suzman.

The passing of Helen Suzman reminds us once again that many of the
generation to whom we owe our freedom are slowly leaving us. She has joined
others, such as the late Oliver Tambo, Mangaliso Sobukwe and Steve Biko.

As a trustee of the Helen Suzman Foundation, I was often struck by the
incredible dignity and humanity of Helen Suzman. As the Helen Suzman
Foundation, we will continue to protect and promote her legacy.

The fact that she lived such a long, productive and compassionate life does
not take away any of our sadness today. She was a principled woman and
never compromised when it came to the truth. Helen always spoke truth to
power.

Her contribution and her regular visits to political prisoners will always
be remembered. At her funeral you could see political prisoners, from all
political persuasions, paying their last respects to Helen. May her soul
rest in peace! Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP pays tribute to Helen Suzman,
a woman of stature, who demonstrated that bullies can be overcome if you
stand up to them. She also demonstrated her belief that political
correctness should not override integrity or good ethics, and she did what
was right when others would not.

Helen, an English-speaking, Jewish woman in a Parliament dominated by male
Afrikaners, was an outsider from the start and her strong public criticism
of the governing NP’s policies of apartheid, at a time when this was
unusual amongst white people, made her even more of an outsider. Yet, she
was a tireless fighter for her cause and she showed that one person, even
an outsider, can make a difference.

While this amazing lady lived for others, nobody in this world will miss
her more than her husband, Dr Moses Suzman, and her two daughters, Frances
and Patricia. To you, the ACDP would like to send its heartfelt thoughts
and condolences as you mourn her passing and celebrate her wonderful life.
[Applause.]

Rre B E PULE: Motlatsa Mmusakgotla o tsaya tsia bogatlhamelamasisi jo moswi
Helen Suzman a nnileng le jone mo pusong ya tlhaolele. O tsene mo
Kokoanotheomolaong ka nako ya basweu fela ka 1953 a le dingwaga dile some a
mararo le borataro (36) a emetse lekoko la United Party.

O ntse dingwaga dile 36 mo Kokokoanotheomolao a emetse lekoko leo,mme
lentswe la gagwe le utlwala go gaisa ba bangwe ba bantsi. Ba ba kileng ba
utlwa a bua, le jaana lentswe la gagwe lo santse lo lela mo ditsebeng tsa
bone. A buelela botlhe ba ba neng ba gateletswe ka nako eo.

UCDP e lebogela botshelo  jo bo tlhwatlhwa jwa dingwaga di le some a
robonngwe nngwe (91) jo a bo tshedileng. O supile tota gore bosadi ga se
bogole mo go direleng. Motswana o rile; “Mmamotho o amuwa a sule” a boswa
jo a bo tlogetseng bo ungwele Aforika Borwa molemo. A mowa wa gagwe o
robale ka kagiso. Ke a leboga. (Translation of Setswana speech follows.)

[Mr B E PULE: The Deputy Speaker recognises the bravery with which the late
Helen Suzman served during the apartheid government days. In 1953, at the
age of 36, she joined the then `whites only` National Assembly representing
the United Party.

She served in the National Assembly for 36 years and was very vocal
compared to others. Her voice still reverberates in the ears of those who
once listened to her speak. She spoke on behalf of those who were oppressed
then.

The UCDP appreciates the valuable 91 years of her life.  She has proved
that womanhood is not an anomaly in serving. This affirms the Setswana
adage `` A person’s worth is recognisable after his demise``. May the
legacy she left bear fruit for South Africa. May her soul rest in peace.
Thank you.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I also bring a message of
condolence from the MF. While we mourn the loss of the wonderful Helen
Suzman, we cannot help but also celebrate the blessing she has been to our
nation.

Very few people live to the good age of 91. Helen has indeed seen the part
she played appear in the pages of history, as well as the triumph of our
democracy. She serves as a great inspiration to us all and her open beliefs
and commitment to the people have made her a great contributor to democracy
in South Africa.

Indeed, the nation mourns the loss of Mrs Suzman and I take this
opportunity to convey our sincerest condolences to the family and friends
of this most kind and precious soul. Mrs Suzman never allowed fear to
overcome her beliefs. She is a great example for women globally. Her
strength and convictions make her a true South African, one who did not
allow the system to override what is right, what is just and what should
be.

We believe that her family and friends have shared all her sacrifices and
her beliefs and courage. You have been blessed.

Helen Suzman, the nation thanks you for all you have been and for all that
you have given us. We pray that you shall continue watching us from the
stars and guiding us, through your example, to a true democracy. May you
rest in peace. I thank you, Madam. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the late Mrs Helen Suzman was a
respected politician. She was a brave person. It takes a great deal of
courage to stand against what is fashionable or is considered right by the
majority.

Helen Suzman served in this Parliament during the darkest days in the
history of our country. Her voice was a minority voice, always overwhelmed
by the voices of those who believed that, by virtue of their numbers in
this House, they were ordained to tell everybody what was right or wrong.

Suzman’s stand in this Parliament demonstrates that the majority can be
very wrong. Indeed, the apartheiders were all wrong. What they defended in
this country was finally declared a crime against humanity by the United
Nations.

During the debate on the imprisonment on Robben Island of the first
president of PAC, Robert Mangaliso Sobukwe, without even a mock trial, Mrs
Suzman said, and I quote:

   Sobukwe has been detained for another four years in jail. The cardinal
   point is that Sobukwe is being held in prison as a prisoner and, as such,
   deprived of his liberty.

Mr G P C Bezuidenhout asked:

   Why do you say that he is living in a compound? Is it not a flat?

Mrs Suzman answered:

   I wonder whether the hon member, who is so cynical about this, would care
   to take up permanent residence in that flat. Perhaps he will enjoy it.

The PAC salutes the courage of Mrs Suzman. May she be a dynamo of
inspiration to all those who love freedom and fight for justice. Izwe
lethu. [Our country.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the FD, I rise in honour
of the memory of the late Helen Suzman and in support of this motion. The
passing on of Mrs Suzman reminded us once again of the type of leadership
this country has been blessed with.

Her lone voice against apartheid was one of moral outrage against
oppression, discrimination, racial hatred and the Nationalist policies of
divide and rule. Her wit and sharp tongue cut through the NP façade to
expose the hypocrisy of a government that was anything but Christian.

The late Helen Suzman will rest in peace. She deserves recognition as a
human rights activist, not a recognition cut out of stone, but one that
inspires a nation to protect the ideals she lived for. This Parliament
should be proud of the independent and critical spirit Mrs Helen Suzman
brought to this House.

We should, therefore, continue to protect and strengthen the independence
of this institution by remaining vigilant and critical of government. Her
legacy should be remembered by cornering off one section in the
parliamentary library, such as a Helen Suzman reading room, housing
information and works related to her illustrious political history. Long
live the spirit of Helen Suzman, long live! [Applause.]

Mr A MLANGENI: Madam Deputy Speaker and Members of Parliament, the
fortunate thing about being the last speaker is that a lot of things have
already been said about Helen Suzman. So I won’t have much to say about
her, otherwise it would be a repetition.

In the passing away of this remarkable lady, Helen Suzman, South Africa
lost a great human being, a human being who, in this institution of
Parliament, single-handedly fought for the rights of all the oppressed
people in South Africa, especially the black people who were denied their
human rights by the National Party government. Helen Suzman’s indomitable
spirit withstood all the insults that were hurled at her by the members of
the NP at the time.

Helen had great foresight. By 1958 - I don’t know if my hon friend Koos was
already a Member of Parliament then, or if Hennie Bekker was, if he is here
- the ANC had become a great liberation movement. The movement had become a
thorn in the flesh of the NP. By 1958 the government felt threatened by the
ANC. And the Minister popularly known as Blackie Swart, who was responsible
for banning people, especially members of the ANC who were fighting against
apartheid laws, etc, had threatened to ban the organisation.

Helen warned the NP in this very institution, Parliament, and said to the
government: “At the moment the ANC is a legal organisation operating above
ground. If the government bans the ANC, you will be forcing them to go
underground. And when they go underground, you will not know what they are
doing.”

But the government didn’t take heed of the advice given by Helen Suzman. At
the time, as Helen pointed out, the government knew in advance about
everything that the ANC was going to do, since it was still above ground;
whether they were engaging in activities such as boycotts or asking people
to stay away from work, as a form of protest. But, once it was forced to go
underground, it became difficult for the government to know. Suzman had
warned them about the consequences if such action were to be taken by
government.

All kinds of insults were hurled at her. She was called a “kafferboetie”,
or a “kaffersussie”, whichever is correct. [Laughter.] But Suzman stood her
ground and continued with what she was doing.

Helen was a great liberal. Her mind was free from prejudice of all kinds.
She did not only visit us in prison on Robben Island, but also went to the
townships, as well to what was then called “squatter camps”, to see how
people were living in those areas. Today we call the squatter camps by a
decent name, we call them informal settlements. Only Helen Suzman could go
into such areas to see for herself the conditions under which people were
living. She would then come to this Parliament and raise these issues.

Again she was called a “kafferboetie”, because she took up the cudgels of
the black people. Whenever our treatment in prison tended to improve a
little bit, we knew that Suzman was on her way. We would get things, such
as the books that had perhaps been ordered more than six months previously.
They would give you your books if you were studying, because these were
some of the things we raised on Robben Island. You would have to wait for
months before you could get prescribed books from the University of South
Africa and other institutions, but as soon as you got them, you knew that
Suzman was on her way to see the conditions under which we were living, to
see how best she could help us.

Only a person such as Suzman could help us. The International Red Cross
also used to visit us on Robben Island, but they couldn’t do as much as
Suzman.

Suzman was not afraid to go to Pretoria, to the commissioner, and raise
these issues personally, to say that these were the conditions under which
people were living, please bring about some improvement. She was a fearless
lady. As I said earlier, while South African citizens could not go into the
townships to see for themselves the conditions under which people were
living, Helen Suzman would go there, bravely unescorted, and mingle freely
with the people in the squatter camps. Her white friends, then, could not
go. They were afraid and said that the black man was an animal and that she
would be killed. Suzman had no such fears and was accepted wherever she
went.

The ANC pays tribute to this wonderful lady, this remarkable human being.
Hopefully her spirit will rest in peace. Let us all draw inspiration from
her, as some people have already pointed out. Let us be inspired by the
works of Helen. Let us try to follow in her footsteps and work, not only
for ourselves, but for the people of South Africa. Let us be concerned
about all the people of South Africa, as Helen was. If you all do that,
comrades and friends, I have no doubt in my mind that Helen will lie
peacefully in her grave. Long live the spirit of Helen Suzman, long live!
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I take it that there are no objections to the motion.

HON MEMBERS: No!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I take this opportunity to add the voices of the
Presiding Officers to the sentiments expressed here today. I also remind
hon members that the condolences book is open in the foyer of the National
Assembly, just outside the doors to the Chamber. The condolences of the
House will be formally conveyed to the Suzman family. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Agreed to.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I intend moving the
following motion:

  That the House debates the problems surrounding South Africa’s current
  electoral system of list-based proportional representation, the
  recommendations made by the Van Zyl Slabbert Commission and the merits of
  initiating a process of electoral reform in South Africa.
Thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


    1) congratulates the people of Ghana for the exemplary democratic
       elections recently held in that African country;


    2) notes that the election results were very close, even in the second
       running between the ruling New Patriotic Party which lost to the
       opposition National Democratic Party, giving the winning party only
       50,23% of the votes;

    3) admires the way the contesting parties have managed this difficult
       presidential election and have thus maintained the peace and
       political stability of their country which can only lead to rapid
       economic development and prosperity of Ghana;

    4) welcomes the statement by the newly elected president, Mr John Atta
       Mills, in his inaugural speech that honesty, fairness, compassion
       and sincerity will be the hallmark of his administration and that he
       has no wish to carry out political vendettas;

    5) hails his words that he does not want any Ghanaian child to go to
       school under a tree; and

    6) observes that Ghana is the second largest producer of cocoa in the
       world and has also recently discovered oil which can earn Ghana
       between R14 billion and R21 billion a year and hopes that this
       wealth will be used to uplift the people of Ghana and of Africa in
       general as the founding father of Ghana, that great Pan-Africanist,
       President Kwame Nkrumah, envisaged.


I thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, may I just remind you that we are dealing
with notices of motion.

Mr E W TRENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend
moving the following motion:

 That the House –


 (1)  notes the ruling in the Pietermaritzburg High Court on 12 September
       2008 supporting the establishment of a commission of inquiry into
       allegations concerning the corruption relating to the arms deal and
       also the recommendation made in the report of the independent panel
       assessment of Parliament that was released on 13 January 2009; and
 (2)  resolves to call on President Kgalema Motlanthe to appoint an
       independent commission of inquiry, headed by a retired judge or
       judges, to investigate whether any abuse of power, and/or
       corruption, and/or any other irregularities occurred during the arms
       deal.

Thank you.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend
moving the following motion:

  That the House –


 (1)  notes the many problems surrounding the 2008 matric examination that
       include missing examination results, the Education Department’s
       failure to release a large number of examination results timeously
       and allegations that some examination results were inflated; and


 (2)  resolves that an independent committee of inquiry be appointed to
       investigate the 2008 matric examinations.


Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now wish to put the motion moved by hon Pheko. Are
there any objections to that motion?
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, that was a motion which was to be put
to the House to be debated. If it was a motion without notice, then, in
actual fact, the hon member should have notified parties beforehand, but we
certainly have had no sight of that whatsoever. To be frank with you, Madam
Speaker, it sounded to us more like a statement than a motion.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member. Could I ask the Whips to deal
with this matter?

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:


  That precedence be given to the First Order under Further Business,
  namely, consideration of the Second-Hand Goods Bill, before the First
  Order on today’s Order Paper.

Agreed to.

      CONGRATULATIONS TO GINIEL DE VILLIERS ON WINNING THE DAKAR RALLY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House –


     1) notes that Giniel de Villiers of South Africa won the Dakar Rally on
        17 January 2009;

     2) further notes that he travelled more than 5 600 miles through
        Argentina, over the Andes and through the Atacama Desert and ended
        up winning by just under 9 minutes ahead of American Mark Miller and
        his South African co-driver, Ralph Pitchford;

     3) recognises that Giniel de Villiers is the first African to win the
        Dakar Rally;

     4) acknowledges that his victory, as well as Ralph Pitchford being
        placed second, is a triumph for South African motorsport and off-
        road racing in this country;

     5) further acknowledges that his win has taken South African motorsport
        to a new level internationally and serves as an inspiration for
        young South Africans who dream of pursuing a career in motorsport in
        the future; and

    6) congratulates Giniel de Villiers on his victory and wishes him well
       in the rest of his motor racing career.

Agreed to.

                   CONGRATULATIONS TO MATRICULANTS OF 2008
                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

 That the House –


 (1)  notes that the class of 2008 is the first group of matriculants to
       have completed the recent inaugural National Senior Certificate
       examination under the revised outcomes-based education (OBE)
       curriculum;


 (2)  recalls that the National Senior Certificate is a new qualification
       based on South Africa’s National Curriculum Statement, NCS, and it
       is the first real national examination that has been administered by
       the Department of Education;


 (3)  notes that it is the largest examination in terms of candidate
       numbers and this year there were 589,912 candidates compared to
       564,000 in 2007;
 (4)  believes that the 29 subjects of the NCS provide high-level skills
       and knowledge which will support South Africa in improving the
       quality of its human capital; and


 (5)  congratulates all the successful candidates on the passes they have
       achieved in this first National Senior Certificate examination as
       well as their parents, caregivers and others who gave support to
       learners through a challenging period in their lives.


Agreed to.

                     CONGRATULATIONS TO SA CRICKET TEAM


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

  That the House –


  (1) notes that the South African Cricket Team, the Proteas, has won the
       test and one-day series against Australia on Australia’s home soil;


  (2) further notes that this is the first team in fifteen years to
       complete the double win against Australia on their home soil, more
       importantly on their national day;


  (3) believes that the participation of our cricket team in this
       competition has contributed to the effort to deepen the bonds of
       human solidarity across racial and colour lines and that they, as
       they united to achieve victory, inspired our people to love sport,
       to be proud of themselves as South Africans and reaffirmed our
       people’s conviction that acting in unity, we can overcome all
       adversity as we work to achieve the broader objectives of national
       unity and the realisation of the goal of a better life for all; and


  (4) congratulates the Proteas on winning the test and the one-day series
       and wishes them well in the coming games.


 Agreed to.

       INAUGURATION OF PRESIDENT OBAMA OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, we now come to the second motion on the
Order Paper, in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party.
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I want to
make it clear that we certainly do not intend opposing this motion. It is
far too important to do that. But, just as a matter of principle, in terms
of the way we operate as far as motions without notice go: any party
wishing to propose such a motion faxes it to all other parties prior to it
being moved in the House.

Now, on 20 January the DA faxed a motion on the inauguration of the new
president of the USA to all the parties and we do have proof that it was
received by the ANC. But, without any discussion, our particular motion has
been ignored and the ANC’s motion has appeared on the Order Paper, but we
were never given any indication of this whatsoever.

I merely want to indicate to you that we certainly do not intend opposing
the motion. We would like the debate to occur as it should do, but in
actual fact there has been, we believe, a breach of protocol in this
particular instance. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, that is noted. I now call upon the
hon Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
the motion as it appears on the Order Paper:

 That the House –
 (1)  notes that on Tuesday, 20 January 2009, Mr Barack Hussein Obama was
       inaugurated as the forty-fourth president of the United States of
       America;


 (2)  recalls that in his inaugural speech the new president made several
       commitments and that, amongst others, he committed his
       administration to work for peace, co-operation and development and
       called upon each nation to make an effort towards the realisation of
       these goals;


 (3)  recognises that the success of the world economy depends not just on
       the size of the gross domestic product of an individual country, but
       on the ability to extend opportunity to every nation, not out of
       charity, but because it is the surest route to our common destiny;


 (4)  acknowledges that President Obama has recognised that climate change
       is a new threat on a global scale which poses an enormous burden
       upon humanity and that the evidence for climate change is
       indisputable and immediate action by all governments and the public
       as a whole is needed;


 (5)  believes that poverty constitutes the deepest and most dangerous
       structural fault in the contemporary world and global society, and
       that this mostly manifests itself in the developing world; and
 (6)  commits itself to continue to work with other parliaments, countries
       and progressive forces to promote the transformation of the global
       order, away from unilateralism and conflict, and to continue to seek
       a path of hope and human solidarity, to pursue resolution of
       conflict through dialogue and peaceful means and to promote mutual
       friendship among peoples of the world, recognising that this
       commitment proceeds from the premise that all nations have a shared
       responsibility, collectively, to improve the human condition.


 Thank you.


The SPEAKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members of the National Assembly,
Happy New Year! I know I have spoken to quite a number of you, but it is
the first time that we meet with the majority of you and we wish you the
best in 2009.

I am very happy to be participating in this debate and I will start by
mentioning what our President, His Excellency President Kgalema Motlanthe,
said when he congratulated President Barack Obama on his historic
inauguration as the 44th president of the United States of America. He used
the following words, and I quote:

   Your election ... carries with it hope for millions of your countrymen
   and women as much as it does for millions of people ... of African
   descent both on the continent of Africa as well as those in the Diaspora.

   In this regard, they too, express the hope that your election ... will
   indeed contribute significantly to efforts in ... Africa to help bring
   about “change they can believe in” ...


   ... Africa, which today stands proud of your achievements, can only but
   look forward to a fruitful working relationship with you both at
   bilateral and multilateral levels in our endeavour to create a better
   world for all who live in it.

Almost every country in the world watched President Obama’s spectacular
inauguration with keen interest, because America is viewed as a superpower.
The entire world economic order hinges on what happens to the American
dollar. President Obama himself noted this political truism, as carried in
this quotation:

   As for our common defence, we reject as false the choice between our
   safety and our ideals. Our Founding Fathers, faced with perils we can
   scarcely imagine, drafted a charter to assure the rule of law and the
   rights of man, a charter expanded by the blood of generations. Those
   ideals still light the world, and we will not give them up for
   expedience’s sake.


   And so, to all other peoples and governments who are watching today, from
   the grandest capitals to the small village where my father was born: Know
   that America is a friend of each nation and every man, woman and child
   who seeks a future of peace and dignity, and that we are ready to lead
   once more.


I speak with confidence when I say that, whereas America leads in certain
aspects of world politics, especially in the executive arm of government,
we as South Africa can also be credited for registering substantive
milestones in legislative development in an international context. A few
weeks ago, this Parliament received a report by independent assessors. The
main aim of this report, amongst other things, was to assess the extent to
which Parliament has evolved over the past 15 years, in line with the
Constitution and in promoting and enhancing democracy.

President Obama himself admits in his biography that his worldview on
politics was shaped, to a large extent, by the South African struggle. He
was often aligned with South African activist students in his university
days. That is why he made a great effort to visit South Africa to confirm
or dispel how many of the ideologies he was earlier exposed to were now
translated into reality. We are thus proud, as a nation, that we have in a
small but significant way contributed to his political career and the
impact of America on world politics under his stewardship.

President Obama’s election signifies the beginning of a new era of
partnership between America and the rest of the world, hopefully a
partnership based on trust and a desire to see more prosperous, peaceful
nations. During his trip to Africa in 2006 he, amongst others, spoke
against the genocide in Darfur and criticised the Kenyan government over
corruption. Please note that the US president has a close affinity with
Kenya because his father was from Nyang’oma Kogelo village in the Siaya
District. His Excellency Obama also echoed many South Africans’ sentiments
that there was a need for more debate on the country’s response to HIV and
Aids.

For us in Africa, President Obama’s victory gives cause for optimism,
rooted in the profound slogan that suggests that, “Yes, we can.” Yes, we
can indeed get rid of poverty; we can improve participatory democracy; we
can build peace and economic prosperity. Yes, we can.

This is for us, South Africa, another blessing and call for hope, and a
chance to build a more democratic, nonracist, nonsexist and thriving South
Africa. With the historic election of Nelson Mandela as our President,
South Africa instantly became a beacon for the world on how a great nation
can triumph against fear, racial prejudices and economic and social
barriers. This is a call for us in legislatures across the world to review
and challenge our role in realising in its fullness the god-given promise
and democratic principle that all are truly equal before the law, truly
free and do have a chance to pursue their full measure of happiness.

South Africa remains confident that President Obama and America will
continue to support our young democratic nation and to demonstrate a keen
interest in our struggle to eradicate poverty, Aids and crime. We look
forward to working with President Obama and his administration and have no
doubt that South Africa continues to hold a special place in his heart.
After all, we are not ashamed as South Africa to claim that we have
contributed to his success.

Yes, together we can and we must, and as we know that he is a child of God,
Rev Meshoe, we want to strengthen him through the Book of Isaiah, where God
says: “Do not fear, for I am with you; do not be dismayed, for I am your
God.”

Today, we may without doubt say to hon members who love conservation that
there is hope for the second round of the Kyoto Protocol. We wish him well;
we wish Michelle and the girls well in the White House. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr A J LEON: Madam Deputy Speaker, I seem to be making up for several
months of absence. Madam Speaker, your very graceful note this afternoon, I
think, has set the tone for this debate. Last week, writing in The New
Yorker, David Remnick said, and I quote:

   Slaves - men of West African origin branded with Christian monikers like
   Tom, Peter, Ben, Harry and Daniel - helped to build the White House.
   Construction began in 1792 and slaves worked as sawyers, quarrymen,
   carpenters, stonemasons, brickmakers. Such was the fabric of the new
   republic: 12 American presidents owned slaves, eight of them while in
   office.

After emancipation and the Civil War in the United States, a handful of
black men won seats in the United States Congress. But by 1900 white
supremacy was regaining its hold. On January 29, 1901, one of those last
black congressmen, George H White of North Carolina, stood in the well of
the House and prophesied the miracle of reconciliatory justice. This is
what he said:

   This, Mr Chairman, is perhaps the Negroes’ temporary farewell to the
   American Congress but let me say Phoenix-like he will rise up some day
   and come again. These parting words are on behalf of an outraged, heart-
   broken, bruised and bleeding, but God-fearing people ... The only apology
   I have for the earnestness with which I have spoken is that I am pleading
   for the life, the liberty, the future happiness, and manhood suffrage for
   one-eighth of the entire population of the United States.

On January 20, 2009, an African-American family took occupancy of the White
House. The election of Barack Hussein Obama on 4 November represented the
culmination of the processes predicted by Representative White after nearly
a century of struggle and resistance.

As we have heard and know so well, the incoming president’s father was
Kenyan, his mother a Kansan. First Lady Michelle Obama’s great-great-
grandfather, Jim Robinson, worked as a slave on the Friendfield plantation
in Georgetown, South Carolina, and is thought to be buried there in an
unmarked grave.

Obama’s election is indeed a moment of American exceptionalism, proof that
the most economically and militarily significant country on earth and one
of its large democracies can, indeed, overcome. Yet President Obama’s
election is not just exceptional for America, but offers hope for the world
of the power of transformation and personal conviction.

I happened to be in America on election day and a rather waspish note was
struck from Nairobi where, of course, the provenance of President Obama
comes from. It was repeated in all the newspapers. They said: Well,
President Obama’s father is a member of the Luo tribe and what we say in
Nairobi is, just as well his father went to America - he could never have
been elected president of Kenya. I thought that also struck a note.

Another note I heard was in October 2007, when I happened to be in Boston.
I went downtown to the Boston common and I heard a man who as a long-shot
candidate at that stage for the nomination of his party, let alone the
presidency of the United States – and his name was Barack Obama. That night
I was struck by the depth of his personal conviction and, in a sense, his
own exceptionalism, because in his speech that night – and in countless
others repeated during the gruelling two-year campaign which marked his
ascent to the presidency – he did not refer to his colour, his suffering or
his people’s struggle for equality, despite the enormous weight and
evidence of that phenomenon.

As a thoughtful commentator on public affairs in America, Andrew Sullivan
noted, race is what makes Obama exceptional. He noted, and I quote:

   Race is what makes Obama a transformative candidate: not because of his
   emphasis on it but because of his real unwillingness to pick sides in a
   divide that reaches back centuries and appears at times unbridgeable.

His inauguration last week was a remarkable event, as the Speaker noted, of
delighted celebration and an affirmation of democracy. He reached out, not
just to his own base, but across the significant divides in the United
States and in the wider world, and he offered, in a measured and calm way,
an opportunity to meet the challenges of the most daunting economic crisis
we have witnessed in the past 80 years.
He offered the promise to bridge international crises through co-operation,
not in conflict, with other nations. And, indeed, as we know, the world
needs an engaged America to assist with the leadership and the resolution
of some of these great crises, perhaps the greatest crises in modern
history – the rising of the oceans, the overheating of our planet, the
implosion of the international system of finance and raging conflicts in
Afghanistan, Iraq, the Middle East and terror emanating from South Asia.

Precisely because, as our Speaker noted, of his African provenance, this
continent can take special pride in Barack Obama’s achievement. We can look
forward to an era of co-operation and renewal. But we should also be
heedful of the words he spoke in that memorable inaugural address last week
on 20 January when he said:

   To those who cling to power through corruption and deceit and the silence
   of dissent, know that you are on the wrong side of history; but we will
   extend a hand if you are willing to unclench your fist.

[Interjections.]

Perhaps at this exceptional moment South Africa should recalibrate its own
international relations, to reconsider on which side of the great historic
divide we truly stand. Are we on the side of freedom, or are we on the side
of the fist? Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr E J LUCAS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the inauguration of Barack Obama as the
44th president of the United States of America was a defining moment, not
just for the United States, but for the world in general. It should be
noted that President Obama’s term corresponds with one of the most
challenging periods in American history. And the fact that the people have
chosen him to lead them through this testing time and into prosperity
speaks volumes about the confidence they have in his ability and the manner
in which he has captured the imagination of the people.

It is important to realise that President Obama’s appeal and the hope that
he represents is not confined to the United States. The euphoria which
surrounded his victory and subsequent inauguration was felt in countries
across the globe, from the United States to Kenya and even here in South
Africa.

President Barack Obama has broken down many barriers and preconceptions. He
has allowed people to dream big and to aim high, to realise that they must
not allow themselves to be defined or limited by their circumstances. The
fact that an African-American leads the most powerful nation in the world
is truly inspirational.

The interest and political awareness that President Obama and the American
presidential race created was encouraging as it got people talking
enthusiastically about politics and excited to vote as they realised their
vote could – and did – make a difference.
The calibre of the people nominated and appointed to his first cabinet is
evidence that President Obama is willing to put the needs of the nation
first and work with people who are the most suitable candidates for the
position and who are most likely to succeed. We hope that he continues with
this trend in his commitment to serve the people of his country.

The IFP would like to congratulate President Barack Obama on being elected
as the 44th president of the United States of America and the first African-
American to hold this esteemed position. We know that there will be many
challenges and obstacles during his term in office, but we truly believe he
will succeed and serve the people of the United States with distinction.

He said, “The time has come for Americans.” Our time came in 1994. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ID has conveyed its
congratulations to President Barack Obama. We agree with him that, yes, we
can change the world; that, yes, we can bridge the racial divide; and that,
yes, we can bring hope to the world. On his foreign policy he said that
America must listen to the world and not lecture the world, and that he
would work with all nations to bring about peace and security in the world.

It was a very special moment for me to be there in a stadium crowd of
82 000 people in Denver, in August last year, when he accepted the
nomination to run as the president of the United States of America. I
think, also, that the whole world can breathe a collective sigh of relief
that the militaristic and arrogant rule of George W Bush has come to an
end.

Now is the time for real leadership by attaining global security through
dialogue and Americans’ commitment to climate change. The fact that a black
man is the first president of America is a sign that black people, and
especially black children, can say: Yes, we can. I thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairman, the ACDP congratulates President Barack Hussein
Obama on convincingly winning the US presidential elections and on becoming
the first African-American president of the United States of America.

Three important lessons that we should learn from the Obama campaign are,
firstly, that he had a message of hope for people who were losing hope
because of the economic meltdown and its financial implications for
citizens. His message of “Yes, we can” was very well received.

Secondly, he neither dwelt on the past nor used the race card. He did not
blame his negative past, segregation, slavery or former white oppressors.
Thirdly, he emphasised the importance of hard work over the pleasures of
riches and fame. He said, and I quote:

   Time and again, these men and women struggled, sacrificed, worked till
   their hands were raw so that we might live a better life.

This is important for South Africans to hear and understand. The ACDP
believes that for all our people to have a better life, we must emphasise
hard work and improve productivity so that there will be more for us all.
The ACDP wishes him well and calls on all political parties to call on
their members to work hard to make our beautiful country, South Africa, a
great success story and to urge them to stop making unnecessary demands for
handouts. I thank you.

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, I followed the American election campaign and
the debates between Mr Obama and Mr McCain. From what I saw, Mr Obama was
by far the better candidate. To be honest, I must also add that in the
political climate in the USA after President Bush, any Republican would
have found it very difficult to win.

It is important for the world and for South Africa to have a wise leader in
the USA, as it is a superpower. Therefore, the FF Plus would like to
congratulate President Barack Obama on his election.

Ek moet vir u sê ek is dankbaar ek is nie in mnr Obama se skoene op die
oomblik nie, want die verwagtinge van hoe hy die wêreld oornag gaan
verander, is ongelooflik hoog. Ek is bevrees geen politikus kan werklik
daaraan voldoen nie. Die media se oorweldigende reaksie op mnr Obama se
verkiesing het my tog verbaas. Het die media so gereageer omdat mnr Obama
nie wit is nie? Speel ras wel hier ’n rol? Mnr Obama het juis die punt
gemaak om daarbo uit te styg en dit nie deel van die veldtog te maak nie.
Mnr Obama is in Amerika deur ’n meerderheid witmense verkies wat ’n
illustrasie was presies hiervan. Dit kan ook op ’n stoute manier ’n
korrekte parallel na Suid-Afrika trek wat beteken dat mnr Marthinus van
Schalkwyk in Suid-Afrika dan deur die meerderheid verkies moet word by die
volgende verkiesing. Of as hulle werklik grootmoedig is, wat van Pieter
Mulder vir die volgende president? Ons sê geluk aan mnr Obama met sy
verkiesing. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I must tell you, I am grateful that I am not in Mr Obama’s shoes at this
moment, because the expectation of him to change the world overnight are
extremely high. I am afraid no politician can really measure up to it. The
media’s overwhelming reaction to Mr Obama’s election really surprised me.
Did the media react in this way because Mr Obama is not white? Does race
actually play a part here? Mr Obama made a point of rising above this and
by not allowing it to become a part of the campaign. Mr Obama was elected
in America by a majority of white people - an illustration of that point.
It can also, in some daring manner, draw a parallel to South Africa which
means that Mr Marthinus van Schalkwyk must be elected at the next election
by the majority. Or, if they are really generous, how about Pieter Mulder
as our next president? We congratulate Mr Obama with his election. I thank
you.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, hon members, the ascendance of Barack Obama
from humble beginnings in the backwaters of Hawaii to be the president of a
superpower such as the United States of America, epitomises the truth in
the adage which says: “Where there’s a will there’s a way.”

His rise to the White House has also brought credence to Martin Luther
King’s dream 40 years ago, that America would be led by a black man at some
stage. President Obama’s ascendance to the presidency was based on the
slogan: “Change can happen.” It is a lesson that those who dream of staying
in power until the next coming, have to wake up to the realities of this
world.

Mahatma Gandhi’s words, “You must be the change that you want to see in
world”, have inspired President Obama. He ran for the job that people
thought he was not ready for and to which he should not aspire. He was told
that America was not ready for a black president, that he was a junior
senator, even that he was too young and that the mighty machine of the
Clintons was just too powerful.

In the face of all that, he was fired up and ready to go, because he has
personal mastery. He has self-belief, self-control, extraordinary
articulation skills and the ability to rope people in and motivate them.

This is the type of leader we should look up to, a leader who can carry
himself gracefully and elegantly at all times, on stages, in crowded rooms
and in debates.

All credit goes to President Obama because we all know that Americans are
fastidious when it comes to electing a president. The moral background,
character and all past relations are placed under a microscope, but this
descendant of Africa went through with flying colours. Such a leader we
look up to.

The UCDP joins the Democratic Party in America, all Americans and other
people of goodwill across the world in wishing this man of substance well
in his presidency. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. On behalf of the MF, I take this
opportunity to congratulate the president of the USA, President Barack
Obama, on his inauguration. The world watched in awe as the USA welcomed
their first president of colour with great enthusiasm and much hope.

The world has been rocked by great economic upheavals, which the USA has
not been spared. Like South Africa, they too, are plagued by the economic
challenges of poverty, unemployment, minimum resources and public
facilities.

The USA and the world are expecting great things from Mr Obama. We hope he
shall include on his agenda for his term as president, relieving Africa of
its foreign debts. Yes, you can!

The MF believes that Mr Obama has an influential role to play in bringing
peace to the Middle East. We are hoping that he shall encourage peace talks
in that area. Yes, President Obama, you can!

Mr Obama has a lofty challenge ahead of him as expectations are high and
people have invested much hope in his leadership.

Our congratulations are extended to the Obama family and we are most proud
to note his African heritage. We are hoping that we may foster good
relations with Mr Obama which will be of great benefit to the South African
people and to Africa as a whole. We certainly hope that Mr Obama will soon
grace us with his presence so that we may engage in dialogue that will
benefit both our nations. Yes, we can!

Mr Obama has often been compared to Mr Mandela and the MF is eager to see
whether Mr Obama will deliver his nation from the atrocities of the Bush
regime, as Mr Mandela did for us with regard to the apartheid regime.

Once more, congratulations to the hon president of the United States,
Barack Obama. I thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairman, the PAC congratulates President Barack Hussein
Obama on his election as president of the USA. We thank the American people
who voted for this African-American, who is the 44th president of the USA.
They, together with him, made unprecedented history which is pregnant with
the possibility of creating a safer and happier world.

President Obama has shown what men and women can achieve if they use their
opportunities prudently and are focused on their vision.

President Obama’s episode is remaking the America of George Washington and
Abraham Lincoln. It helps to cleanse America of its perceived racism. It
gives the American people a fresh start to move from the international
politics of confrontation and violence to the elevation of diplomacy and
peace in resolving the problems of the world.

If not resisted and frustrated, the policies of President Obama have the
possibility of creating a world as was envisaged by the League of Nations,
the United Nations and the authors of the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

The world’s stability and peace need an America that is a friend of other
nations, not its bully. It needs an America that contributes to the
advancement of mankind, not an America that sees terrorists under every
tree, thus increasing terrorism in the world.

Congratulations, President Obama. You have exploded the myth of race
superiority. You have liberated many from this dangerous myth. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD, a member of the Christian Democratic
Alliance, expresses its congratulations to America’s 44th president. His
inauguration was truly a global event, not only because President Barack
Obama is America’s first black president, but also because the world sees
in Mr Obama someone who, on an international level, can bring change to the
old patterns of doing things.

The election of President Obama should bring hope to Africa as well. He has
spelled out in his inauguration speech that he will work with those leaders
who are willing to unclench their fists to rule in fairness and with
accountability. He, of all people, will understand the shame of Africa with
regard to sustaining democratic governments.

The inauguration of President Obama offers an opportunity for African
governments to rise up and outline a global strategy to benefit the
continent. We may yet see a new generation of African leaders who will not
tolerate dictatorship.

The FD wishes President Obama every success during his term of office and
this Parliament looks forward to having a good working relationship with
his new administration. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Mr Chairperson, hon members, on Tuesday,
20 January 2009, Barack Hussein Obama was sworn in as the 44th president of
the United States of America. An estimated two million people attended the
swearing-in ceremony in the capital. Thousands more, in every part of the
world, witnessed his swearing-in on television.

The sense of euphoria that gripped not only the citizens of the USA, but
also people thousands of miles away, in distant lands and climes, testifies
to the hopes millions have invested in this 44th president of the United
States of America.

The historic nature of the moment has been widely commented upon by
virtually every opinion-maker in the world. Two hundred and thirty-three
years after the founders of the United States had declared, and I quote:


   We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal,
   that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable Rights,
   that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. That to
   secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their
   just powers from the consent of the governed ...

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Chairperson, on a point of order: I would say a
Minister is addressing us on a very serious matter. I think perhaps it’s my
old age, but I can hardly hear the Minister because of the noise. I’m
objecting to this. A Minister is addressing us on an important matter.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, hon member.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Thank you, Mntwan’omhle! Ndiyabonga.
[Thank you, Your Highness! I’m grateful.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Please, hon members, let us listen
to the Minister.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: The founders of the United States had
declared:


   That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men,
   deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed. That
   whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is
   the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new
   Government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its
   powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their
   Safety and Happiness.

On that day it appeared to many that an impressive segment of that promise
had at long last been realised.

As President Obama himself remarked, his father would not have been served
a cup of coffee in many restaurants in the city of Washington DC barely
fifty years ago. He might have continued to enumerate the thousands of
people of African, Asian and Mexican descent who had been murdered by lynch
mobs, by law enforcement agencies, and indeed by the United States federal
government itself, for having dared to imagine that those stirring words
applied to them.

The presidency of Barack Hussein Obama owes much to the courage of ordinary
African-American women and men who have over the centuries struggled and
fought for the freedom and recognition of their right to dignity as human
beings. It owes much more to these men and women than to his undoubted
eloquence and political skill.

The tears we saw the Rev Jesse Jackson shedding on that fateful night of 4
November 2008 were tears of joy. They were also tears of vindication. They
were tears of vindication for the courage of W E B Du Bois and his
colleagues who had gathered at the first Pan African congress in 1900 to
try to forge a transatlantic movement of African people to fight for the
end of colonialism and to attain our human rights. It was vindication of
the pioneers of the African-American freedom movement, men and women such
as Paul and Eslanda Robeson, Shirley Graham Du Bois, Thurgood Marshall and
many others who had fought the good fight long before it was fashionable to
do so and had often paid a heavy price for daring to do so.

It was a vindication of the courage of Mrs Rosa Parks, an ordinary
Birmingham seamstress, whose simple act of defiance in 1955 set in motion a
movement that was to prove unstoppable. It was a vindication of a simple
act of self-assertion on the part of a group of students who demanded
service at Woolworths’ lunch counter in 1961.

It was a vindication of the thousands of ordinary African-American farmers,
tenants and share-croppers of the state of Mississippi, who dared to stand
up to the police dogs, the electrified cattle rods, the beatings, the
jailings and lynchings that the racist lawmakers of that state marshalled
in an attempt to deny them the right to vote.

It was a vindication of the young Freedom Riders, the voter registration
marshalls and the youthful volunteers of 1963’s Freedom Summer, who flocked
to the state of Mississippi to man the freedom houses and to build the
Freedom Democratic Party that forced President Lyndon Baines Johnson to
choose between the white racist oligarchy of the Deep South and justice for
all Americans. To his eternal credit, when the chips were down in Selma,
Alabama in 1965, President Johnson, despite all his faults, made the
correct choice. He chose justice.

The election of an African-American as president came at an extremely high
price, a price exacted in the blood of thousands of martyrs who ended their
lives in jail or at the end of a rope, some buried in obscure places by
those who sought to halt progress and hold African people down in permanent
servitude.

Even as his campaign began, the voices of the doomsayers and ill-wishers
could be heard. I quote:

   Obama is smart and attractive. Maybe he will be president some day.

So said the author of Fear of Flying, Erica Jong. Also:

   Obama is also a token - of our incomplete progress toward an interracial
   society. I have nothing against him except his inexperience. Many black
   voters agree. They understand tokenism and condescension.

The refrain of inexperience and subtle suggestions of tokenism were
repeated throughout the primaries, even by the most serious-minded opinion-
makers of the United States. Those of us who have long memories will also
recall the comments of Ben Bradley, former editor of The Washington Post,
on a visit to this country two years ago. Obama proved them all wrong.

He proved them wrong because he knitted together a coalition, the existence
of which most political actors could not have predicted, much less
activated. Unlike other candidates, Obama’s campaign relied on ordinary
people who made their contributions on the Internet, in tiny envelopes or
by the sheer legwork of thousands of enthusiastic volunteers. His politics,
his eloquence and presentation motivated millions of new voters and re-
energised previously disaffected millions in more ways than any other
presidential candidate has done in decades.

While commentators came thick and fast, speaking of the “Bradley factor”,
few noticed the Harold Washington factor that had resulted in the USA’s
second city, Chicago, electing an African-American mayor during the 1980s.
It was by dint of brick-by-brick construction of an effective political
organisation that Harold Washington had been elected. Barack Obama,
harnessing years of experience as a community organiser, was able to
achieve the same feat.

Much as his detractors tried to race-bait him, to label him a Muslim - even
suggesting that that in itself implied moral turpitude - and in the endgame
some even suggesting that he was a socialist, voters were not fooled and
came out in their millions to vote him into office. I suppose there is a
lesson there for those who take pleasure in negative campaigning.

Casting his eyes back to the moments of his original inspiration, President
Obama spoke of the African National Congress, to which he was exposed as a
student while engaged in the campaign to impose sanctions on apartheid
South Africa. This underscores once again the significance of the
transatlantic movement that Du Bois and other founders created in 1900, and
the manner in which, from opposite sides of that great ocean, we have drawn
inspiration from each other.

Fifty-six years ago a Kenyan, working for a British army officer, was
incarcerated in a high-security prison. The 54-year-old cook had become
involved in his country’s struggle for independence and his British captors
brutally tortured him to extract information about the insurgency.
According to that cook’s family, the British held him for two years, during
which he was “whipped every morning and evening”. And “they would sometimes
squeeze his testicles with metal rods,” so the family recalled. That cook
was named Hussein Onyango Obama, the paternal grandfather of the president
of the United States, Barack Obama.
Like many other colonial subjects, Hussein Obama had joined and served with
the British forces during the Second World War on the strength of the
promises contained in the Atlantic Charter signed by Churchill and
Roosevelt in 1941.

The anti-British rebellion of 1952 cost 12 000 Kenyan and 32 European
settlers’ lives. Though militarily defeated, the liberation fighters were
vindicated when Kenya became independent in 1963.

The blood that binds President Obama to the continent of his ancestors is
far thicker than the waters of the Atlantic that separates us. The
struggles of the African people on either side of that ocean inspired him.

Millions in every part of the world have invested great hope in his
election. He has already demonstrated, within the space of a week, that he
will open a new chapter of human decency ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Minister, please wind up.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: ... respect for the world community and
respect for the environment. A United States president, who speaks of
restraint and humility, is bound to make a huge difference in the troubled
world of today. We have no doubt that future generations will remember this
presidency as a great turning point, not only in the history of the United
States but, indeed, the history of humanity. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Agreed to.

                      LAUNCH OF ANC ELECTION MANIFESTO




                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr D A A OLIFANT (ANC): Chairperson, let me first say: Happy New Year! It
is nice to see everybody.

On 10 January 2009, the oldest liberation movement in Africa, the ANC,
launched its election manifesto in East London, where more than 100 000
people attended, filling two stadiums, car parking areas and surrounding
streets. Not since the release of former ANC president Nelson Mandela from
Robben Island prison have we seen such a public outpouring of support for
our movement, which has just celebrated its 97th year of existence – almost
a century.

This is an indication and a debunking of any myth that the ANC’s mass
support is being eroded in the Eastern Cape. We therefore challenge any
serious contender to the ANC, in the run-up to the 2009 elections, to equal
or better the attendance record set by the organisation in East London.

The ANC wishes to thank its members and supporters, who turned up in their
multitudes on Saturday, 10 January, for the historic launch of our election
manifesto in East London. And remember, the ANC lives, the ANC leads. Now
is the time to again vote ANC. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

             RIGHT TO VOTE OF SOUTH AFRICANS OUTSIDE THE COUNTRY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J ELLIS (DA): Mr Chairperson, I wanted to return the compliment to the
hon Olifant, but he spoke such rubbish that I don’t think I can.
[Interjections.]

Last week the DA filed papers in the Cape Town High Court to have section
33(1)(e) of the Electoral Act declared unconstitutional. We have done so
because we believe that the right to vote is a fundamental right. The
denial of the right to vote to the vast majority of South Africans, was
central to the struggle against apartheid, a struggle in which thousands of
South Africans lost their lives. Because of the importance of the right to
vote, this right is guaranteed to all adult citizens in the Bill of Rights
of the Constitution.
However, there exists at present what seems an unreasonable and
unconstitutional exclusion from the right to vote for many thousands of
South Africans who live abroad. For example, if you are playing in England
... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order!

Mr M J ELLIS: If you are playing in England for Bafana Bafana, you can vote
because this is an international sporting event, but if you are playing in
Australia for the Stormers, you can’t vote because this is only a Super 14
event. Similarly, if you go to Ghana on a six-week business trip, you can
vote, but if you are there on a six-week contract, you can’t. If you go to
Zimbabwe to bury your father, you don’t qualify for a special vote, but if
you’re there on holiday, you do qualify.

The distinctions in section 33(1)(e) deny the vote to South Africans who
are temporarily working abroad, but who intend to return. It discriminates
unreasonably between various classes of South Africans who are temporarily
outside the country, and denies large numbers of South Africans their
constitutional right to vote. We believe that this is wrong.

Therefore, we will continue to pursue this matter to the highest court in
the land in the belief that the right to vote is an inalienable right of
citizenship and worth fighting for. Thank you. [Applause.]

                  SHOOTING OF TWO BOTHASIG POLICE OFFICERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP notes with great concern the
shooting of two Bothasig constables in the early hours of Sunday morning by
two unknown men. The two constables, both of whom are still in a critical
condition in hospital, were on patrol when two men opened fire on them
before taking the officers’ 9mm firearms.

It is of crucial importance that those who are entrusted to maintain law
and order, do not themselves become victims of crime. We urge the police to
step up their search and to leave no stone unturned until these gutless
criminals are brought to book. We also call upon members of the public to
work hand in glove with the police to fight crime.

The ongoing attacks on innocent policemen in the course of their duties are
a true indication that crime remains a big issue and many of us are not
safe in this country. [Applause.]

           VISITS TO SCHOOLS TO EMPHASISE EDUCATION AS A PRIORITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P R MASHANGOANE (ANC): Chairperson, using some of the Millennium
Development Goals as benchmarks - achieving universal primary education,
improving quality and eliminating disparities in education in general – the
ANC-led government will build on achievements we have already made in
education.

In the past two weeks, we have witnessed the reopening of schools
throughout the country. Consistent with our policy pronouncements, the ANC
has deployed its leaders, both in government and in our constitutional
structures, to visit schools around the country. The purpose of these
visits is to lend support to pupils, teachers and parents and to mobilise
the community to play an active role in the education of our children.

This year, as part of the progressive introduction of free and compulsory
education to the poor until they enter university, the ANC-led government
will improve the access of poor South Africans to quality education by
ensuring that 60% of schools are no-fees schools.

We reiterate our commitment to work together with educators, parents,
school governing bodies and other stakeholders to make education a priority
for all. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

                INTERVENTION BY SADC IN SITUATION IN ZIMBABWE
                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Chairperson, peace-loving people of the world,
particularly Africans, are disappointed by another failure by SADC leaders
to save Zimbabwe from further economic collapse and the resultant untold
human suffering.

The ACDP supports the statement that was made on Zimbabwe by the former
first lady of Mozambique and wife of former President Nelson Mandela, Mrs
Graça Machel, that Robert Mugabe and Southern African Development Community
leaders have the blood of hundreds of thousands of Zimbabweans on their
hands. They watched the suffering of millions of Zimbabweans without
lifting a finger and blocked the UN Security Council and others who wanted
action to be taken in order to save lives.

The ACDP believes SADC leaders must share the blame with Robert Mugabe for
the lawlessness and suffering taking place in Zimbabwe. When SADC leaders
had the opportunity to help the suffering people of Zimbabwe, by telling
him and Zanu-PF to graciously accept defeat in the March general elections,
they chickened out and instead supported their comrade who lost.

A power-sharing deal, we believe, will not materialise for as long as
tyrant Mugabe is involved as a self-imposed senior partner in the
negotiations.

The ACDP believes a power-sharing deal is possible in Zimbabwe, but only
without Mr Mugabe. He must be removed from the presidency he does not
deserve and from any power-sharing, because he is a stumbling block to
peace in that area.

Because SADC leaders have failed our region, the ACDP now appeals to the
United Nations, whose members we believe still have a conscience, to
intervene before a time bomb explodes in Zimbabwe, which may result in
civil unrest that could destabilise the whole region.

Reports that Mugabe is expected to seek approval from regional leaders at
the summit in Pretoria to form a government alone, only shows how little
regard he has for SADC leaders. If they agree to such a proposal, they will
have irresponsibly destroyed their reputation and nullified all forms of
claims that they have had about believing in justice, human dignity and
respect for the rule of law. Thank you. [Applause.]

                    UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF ELECTORAL LAW

                            (Member’s Statement)
Dr C P MULDER (VF Plus): Mnr die Voorsitter, die VF Plus het gister ’n
dringende aansoek by die Hooggeregshof ingedien om die diskriminerende
bepalings van die Kieswet, wat dit vir die meeste Suid-Afrikaners in die
buiteland onmoontlik maak om te stem, ongrondwetlik te laat verklaar.

Met dié indiening is die VF Plus oorval deur boodskappe ter ondersteuning.
Enkele voorbeelde: Eerstens, “Ek beplan om binnekort terug te trek huis
toe; ek wil ook graag my stem laat tel omdat dit ’n impak op my lewe sal hê
wanneer ek terugtrek huis toe. Dis ’n absolute skande dat gevangenes mag
stem en iemand soos ek mag nie.” – Justin Labuschagne, Londen. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr C P Mulder (FF Plus): Hon Chair, the FF Plus lodged an urgent
application with the High Court yesterday to have the discriminating
provisions of the Electoral Act, which make it impossible for the majority
of South Africans overseas to vote, declared unconstitutional.

In doing so, the FF Plus was swamped with messages of support. A few
examples: Firstly, “I plan to return home soon; I would also like to let my
vote count, because it will have an impact on my life when I return. It is
an absolute disgrace that prisoners may vote and someone like me is not
allowed to vote.” – Justin Labuschagne, London.]
Secondly, “When we entered the new South Africa I expected the government
to stand up for the rights of all its citizens, yet my right to have a say
in my country’s future was ripped away from me. As an expat this is just as
bad as the racism of our past where people were denied the right to vote
because of the colour of their skin. I am being denied the right to vote
because of my location.” - James Smith, Beijing, China.

Thirdly, “I am on a teaching contract in Korea and cannot see why I should
be denied to vote, yet prisoners in South Africa can.” – Alexander Smith,
Korea.

Laastens, “Ek en my gesin is tans woonagtig en werk in Qatar in die Midde-
Ooste. Wat staan ons te doen? Ons wil en ons moet stem. Ek en my vrou is
albei geregistreerde Suid-Afrikaanse kiesers en kom terug.” – Bernard
Jacobs.

Die VF Plus doen ’n beroep op die ANC, en spesifiek die Minister van
Binnelandse Sake, om hierdie saak met erns te hanteer en verstandig te
wees, en nie die saak te opponeer nie, in die ANC se eie belang. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Finally, “My family and I presently live and work in Qatar in the Middle
East. What should we do? We want to and we have to vote. Both my wife and I
are registered South African voters and we are returning home.” – Bernard
Jacobs.
The FF Plus calls on the ANC, specifically the Minister of Home Affairs, to
deal with this matter in a serious and sensible manner, and not to oppose
the issue, in the ANC’s own interest. I thank you.]

                            SUPPORT FOR PALESTINE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B NTULI (ANC): Chairperson, I wish to make a statement on Palestine.
The ANC will intensify its solidarity efforts by supporting a just
solution, including the strengthening of a sovereign, independent and
viable Palestinian state, which will help to bring about peace in the
region and an end to the conflict.

The ANC has observed, with great concern, the Israeli army’s attack on and
killing of innocent Palestinian civilians. As in many other conflicts
recorded in history, women and children pay the heaviest price in any war
situation. We unambiguously condemn these horrendous attacks on innocent
civilians.

The ANC supports the resolution taken by the United Nations on Thursday, 8
January, calling for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, leading to the full
withdrawal of Israeli forces. We further support all resolutions taken by
the UN pertaining to the conflict. We support a two-state solution as a
model for peace between Israel and Palestine, recognising the right of
Israel to exist as a sovereign state, and supporting the establishment of a
strong and sovereign Palestinian state, based on the 1967 border
resolution. I thank you.

       INADEQUATELY SHORT SPEAKING TIME ALOTTED TO OPPOSITION PARTIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO: Modulasetulo [Chairperson], the motto of our Parliament is:
Masijule ngengxoxo, Mzansi. [Let us deepen the debate, South Africa.]

Can we ...

... jula ngengxoxo ... [... deepen the debate ...]

... in one or two minutes, compared to others who are guaranteed eight to
30 minutes? There is no such practice in many of the other parliaments of
the world, even at the UN where I operated.

The practice of allocating such a short time to opposition parties in this
House must be abolished, just as we abolished floor-crossing.
[Interjections.] It is not democratic. The PAC and some opposition parties
in this House, with their limited time, almost incoherently, opposed the
removal of the people of Matatiele and Khutsong to other provinces against
their will. Their voices did not weigh anything and the people were moved,
with dire consequences for Khutsong.

Because of time constraints on opposition parties in this House, only one
voice is heard. Laws that have a detrimental effect on the growth of this
country’s population have been made against the clear opposition of our
people, including the majority of religious organisations, which are the
moral conscience of this nation.

The population is important for national perpetuation and preservation of
sovereignty. The extinction of our Khoisan brothers and sisters in this
country is a classic example of the tragedy of population reduction.

Masijule ngengxoxo Mzansi kodwa ukujula kudinga isikhathi. Izwe lethu !
[Let us deepen the debate South Africa, but to deepen we need time. Izwe
lethu [Our country!]

               AMENDMENTS TO NATIONAL SPORT AND RECREATION ACT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T D LEE (DA): Chairperson, the DA rejects the proposals by the
Department of Sport to introduce draconian additions to the National Sport
and Recreation Act, in order to give the Ministry of Sport outrageous
powers over national team selections.
Some of the regulations proposed by the Department of Sport include that,
firstly, foreign coaches must have previously coached a national team for
at least five years to be eligible to coach a South African national team;
and, secondly, national teams need to be chosen at least 30 days before any
international competition and sent to the Minister for approval. The
Minister will have the sole right to award national colours, take them away
or refuse them.

Not only do these provisions take away the powers of national sports
federations, but they also contravene international sport regulations,
which will jeopardise our international reputation in the sporting
community. South Africa does not need political meddling in sport,
especially when our national teams truly represent the rainbow nation and
are in great form.

Government’s only role in sport should be to ensure that various sporting
codes and organisations have the necessary assistance to help develop the
country’s next generation of sportsmen and women. It has no business
interfering in the selection process of international teams and the
recruitment of players and coaches.

If the Rev Stofile is serious about addressing the challenges facing sport
in South Africa, he must focus on addressing the enormous shortage of
sports facilities and the lack of proper development structures ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, complete. Your time is
up.

Mr T D LEE: ... and improve the financial performance of his department,
which has obtained a qualified audit opinion for the past two successive
financial years. I thank you.

                      LAUNCH OF MOSES KOTANE INSTITUTE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M D NENE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government continuously works
with our people to promote mathematics, science, technology and language
development. The ANC-led provincial government of KwaZulu-Natal has
launched a unique science and engineering training institute named after
Moses Kotane. This institute aims to help students who have passed matric
or Grade 12 with exemption, but did not meet the requirements to be
admitted directly to the faculties of science and agriculture at tertiary
institutions.

The new Moses Kotane Institute is a unique science and engineering training
institute and would focus mainly on developing the skills of historically
disadvantaged students. The benefit of science and technology would be used
to assist South Africa in developing expertise in various fields in science
and agriculture.

This institute has formal links with the national Department of Education,
which will officially regulate all programmes as well as forge links with
eThekwini FET, the University of KwaZulu-Natal and Pretoria University
respectively. They will work closely with the institute by offering to
present parts of some modules.

Yingakho-ke uKhongolose kumhlahlandlela wakhe wokhetho ukugcizelele
okwezemfundo kanjalo egcizelela ukuthi kwenziwe amakhono azokwazi ukuthi
kutholakale abantu abazokwenza umnotho waleli lizwe uphakame. Yingakho-ke
futhi sithi uKhongolose uyohlala ephila futhi ehola njalo-njalo.
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[It is for that reason that the ANC in its Election Manifesto emphasises
education and also the development of scarce skills, in order to produce
people who will accelerate the economic growth of this country. It is also
for that reason that we say the ANC will always be alive and will lead
forever. I thank you.]

              ASSISTANCE FOR THOSE RETRENCHED DUE TO RECESSION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr U ROOPNARAIN (IFP): Chairperson, at a time of economic recession and
downturn, the Unemployment Insurance Fund is providing somewhat of a
cushion to those who have been retrenched and to women taking maternity
leave. Indeed, the fund is now somewhat of a model for a kind of
contributory social security assistance that is needed. Despite this
benefit, South Africa’s structural unemployment will cause claims to go up
and contributions to go down, and the UIF surplus may shrink.

The IFP warns that, despite its successes, government cannot shy away from
the fact that close to 300 000 jobs may be lost this year and families are
going to suffer. The stresses, strains and trauma experienced due to job
losses cannot be ignored. The threats faced by the South African economy
are substantial and complex.

This weekend the IFP launched a very successful election manifesto in
Soweto. The IFP calls on South Africa to harness all of its talents, in
every aspect of skills development, productivity, empowerment, education
and the pursuit of economic and social progress. The UIF is playing a small
part, but much more needs to be done as we begin to face the daunting
economic crisis. I thank you.

                    WAR ON POVERTY CAMPAIGN IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A J NYAMBI (ANC): Chairperson, in its war against poverty the ANC-led
government continuously implements integrated antipoverty programmes,
ensuring that these programmes address not only social assistance, but also
the sustainable integration of all communities into economic activity.

On 30 January 2009 the ANC-led government of Mpumalanga will be launching a
War on Poverty campaign in a village called Skhwahlane in Nkomazi
Municipality. Among other things, the campaign aims at bringing together
all government departments to commonly identify and help impoverished
households that are in urgent need of assistance, without duplicating any
programme.

The volunteer youth group called Masupatsela, together with  community
development workers, will visit the most deprived households, identify
their specific needs, help them access government services and also provide
them with mosquito nets to protect them from malaria.

The ANC believes that our attack on poverty must empower the people to get
themselves out of poverty while creating adequate social nets to protect
the most vulnerable in our society. I thank you.

                 STATEMENTS BY PRESIDENT OF ANC YOUTH LEAGUE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I O DAVIDSON (DA): Chairperson, in light of Julius Malema’s highly
irresponsible and grossly insulting statements suggesting that the woman
who accused Jacob Zuma of rape in 2005 “had a good time with him” because
she stayed the night and that she couldn’t have been raped because “you
can’t ask for money from somebody who raped you”, the DA Youth has referred
Mr Malema to the Commission on Gender Equality.

In a country where a woman is raped every ten minutes, it is unacceptable
that, as a national leader and a senior figure within the ANC, Mr Malema be
allowed to continue making such dangerous statements unchecked. We urge the
Commission on Gender Equality, which is tasked with investigating
complaints on any gender-related issue, as set out in section 187 of the
Constitution, to investigate his comments and take the appropriate action
against him.

The DA also supports the comments of Rape Crisis Cape Town Trust director
Kathleen Dey, who said that Mr Malema has no right to dictate how a woman
who has been raped should behave, and that it shows a clear disrespect for
women and a limited understanding of the complexities of rape.

Mr Malema is setting a dangerous precedent and, if we pride the right to
equality and dignity enshrined in the Constitution, his statements must be
universally condemned. I challenge the leadership of the ANC, some of whom
are sitting in this House today, to ensure that Mr Malema is subject to
strong and unequivocal rebuke. I thank you.
            PROGRAMME FOR TRAINEE BOILER OPERATORS IN NORTH WEST

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M W MAKGATE (ANC): Chairperson, the mission of the ANC-led government
continues to be the fundamental transformation of the South African economy
in order to empower the formerly disadvantaged, and eliminate poverty and
the extreme inequalities generated by the apartheid system.

Due to the high vacancy rate of boiler operators in state hospitals across
the North West Province, the Department of Public Works in the province
recruited 91 people to be trainee operators at 11 hospitals across the
province. Of the 91 trainees, 71 are men and 20 are women from rural and
poor backgrounds.

The trainees will have to undergo 12 months of on-the-job training, with
each trainee receiving a monthly stipend of R2 500. At the end of the
course, 55 trainees are expected to be permanently absorbed into the job.

One of the trainees, Kenaleone Moeng, a 23-year-old from Vryburg, told us
that, since passing her matric in 2002, she had been struggling to find
employment and had been despondent about her future. That was until she saw
the advertisement in a local newspaper for the boiler operator development
programme.
She said: “This is an opportunity of a lifetime. For me as a young woman,
this is a very proud moment because these kinds of jobs were previously
dominated by our male counterparts.”

Increased graduate output in areas of skills shortages will include
measures to streamline Sector Education and Training Authorities and other
institutions to address and focus on existing skills shortages. I thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, hon members. There is
one slot left here, created by the absence of Nadeco. In our sequence the
ANC can take it, if not the DA, if not the IFP.

Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): The ANC will take it, Chair.

                           THE 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Chairperson, I thought the hon Lee was going to
speak about what happened yesterday. Yesterday marked a significant
milestone in our preparations to host the prestigious 2010 Fifa World Cup.
South Africans from all walks of life are continuing to work tirelessly to
ensure our readiness with fewer than 500 days to go before the event kicks
off.

The stadiums that will host the Confederations Cup in June this year are
nearing completion and they are ready to receive the influx of soccer
spectators into their cities. The prophets of doom have been proved wrong
by the massive infrastructure developments at stadium sites and related
projects across the country.

However, a lot of work still needs to be done and we cannot afford the
luxury to relax our efforts in ensuring that the tournament in 2010 will be
the best ever. As such, the Local Organising Committee needs to do a lot
more in popularising the event amongst all South Africans, especially in
the deep rural areas. The opportunities presented by hosting the event must
be accessible to all South Africans.

The ANC calls on the public and political parties to continue supporting
the event to prove to the world that South Africans do have the ability to
unite around common objectives and strive towards the building of a better
Africa and a better world. Thank you.

                    WAR ON POVERTY CAMPAIGN IN MPUMALANGA
       INADEQUATELY SHORT SPEAKING TIME ALOTTED TO OPPOSITION PARTIES
                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I would like to
respond to two statements, namely, the one on the antipoverty strategy
campaign and the hon Pheko’s one on the demarcation and time allocation in
the House.

On the first one, I would like to thank the hon member for raising this,
because I think this has been the cornerstone of the ANC-led government, to
fight poverty and make sure that we can create opportunities for the poor;
and that within that strategy we form partnerships with communities as well
as the private sector. Of course, dealing with poverty is not only
government’s problem. We need all of us to come together and make sure that
the strategy can work.

Surely, this is the roll-out from last year’s launch in the Free State.
These are now the provincial launches and we believe that, so far, all of
them have been successful. That clearly shows that the ANC-led government
is really for the poorest of the poor and is keen to make sure that it can
fight poverty.

Regarding the second statement: hon Pheko is not here now, but the
demarcation issue is under way. The Minister and the cluster are looking at
that. On the question of time allocation, I think that he should know -
because he himself is a whip - that he should be grateful to the ANC for
even giving him two minutes to speak. If it wasn’t for that, he would just
be able to say “hello, Chair” and sit down. He is able to talk because we
gave him time when we were doing the time allocation.
Over and above that, he must know that the ANC has this time not because it
gets these votes on a platter, but we actually go out and campaign. He must
do that as well and stop coming to complain in the House about time
allocation. The electoral system is based on proportional representation.
So, if the PAC is not giving him more votes for more time, sorry, hon Pheko
and those who are advocates for time allocation. They do the same on the
state of the nation address and all that. Go out now! This is the right
time to go out and canvass so that you can get the time you want in the
House. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

                      LAUNCH OF ANC ELECTION MANIFESTO
                  SHOOTING OF TWO BOTHASIG POLICE OFFICERS
           VISITS TO SCHOOLS TO EMPHASISE EDUCATION AS A PRIORITY
                      LAUNCH OF MOSES KOTANE INSTITUTE
                            SUPPORT FOR PALESTINE
                INTERVENTION BY SADC IN SITUATION IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, well, I certainly think one should
congratulate the ANC on its massive showing at the launch of its election
manifesto at the beginning of January. However, as the president of the ANC
said recently, we also watch with great interest and pride the large number
of parties that have launched manifestoes throughout the country, because
this is an indicator of the strength of democracy in South Africa. As he
said, we are proud that we have opposition in our country; we might not
agree with them, but their existence indicates the strength of our
democracy and therefore we do welcome all the manifestoes that have been
launched, knowing of course that the one we have launched is the best of
all of them.

With respect to the challenge that the DA has given notice it will be
pursuing, in happy alliance with the FF Plus I believe, we know this is
merely a regurgitation of the launch of an objection against the Act at
every period when there is an election in South Africa, and we expect an
outcome similar to those we have had in the past. We know it is a good way
of getting oneself in the newspapers, just as we approach elections.

With respect to the matter of the killing of policemen in our country, I
think one would agree with the hon Seaton, and we certainly do believe and
hope that the police are pursuing these criminals with great vigour. But I
would ask as well of the House, could we do more about talking more
positively about our hardworking men and women in the police service? We
tend to downplay their role in much of our discourse and I think we should
build their status in our society and say much more about the hard work
they do in protecting all of us in South Africa.

On the matters of education, Chairperson, we certainly welcome the
initiatives taken by the ANC to put education at the centre of society’s
action. The KwaZulu-Natal initiative, with respect to engineering and
technical skills, is most welcome as these skills are absolutely needed in
our society.

I certainly would agree with the ANC that we must have a lasting peace
found with respect to Israel and Palestine, that it must be a peace that
recognises the right of Palestine to exist and also the right of Israel to
have a state that is secure. We will continue to work as government for a
lasting peace in the Middle East.

And, of course, with respect to Zimbabwe, we urge the SADC leaders to
continue their efforts to find an inclusive solution to the problems in
that country. Of course, given the vigour of Rev Meshoe, we advise him to
put on his fighting armour and go and assist the people of Zimbabwe in an
uprising. I can advise him that I don’t believe it will be possible to have
a lasting solution that will exclude Mr Mugabe but, indeed, a solution must
be found. I don’t know if the ACDP would survive the absence of Rev Meshoe
while he soldiers in Zimbabwe. [Time expired.]

                              HOURS OF SITTING

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the motion
as printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party on the Order
Paper, as follows:

  That the House, notwithstanding the hours of sitting of the House as
  provided for in Rule 23(2), on Monday, 9 February 2009, sits at 09:00 to
  debate the President’s State of the Nation Address.

Agreed to.

                          REVIVAL OF LAPSED ORDERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the
motion, as printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party on
the Order Paper, as follows:

  That the House revives the following items, which were on the Order Paper
  and that lapsed at the end of the 2008 annual session, for consideration
  by the National Assembly:


     1) Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration on Public Service Commission’s Fourth Consolidated
        Monitoring and Evaluation Report of 2007 (Announcements, Tablings
        and Committee Reports, 19 November 2008, p 2276); and


     2) Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration on State of Public Service Report 2008
        (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 19 November 2008, p
        2282).

Agreed to.

        RATIFICATION OF DECISION TO ESTABLISH AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the motion
as printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party on the Order
Paper, as follows:

   That the House ratifies the decision of the Speaker of the National
   Assembly and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, acting
   jointly, in terms of Joint Rule 138, to establish an Ad Hoc Joint
   Committee to consider matters in terms of section 12 of the National
   Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act 32 of 1998), as announced in the
   Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 12 January 2009.

Agreed to.

Decision to establish an Ad Hoc Joint Committee to consider matters in
terms of section 12 of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act 32
of 1998), accordingly ratified.

           RATIFICATION OF DECISION TO ESTABLISH AD HOC COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the motion
as printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party on the Order
Paper, as follows:

   That the House ratifies the decision of the Speaker, in terms of Rule
   214, to establish an Ad Hoc Committee on the Criminal Law (Forensic
   Procedures) Bill, as announced in the Announcements, Tablings and
   Committee Reports of 13 January 2009.


Agreed to.

Decision to establish an Ad Hoc Committee on the Criminal Law (Forensic
Procedures) Bill accordingly ratified.

                           SECOND-HAND GOODS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Bill, as amended, be rejected.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly rejected.

                   ELECTION OF MEDIATION COMMITTEE MEMBERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:
   That the House –


      1) notes that the National Assembly has rejected the Second-Hand Goods
         Bill [B2 – 2008] (sec 76(1));


      2) elects the following members, as nominated by their respective
         parties, as the Assembly representatives to the Mediation Committee
         on the Second-Hand Goods Bill [B2D – 2008] (Sec 76(1)):
          a) Bekker, H J (IFP);
          b) Daniels, P (ANC);
          c) Kohler-Barnard, D (DA);
          d) Maserumule, F T (ANC);
          e) Moatshe, M S (ANC);
          f) Nhlengethwa, D G (ANC);
          g) Sotyu, M (ANC); and
          h) Van Wyk, A (ANC); and


      3) elects the following member as alternate member:
         King, R J (DA).

Agreed to.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES ON
   OVERSIGHT VISIT TO TRANSNET’S DURBAN CONTAINER TERMINAL AND TRANSNET’S
                  OPERATIONS AT SENTRARAND AND KOEDOESPOORT

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES ON
 INTERACTION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES ON ITS ANNUAL REPORT
                                  (2007-08)

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES ON
          INTERACTION WITH TRANSNET ON ITS ANNUAL REPORT (2007-08)
Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, yesterday President Obama read out a list of
major American companies that were shedding thousands and thousands of
jobs. In this country we are not immune to the prospect of massive job
losses.

The extent of unemployment in our country is predicted to be in the range
of 4,1 million, not counting those that are rendered jobless and without an
income due to small and micro business failures and those who have stopped
looking for jobs.

The various bailout packages we have seen, and will continue to see in
Europe and in the US, bring home the truth that the state has to be
resilient in approaching challenges to the economy. All over the world
states will have to invest in their economies in order to maintain healthy
growth indices.

Luckily for us in South Africa, and unlike the US which has historically
put enormous amounts of faith in the free-market economy, we have a more
diverse range of choices in our arsenal of tools to fix what is wrong in
our economy.

In this regard, we are not unlike countries such as China, Britain, Spain
and others. As a state, however, we must begin to optimise the potential
presented by these state enterprises to deal with our dual challenges of
unemployment and growth.

We have, in many of these companies, enormous amounts of capacity,
capabilities, skills and resources that are just waiting to be tapped and
waiting for a focused and more strategic approach to be adopted by the
state.

Happily, the executive is already preparing to restructure in the next term
to allow for a more focused management of state-owned enterprises towards
optimising benefits into our own and the economies of our neighbouring and
partner African countries.

It is therefore incumbent that the new Parliament does the same. There are
many shortcomings related to the model of a portfolio committee that we
raise in our annual report. For many years now, this Parliament has
discussed ad nauseam how we should be conducting our oversight role,
particularly in relation to organs of state other than departments and
Ministries.

It is certainly the view of this committee that, in so far as it pertains
to state-owned enterprises, the new Parliament should very seriously
consider a different model to the portfolio committee model. At the very
least, we should consider a committee to mirror, in the confidentiality
aspects, the Joint Committee on Intelligence, owing to the commercially
sensitive nature of information that emanates from this diverse and very
dynamic portfolio.

There are, of course, many different models to be employed and to learn
from. We hope that the new Parliament will allow space for such
consideration.

Lastly, the hon Mokoena is no longer here, but his purple jacket today
really brightened up the lives of some of us in this House and we just
wanted to extend to him a special award for the best dressed Member of
Parliament in the House today! Thank you, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on Oversight visit to
Transnet’s Durban Container Terminal and Transnet’s operations at
Sentrarand and Koedoespoort accordingly adopted.
Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on Interaction with the
Department of Public Enterprises on its Annual Report (2007-08) accordingly
adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on Interaction with
Transnet on its Annual Report (2007-08) accordingly adopted.

   WORKING TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE PEACE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN PALESTINE

                                  (Debate)

Adv Z L MADASA: Chairperson, the world has recently witnessed one of the
longest and most protracted conflicts between the Palestinians and the
Israelis. The world has witnessed the destruction of property and the
killing of innocent civilians. The world has witnessed the suffering of
women and children. The world has witnessed, via the television, images of
very powerful and precise weapons demolishing certain parts of the Gaza
area in Palestine.

The question we need to ask, after this conflict we have just witnessed
which is one of many that have taken place in the past, is whether the
result thereof has been a more secure Israel or the establishment of a
Palestinian state. Sadly, the conclusion is that after this war we are back
to square one, which then raises the question of the prudence of engaging
in this war in the first place.

There have been many voices in our community and elsewhere in the world,
coming from social movements, political movements, allies of the ANC and
other people, calling for various actions to be taken or considered in
contribution to this conflict. My responsibility today, on behalf of the
ANC, is to comment on and discuss this topic, guided by ANC policies and
guideline documents and the foreign policy of South Africa. Some of the
comments and calls that have been made by social movements, valid as they
may be, will have to follow certain procedures for the ANC and government
to consider.

I think it is important to consider this conflict in its proper context and
to go back to the legal framework that, in the first place, established the
state of Israel. If we go back to the history of this conflict, we find
that it was the United Nations that agreed, persuaded by certain material
events after the Second World War, to establish the state of Israel after a
failed attempt to do so after the First World War. Those events persuaded
the nations to establish this state and to resolve that, side by side with
this state of Israel, there should be a Palestinian state.

This is an important legal framework that we must bear in mind, because
everything else that we need to comment upon flows from these founding
instruments of international law. This means that we need to repudiate any
religious notion that seeks to explain how these two states should be
established - not that there are no religious explanations for it, but
because the state of Israel was established by the United Nations. It is
important that this should be our starting point. If we resort to religious
notions of the states of Israel and Palestine, we would find ourselves in a
situation where there is no win-win solution, because if we look at it
through the lens of the Israeli side, then it means a one-state solution,
and if we look at it through the lens of the Palestinian side, it would
also mean a one-state solution.

What are the barriers, as the subject of discussion says, to sustainable
peace and development in Palestine? I think we need to look at the material
conditions as they exist today. The truth of the matter is that there is
really no viable Palestinian state as we speak today and the reason for
this has been the destruction of the infrastructure during previous
conflicts and the one we have seen recently.

Today the material condition exhibits a situation of a fragmented
Palestinian movement. Today we see an insecure Israel, be it in the minds
of the citizens or its leadership. Today we see continued building of
settlements in defiance of UN resolutions. Today there is a winding wall in
Palestine which is part of the setback preventing a viable state. Today we
see the rise of extreme leadership on both sides, which means a rise of
intolerance - intolerance as defined by nonacceptance of the existence of
the other side. Today we witness the geopolitical interests as evidenced by
the interests of the neighbours to this conflict who seem less interested
in its resolution. Today we see a total lack of commitment to those who
profess to be the friends of the Palestinian state.

What is the way forward given these conditions? How do we resuscitate the
UN resolution that sought to establish a lasting peace? In my view we need
to ensure that the rational voices, the voices of reason on both sides,
Palestine and Israel, come to the centre. We need to work to marginalise
unreasonable and extremist voices, especially given the looming elections
on both sides. Our appeal would be to the citizens of these two countries
or states to consider a leadership that will be visionary, that will be
forward-looking and that is serious about the establishment of a peaceful
solution. The reason I made reference to the issue of the UN resolution
establishing the state of Israel, is that the resolution which established
that statute means that there are responsibilities that come with that
statute. These responsibilities include the protection of innocent
citizens.

We have a situation today, as evidenced by the remarks of the prime
minister of Israel, Mr Olmert, who has given the guarantee that, if the
soldiers that were involved in the conflict are investigated or there are
attempts to arrest them, the leadership will protect them. In my view,
these were unfortunate remarks because, if you rely on the UN resolution to
establish your statute, then you cannot repute it when it seeks to correct
your actions. If we call upon the UN to ensure that leadership is held
accountable in other places in the world, such as Zimbabwe, Darfur and
elsewhere where there are conflicts, the state of Israel cannot be an
exception to that responsibility. That is why I say the United Nations
resolution to establish a state of Israel is a legal framework to start
discussing this conflict.

Another obstacle and barrier to sustainable development and peace, as I
indicated, is the fragmentation of the Palestinian cause, as we witnessed
last week when we had hearings in the committee with the Palestinian
ambassador and the Israeli ambassador. We had a situation where the two
sides, as represented by the Palestinian Liberation Organisation, Fatah in
particular and Hamas, are in complete conflict with one another. The ANC
has called upon, and still calls upon, the two sides to unite in the cause
of ensuring a viable state of Palestine. This fragmentation is not
conducive to a lasting peace. The ANC calls upon Hamas to realise that the
insistence on the annihilation of the state of Israel will result in
violence and no solution.

The ANC calls upon the state of Israel to realise that to resort to war to
sort out its own security will ensure more insecurity instead. Therefore,
given where we are at this stage, the ANC would like to remind the two
parties not to think about their ideological positions, but to remember
that the suffering of the people that they represent can no longer be
tolerated. We call upon the Israeli leadership, where evidence of
atrocities committed by the soldiers during the war is shown, to submit to
the scrutiny of the United Nations which established the state in the first
place.

We call upon our South African government to intensify its efforts to
resolve the conflict, to ensure that this conflict remains on the radar of
diplomatic efforts. I know that we have been cautioned by many that we are
too far from the conflict and we shouldn’t engage. These are false cautions
that we should ignore. It is important to ensure that the policies that are
written in our documents are carried out when we look into this conflict.
We have been cautioned not to pick sides in the conflict, but we insist as
the ANC that we will pick the side of the victims whenever injustice is
shown. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, the world has witnessed a
bloody backdrop of escalating confrontation and violence in Israel and
Palestine. For those of us who invested our hope in the peace process that
began in Madrid in 1991, news of suicide bombings, shootings, the recent
military occupation and massive destruction of homes and property inspires
sadness and disillusionment.

The DA is shocked and saddened by the loss of life, injury to innocent
civilians and the large-scale hardship and disruption being suffered by all
communities trapped in the cauldron of violence.

But we believe that however dark the current situation may be, a resolution
to the conflict is possible. This is essential, vital and imperative. When
life itself is at issue, leaders must do whatever it takes to move from
possibility to probability and from probability to certainty in order to
protect human beings. A spark that can kick-start such a movement remains
an absolute commitment to peace, which in turn requires the courage to take
risks. Indeed, a return to successful negotiations and sustainable
solutions now requires each side to take such risks.

The DA believes that negotiation is the only possible path to peace. For
negotiation to take place, Israelis and Palestinians must both have an
absolute commitment to peace and an irrevocable commitment to a negotiation
process which will culminate in an acceptable agreement to both parties.
Any lasting agreement must be based on the mutual recognition of the right
of both Palestinians and Israelis to have sovereign, independent and secure
states.

We have no doubt that people of goodwill the world over support this
position. The difficulty lies in how the protagonists in Israel and
Palestine might extract themselves from their current impasse. The
situation requires urgent action. The long drawn-out conflict over security
for Israel and statehood and human rights for the Palestinian people must
be brought to an end. But there will be no lasting peace in the Middle East
unless there is an accord amongst the countries of the region to honour the
agreement which the Palestinians and Israelis will reach about their
future.

In respect of the recent war in Gaza, the DA’s position is clear. We regret
the loss of life. Violence is never a solution and we condemn the violence
perpetrated by both sides. Though Israel’s retaliation is clearly
excessive, the context in which these attacks are taking place must also be
remembered. Neither side is blameless. Though Israel is by far militarily
stronger than Hamas, Hamas has never recognised the right of Israel to
exist and has over a period of time been firing hundreds of rockets into
Israel, killing a number of Israelis. Innocent lives on both sides have
been lost.

As a first step towards restoring peace in that region, the DA supports a
two-state solution and mutual respect for each state’s right to exist in
security. To get there, Israel and Palestine must both commit to stop using
violence to further their interests. As part of a commitment to ending all
hostilities, Israel must withdraw from Gaza and Hamas must provide
guarantees that Gaza will not be used as a base from which to launch
missile attacks into southern Israel. Palestine must recognise Israel’s
right to exist and Israel must withdraw from the occupied territories and
lift the blockade on Gaza. There must also be a credible peacekeeping force
to monitor and broker the peace.

A solution is possible if leaders in the region listen to the views of
ordinary people - the victims. A two-state solution is favoured by most
Palestinians and Israelis. The Palestinian Centre for Policy and Survey
Research conducted a joint Palestinian-Israeli public opinion poll in 2007
which showed that 60% of Palestinians and 64% of Israelis believed that a
two-state solution was the best way to end the conflict. It is worth noting
that here in South Africa, Jacob Zuma, in his speech at the ANC’s manifesto
launch, committed the ANC to a two-state solution.

For the violence to end, both Israel and Palestine need to be equally
committed to a peace process. In addition, Israel needs to reflect on how
its militarist tactics and its continued occupation strengthen its most
militant enemies. But Hamas should also recognise how its attacks on
Israeli civilians have enabled Israel to change the subject from occupation
to threats to its existence. The deadly paradox is that, while Hamas has
nothing but failure to show for its tactics, the conciliatory strategy of
President Mahmoud Abbas and Fatah has failed as well, allowing Israel to
expand its occupation of the West Bank and presenting the Palestinians with
an alibi.

The only way to end this infernal dynamic is to create a Palestinian state
on nearly all the occupied land that was gained in 1967 through the final
status talks. For that to happen, the Palestinians need a unified
leadership thoroughly dedicated to that aim. The Israelis need to want
peace more than settlements, and President Obama needs to come out
forcefully, for probably the last chance at a resolution based on two
states living side by side in security.

The world cannot afford to continue witnessing the tragic loss of human
life in large numbers as it is currently taking place in the Middle East.
The DA appeals to both leaders in the Middle East and other relevant
powers, including the United States, to work towards a peaceful resolution
of the conflict in order to avoid further unnecessary deaths.

What of us in South Africa? As South Africans, we can, at best, provide a
potent example of reconciling intractable divisions and a centuries-old
conflict. At worst, we can allow a far-off conflict to bedevil our own
communal relations. Clearly, this House should lead South Africans to
choose and elevate the best and not the worst option. I thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, we have all watched the horror in Gaza
over the past number of weeks. We have all seen how Israel has
systematically reduced Gaza to ruins; how thousands of people were killed
and wounded. We have seen Hamas firing an uncountable number of rockets
into Israel. But, thank God, today there is a fragile peace in place.

The massive task of working towards sustainable peace and economic
development is to start in Palestine. But we fear that until such time as a
lasting solution is found in the Middle East, very little may in fact be
accomplished. The danger is that whatever may be achieved may once again be
reduced to rubble by another war. The real and basic challenge is,
therefore, to find lasting peace in the Middle East. That is something that
may not occur in our lifetime, because the challenge is how to solve a
struggle that is thousands of years old.

I believe the Bible tells us more about the origin of this struggle. I’m
told that it started thousands of years ago with Abraham’s two sons –
Isaac, who became the father of the Israelites, and Ishmael, the father of
the Palestinians. For thousands of years their descendants have been in
bloody conflict with one another, even until today.

We believe that our government is making a mistake - the mistake of being
seen to be taking sides. When you choose one side, you automatically
alienate the other side. This is counterproductive and removes your
capacity to play a role. We in the IFP believe that there is but one piece
of advice we can offer the two sides - both Hamas and Israel – namely, to
look at our South African experience and to follow our successful example
of stopping the war and negotiating. [Interjections.]

Yes, my vote and you are the man. [Laughter.]

Wise men and women say there are three sides to an issue - your side, my
side and the right side. There is therefore the side of Hamas, the side of
Israel and the right side. Our government erred in taking sides with the
Palestinians. Many ANC members are openly and emotionally on the
Palestinian side. They even talk about sanctions against Israel and the
closure of diplomatic representation. They are therefore losing the trust
of the Israelis.

We in the IFP encourage our government to render immediate humanitarian
assistance to Gaza and assist in working towards sustainable peace and
economic development in Palestine. We further urge the government not to
take sides, but to retain a neutral position in order to impress upon both
Hamas and Israel the only possible solution, namely, to stop the war and to
negotiate. We encourage our government to urge both sides to make
sacrifices in order to achieve peace. This will lay the foundation for
South Africa’s role in assisting and working towards sustainable peace and
economic development in Palestine. Thank you.

Mr M H HOOSEN: Chairperson, the ID believes that it is an indictment
against the international community that the bloody conflict in the Middle
East has gone on for so long.

The ID supports the Road Map for Peace. What is now needed is for the South
African government to call on the United Nations to implement all its
resolutions that have been around for so many years.

As the ID we would like to condemn the violence on both sides. However, we
see Israel’s invasion of Gaza and the incident involving the tragic bombing
of a school, which resulted in the murder of innocent civilians, as an act
of terrorism. Too many innocent lives, including those of children, have
been destroyed in this recent bombing.

In 25 days, 1330 Palestinians were killed by Israel, including 437 children
and 108 women. Five thousand four hundred and fifty innocent civilians were
maimed.

Clearly, Israel’s aggression against the Palestinians can never be condoned
in any way whatsoever. To claim that one has the right to defend one’s
nation and at the same time massacre innocent civilians of another, does
not convince the world that Israel has acted responsibly in promoting peace
in the region.

The people of Gaza are already living in a caged hell because of the
systematic violation of their human rights under the Israeli blockade.
Israel has shown contempt for the rest of the world by unleashing its war
machine on innocent civilians. It is simply impossible to achieve peace and
economic development without a permanent halt on violence and aggression in
the region.

I would like to call on all South Africans, irrespective of their faith, to
condemn these attacks and show solidarity with the people of Palestine and
to do whatever they can to assist them during this humanitarian crisis. I
thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, the ACDP would have preferred the wording of
this debate to be “Working towards sustainable peace and economic
development in the Middle East”, and not just “in Palestine”, because
sustainable peace and economic development are also needed in Israel. This
Parliament will have to take a balanced, unbiased approach if we want to be
successful in contributing towards peace and economic development in that
region.

As the ACDP we are concerned about the humanitarian crisis in the Gaza
Strip because we have compassion for those who are suffering.
During the recent briefings by the Palestinian and Israeli ambassadors to
the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs, the ACDP expressed its sincere
regret at the loss of innocent lives on both sides of the conflict. We
asked that our condolences be passed on to the families of those who had
lost loved ones and those whose loved ones had been injured.

The Palestinian National Authority ambassador stated the following during
his briefing to the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs:


  Why did Hamas not respond to our calls to continue and extend the truce
  for another three months? Why didn’t they accept? Unfortunately, Hamas’
  prime minister sometimes receives instructions from some countries. This
  is the reality. The leadership of Hamas refused to come to Cairo to
  discuss peace. They refused. Hamas leadership made a strategic mistake
  and the Palestinian people are paying the price now.

Our government has never questioned why Hamas has been allowed to launch
its attacks from populated areas. Hamas unashamedly used women and children
as human shields and stored weapons and ammunition in mosques, hospitals
and schools. This is totally unacceptable and is against the Geneva
Convention.

Israel is accused of using disproportionate force when they retaliate and
of breaching international law. What about Hamas? It is a serious breach of
international law to try to prevent attacks on military targets by using
human shields.

The ACDP supports working towards sustainable peace and economic
development in the Middle East for the mutual benefit of both sides, the
Palestinians and the Israelis.

According to the Hamas Founding Charter, it does not recognise the right of
Israel to exist as a state and is receiving support from Iran which has
stated that it wants to wipe Israel off the face of the earth.

The ACDP hopes that the new South African Parliament will seek ways of
influencing Hamas to recognise the right of Israel to live within safe and
secure borders. Otherwise, all our attempts for a lasting peace in that
area will be fruitless.

The ACDP welcomes the ceasefire and the intervention of moderate voices
that will embark on steps towards a lasting peace. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, hon members, my party comes from a background
that says more is wrought in prayer than aggression or belligerence and we
shall therefore not countenance being prescribed to as to how to look at
this whole issue.

The situation in the Middle East calls for prayer, peace and development by
all parties involved. From our angle of elevation as South Africans, we
should not apportion blame; rather, we should pray that the people in
Palestine and Israel find each other and live alongside each other in one
country and in harmony. Our call should be “live and let live”.

We should pray for Judaism, Christianity and Islam, as all these religions
acknowledge the God of Abraham as their Lord. We should pray that members
of the three religions understand this point of spiritual commonality
amongst them and take this as a start towards reconciliation.

We pray for strength, for Arabs and Israelis to realise that a friendly and
co-operative regional plan is necessary to bring about co-operative
economic development and tourism. With such an understanding, tourism will
be revived and jobs will be created for Palestinians who have been trapped
in hopelessness and poverty. Mutual respect and tolerance will lead to
Israel and its neighbours agreeing on sharing water, which is in short
supply in those parts of the world.

We have no doubt that the Sermon on the Mount, which, amongst other things,
states that “Blessed are the peace-makers, they shall be called the
children of God”, is relevant in this case. All nations should strive to
make peace, because war begets war.

The UCDP calls on all involved to make every effort to do what leads to
peace so that there should be development. I thank you.

Ms K R MAGAU: Mudzulatshidulo ... [Chairperson ...]

In a few minutes, I would like to highlight the Palestinian economic state
of affairs which needs to be addressed before sustainable peace and
economic development in Palestine can be a reality.

It should be noted that the Palestinian authority took over complex
economic constraints in the form of the legacy of political restrictions
imposed by the Oslo Agreements and the various agreements signed between
the PLO and the Israeli government, which worked to the detriment of the
Palestinian economy.
To reform the Palestinian-Israeli economic relationship, the above-
mentioned protocol must be renegotiated, as it has been consistently
violated by the Israeli policy of closure and economic siege. Thirty-two
years of Israeli occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip has led to
a steady deterioration in the political and economic conditions there.

Israel has succeeded in restructuring the Palestinian economy in such a way
that it became dependent on the Israeli one. This has led to a small and
feeble Palestinian economy, with limited capacity for job creation and
labour force absorption. As a result, more than 70% of the Palestinian
labour force depends on the Israeli labour market.

The main impediment to development in Palestine and co-operation in the
region is the collective punishment Israel imposes on the Palestinian
people under the closure policy. These closures are creating huge poverty
and are stifling the economy of Palestine. Poverty has now spread to 26% of
the population, compared to 17% in 2007.

More than 50% of Palestinians live under the poverty line of $2 per day.
Unemployment reached 30% of the population in the first quarter of 2007 and
70% of Palestinians living in Gaza are now dependent on food aid.

Added to this is the continued building of settlements around water
reserves, denying Palestinian farmers proper farming opportunities. On the
other hand, Israel’s refusal to release tax revenues, which it collects on
behalf of the Palestinian authority, has only served to polarise relations
between it and the Palestinian people.

This situation has caused hardship for the Palestinian people. This
hardship is further aggravated by the decision of Western governments to
impose sanctions on the Hamas-led Gaza Strip. These sanctions have impacted
negatively on the Palestinian authority to deliver much-needed social
resources to the people of Palestine.

Our main proposition behind the peace process is to improve the living
standards of the people in the region, particularly on the West Bank and in
the Gaza Strip. We are convinced that peace would bring economic
development and prosperity. In turn, economic development would mean
increased support for the peace process.

Therefore, economic sovereignty for the Palestinian people must include,
among other things, the freedom to choose economic policies that are
consistent with their goals of economic development, which will not
necessarily coincide with Israeli interests. Palestinian economic
sovereignty must aim at these interests.

Palestinian economic sovereignty must aim at achieving certain economic
objectives, such as giving priority to the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the Palestinian economy, in order for it to regain its
strength and its ability to grow and lay the foundation for sustainable
development; raising the standard of living of the Palestinian people;
improving their quality of life through the efficient management of
available economic resources, that is human and physical, and the proper
administration of external economic relations to promote the performance of
a Palestinian economy on both micro and macro levels; expanding its
productivity capacity to enable it to benefit from the potential of the
region and international co-operation; and working towards securing
strategic storage of basic goods at fair prices to prevent shortages and
avoid monopolies.

The Palestinian National Authority is aware of the importance of regional
co-operation and integration, particularly in the era of globalisation
where no one nation, regardless of its military power, geographic,
demographic or economic size, can achieve growth, sustainable development
or progress by remaining in complete isolation.

The Palestinian National Authority expects confidence-building measures
through the implementation of the provision of Resolution 1850 of 16
December 2008, which embodies the principles upon which Israeli-Palestinian
peace must rest.

On the other hand, Israel must accept the Palestinians as equal partners
with whom they will have to share their destiny and future. After all, they
share the land, water, air and other fortunes and misfortunes that they
face in the region. And, having said this, all these need to be addressed
before a peaceful solution can be reached.

As the ANC, working together with other progressive forces in the world, we
believe that a strong, peaceful, prosperous Palestine is a possibility,
based on the 1967 borders. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the blood and turmoil of the people of
Palestine leaves me in a daze, as I remember the endurance and sacrifices
of South Africans during the apartheid regime.

It is not possible for any human to turn a blind eye to what is happening
in Palestine; nor can we deny the need for our intervention. It is evident
from decades of peace talks and bloodshed that, in terms of religion, a
common ground may not be found, but we do believe that the land can be
shared and that wealth should not be the decider of how much and how.

Indeed, in a country such as South Africa, where the majority of our people
live in poverty, we have to strive to make facilities and better living
conditions accessible, no matter how diverse we are in race, beliefs,
customs, religion and creed.
We believe that peace in the Middle East is dependent on the Palestinians
and Israelis who call that land home. They need to unite against the
political regimes and fight for the democratic liberation of their people
and land. There is no peace in division, and there is no right in trying to
justify religion. We know, as a growing nation, that it is respect and
tolerance that unite us. The people of the Middle East require leaders who
will forge unity amongst the people, instead of this war and brutality.

We believe that both systems are failing and that the world needs to exert
political pressure so as to encourage both sides to adopt the respect and
tolerance that will certainly foster unity.

The MF does not favour any form of war, terrorism or brutality and believes
it necessary for the Palestinians and Israelis to work towards a country
where there is sustainable economic development and peace. If not,
Chairperson, then intervention by South Africa is needed. I thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairman, it is very painful to discuss a problem of this
nature, but I must say, the concerted genocidal attack on Gaza by Israel,
lasting 21 days, has resulted in over 1 300 Palestinians reportedly being
killed, against 13 Israeli deaths. Fifty percent of the dead Palestinians
are said to have been civilians, mainly defenceless women and children.
This demonstrates the excessive force used by Israel.
In addition to this, it is reported that Israel has used phosphorus
weapons. They cause burns on the victim’s body. Several human rights
organisations have called for the investigation into war crimes, with a
view to punishing some of the Israeli soldiers.

The Palestine-Israel issue is the oldest conflict in the world. Western
powers are supporters of Israel — economically and militarily. This
includes diplomatic support right up to the United Nations. Some of our
nationals are reported to be reservists, fighting alongside the Israeli
army. What is the government doing about this?

There is also the question of selective morality, where you find that big
powers, instead of finding a solution, will rather protect their own
interests. For instance, in Zimbabwe economic sanctions have been imposed
by Western countries, even while Zimbabweans are dying of cholera. Some
leaders have advocated for the invasion of Zimbabwe. Countries such as
America and Great Britain are tirelessly working for a regime change. Why
is the same standard not used to solve the oldest conflict that has killed
millions of people in the Middle East?

The two-states policy guarantees the existence of both Israel and
Palestine. Safe borders must be seriously addressed and guaranteed.
Diplomatic isolation must be considered if Israel continues in its
intransigence. Palestinians must reciprocate and choose peace over war,
otherwise the conflict will only stop the day the oil wells dry up in the
Middle East.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon members, the FD, a member of the Christian
Democratic Alliance, supports the motion to strive for peace and
development in the states around the Middle East.

The tragic loss of life and the destruction of property, largely in Gaza
and to a lesser extent in Israel, are regrettable and unnecessary. If we
can find peace in South Africa, if Northern Ireland can find peace after
almost 40 years, then so can the descendants of Isaac and Ishmael – two
half-brothers sharing the same father.

The FD realises there are deep layers of hatred as a result of generations
of war, that what is needed is a moral reconstruction of the soul of the
region where Israel and the Arab nations find it possible to hone out a
future based on a collaborative value system.

There is a long history of suspicion that exists between these two nations,
which has fuelled the instability of the region and played into the hands
of fanatical and fundamentalist groups to perpetuate their appetite for
hostility and violence. To achieve sustainable peace and development, the
policies held by these nations, and which contribute to the hostility
between them, must be reviewed and removed. In order to proceed with a
viable solution, these nations must first learn to accept the undeniable
right of each other to coexist in the region.

The details of how to reach a reasonable settlement on thorny issues must
be hammered out through a process of negotiation and conflict resolution.
This process, which is ongoing and consists of numerous key states, may
take years, but the idea of the process is to diffuse any situation of war
that may arise during transition. Whatever happens, the FD believes that
where there is peace, prosperity follows. The killing of innocent women and
children must stop. I thank you.

Mr S SIBOZA: Sihlalo, Malunga ahloniphekile ePhalamende, kubalulekile
ukuthi mhlawumbe sisho isizathu esenza ukuba sibe nalenkulumiswano.
[Chairperson, hon Members of Parliament, maybe it is imperative to give a
reason why we are having this debate.]

Chairperson, this debate arose from a request by the Speaker of the
National Assembly of the Republic of South Africa, who raised the question
of how Parliament should respond to the political conflict between Israel
and Palestine and the treatment of Palestinians that live in Israel. The
Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs undertook a visit to the Israeli-
Palestinian territories, the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and Syria in order
to gather information to be able to respond correctly to the question
raised by the Speaker.

As a volunteer in the cadre of the representative organisation, the ANC, I
would like to express our deep sadness regarding the brutal and ruthless
killing of innocent civilians, particularly women and children, in
Palestine and Gaza. It is important to raise the point that, as the ANC, we
will always be on the side of those who are marginalised, exploited and
oppressed, because we feel that we are part of them.

The fact that we are still discussing the issue of Palestinian self-
determination and continuous Israeli aggression today is an indictment of
all of us. Today, as we speak, 42 years after the 1967 Arab-Israeli war,
the reality is that Palestinians control only 23% of their original land
and in the recent 21-day war even that 23% was nearly reoccupied.

Many a time, as South Africans, we draw similarities between what we went
through during apartheid and what is going on in Palestine. Our report will
confirm that. The people of Palestine are experiencing even more suffering
than we did in our country. It is important, therefore, for all of us
Africans to understand the real reason behind this conflict. Many people
don’t understand the hardship and the suffering that the people on the
ground are feeling, as some people didn’t feel what apartheid was doing to
us. I often relate to the young comrades what it felt like to live under
apartheid conditions: detention without trial, the state of emergency and
how, as students, we used to throw stones at the police, who were shooting
at us, because we didn’t realise how mighty the army really was. This is
precisely what is happening in Gaza. Just as we did not understand the
might of the army, they don’t. I am sure the children of Palestine today
wish that the conditions under which they are living were in the past.

Since Hamas took over in June 2007, humanitarian tragedy has been unfolding
in Palestinian territories. In those territories that claim to be
liberated, people are experiencing human tragedy. This was echoed in the
report by John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
UN Emergency Relief Co-ordinator, who said that the conditions for people
in Gaza were grim and miserable and far from normal and that severe
restrictions on the movement of goods and people, following the Hamas
takeover in June 2007, had taken a heavy economic and social toll, on top
of years of difficult economic decline.

Only about 10% of what went into Gaza in January 2007 was allowed to enter
in January 2008. In October, Israel started to reduce the flow of
industrial diesel used to operate the single power station in Gaza. In
February, the amount of electricity supplied to Gaza from Israel was also
reduced. Since June 2007, the movement of Palestinians out of Gaza became
virtually impossible. There is no peace under apartheid. Almost 80% of
Palestinians are receiving food aid; most industrial and agricultural
activities have collapsed, raising unemployment and poverty; frequent and
lengthy power cuts have severely impaired the functioning of essential
services and infrastructure; and water quality is declining rapidly. Today
the situation is even worse than it was during apartheid South Africa.

The United Nations reports had the following to say: Over a hundred
Palestinians have died and over 4 230 were wounded, including more than
1 497 children and 628 women. The UN report stated that over 90 000 had
fled their homes, with approximately 30 000 taking refuge at schools
sponsored by the UN, while the rest took refuge with relatives. Whatever
the provocations and illegality of the rockets, Israel’s concern for
security cannot override all other concerns or justify so much damage to
ordinary people and their livelihoods - an infringement of their human
rights and dignity.

Israel has an obligation under international law towards the Palestinian
people under occupation. International law provides that Israel, as an
occupying power, must ensure the safety and wellbeing of the civilian
population. The blockage, along with consistent military raids, has
resulted in the complete destruction of Palestinian infrastructure. How can
you mistake a mosque, a school or a hospital for a military target? Honest
citizens have now also become victims of this war.

Various large international players are involved in this conflict. The
direct, official negotiations on behalf of these parties, the Israeli
government and the Palestinian Liberation Movement, currently headed by
Mahmoud Abbas, are mediated by an international contingent known as the
Quartet, which consists of the United States, Russia, the European Union
and the United Nations. The Arab League is another player that has proposed
an alternative peace plan. Egypt has historically been part of these
participants.

There was also the question of the Oslo Peace Agreement, which began in
1993, permitting the Palestinian Liberation Organisation to run its
political and economic affairs. In return, it was agreed that Palestinians
would uphold the recognition of their mutual coexistence with Israel and
promote recognition of Israel among Palestinian people. Despite Arafat’s
renunciation of terrorism and recognition of Israel, there was division
among the Palestinian leaders over the acceptance of Israel’s existence.
The agreement called for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the occupied
territories. This agreement was supposed to last for a five-year interim
period, during which a permanent agreement would be negotiated, including
core issues of the conflict, such as the status of Jerusalem, the return of
refugees, Israeli settlement and the Israeli security concern.

In 2000, following the failure of the peace process, the second conflict
broke. At the Camp David Summit and Taba Summit in 2000 and 2001, the
Unites States proposed a plan in which the Arab parts of Jerusalem would be
given to the proposed Palestinian state, while the Jewish part of Jerusalem
would be retained by Israel. All agricultural work under the Temple Mount
would be put under joint control of the Israeli and Palestinian
governments.

Both sides accepted the proposal in principal, but the summit ultimately
failed. Disappointment grew, especially after the failure of the final-
status negotiations at Camp David in 2002. Then there was the Arab Peace
Initiative, which considered a progressive proposal that would end Arab-
Israeli conflict and included a very clear final solution to the borders,
based on the UN borders established in the 1967 Six-Day War. It offered
full normalisation of the relations with Israel in exchange for the
withdrawal of all forces from all occupied territories, including the
recognition of an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its
capital, the West Bank and Gaza Strip, as well as a just solution for the
Palestinians.

The most recent round of talks began in Annapolis, Maryland, in the United
States. In November 2007 these talks aimed to have a final resolution by
the end of 2008. The parties then agreed that there were six final core
issues that needed to be resolved. Jerusalem again refused the question of
settlement, security borders and water. The outbreak of the 20-day war in
December 2008 plunged the Annapolis process in disarray.

The obstacles to resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict are well known
and well documented. Israel has persisted in tightening its siege,
including collective punishment in the Gaza Strip, the colonisation
campaign, illegal Israeli settlement, the use of excessive force against
the population there and other actions amounting to massive collective
punishment of Palestinian citizens. The isolation of Jerusalem and Israel’s
construction of a separation wall was a challenge and a disrespectful
response to the advisory opinion issued by the International Court of
Justice and the General Assembly resolution of 20 July 2004 on the ground
that it resulted in further fragmentation of the occupied Palestinian
territory. There is no peace under apartheid. [Time expired.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          MONDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Technology Innovation Agency Bill [B 49B – 2007] – Act No 26 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 17 November 2008).

      2) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty Bill [B 59 – 2008] – Act No
         28 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 17 November
         2008).

      3) Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5B – 2008] – Act No 30 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 17 November 2008).
      4) Liquor Products Amendment Bill [B 22B – 2008] – Act No 32 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 17 November 2008).

      5) National Energy Bill [B 52D – 2008] – Act No 34 of 2008 (assented
         to and signed by President on 17 November 2008).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and
   Special Petitions on the legislative proposal on the establishment of a
   feed-in tariff to finance renewable energy, dated 19 November 2008

   The Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special
   Petitions, having considered the legislative proposal on the
   establishment of a feed-in tarrif to finance renewable energy, submitted
   by Dr R Rabinowitz, and having consulted with the Department of Minerals
   and Energy and the Department of Trade and Industry, recommends that the
   member not be given permission to proceed with the legislative proposal.
   The Committee further recommends that the Speaker should look into the
   possibility of either making this a legacy issue for the next Parliament,
   or appoint an Ad Hoc Committee to deal with energy shortage and renewable
   energy supply.

   Report to be considered.

                         WEDNESDAY, 26 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1. Membership of Committees


      a) Adv Z L Madasa  has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Foreign Affairs: Subcommittee on International Affairs
         with effect from 19 November 2008.

TABLINGS

National Assembly
1.    The Speaker

    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 17
    November 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
    members of the Assembly of the employment of the SA National Defence
    Force for service in co-operation with the SA Police Service:

CREDA INSERT - T081126e-insert1 – PAGES 2381

COMMITTEE REPORT

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T081126e-insert2 – PAGES 2382-2415


                         THURSDAY, 27 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


      1) Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 27 November 2008:
          a) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48B – 2008 (Reprint)]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) National Youth Development Agency Bill [B 82 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


      1) Bill amended by National Council of Provinces and returned for
         concurrence on 27 November 2008:


          a) National Land Transport Bill [B 51D – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Presidents’ Fund for 2007-
         2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 245-2008].


                           FRIDAY, 5 DECEMBER 2008


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


    (1)    Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation Bill [B 77 – 2008]
         – Act No 41 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 25
         November 2008).


      (2)   Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 76 – 2008] – Act No 40 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 25 November 2008).


    (3)    Legal Succession to the South African Transport Services
         Amendment Bill [B 43B – 2008] – Act No 38 of 2008 (assented to and
         signed by President on 25 November 2008).


    (4)    Finance Bill [B 78 – 2008] – Act No 42 of 2008 (assented to and
         signed by President on 25 November 2008).
    (5)    Diplomatic Immunities and Privileges Amendment Bill [B 55B –
         2008] – Act No 35 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on
         25 November 2008).

      6) Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2008] – Act No 39 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 25 November 2008).

      7) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty (Administration) Bill [B 60
         – 2008] – Act No 29 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on
         21 November 2008).

      8) Refugees Amendment Bill [B 11D – 2008] – Act No 33 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 November 2008).

      9) Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill [B 68
         – 2008] – Act No 45 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on
         3 December 2008).

     10) Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69 – 2008] – Act
         No 46 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 3 December
         2008).

     11) The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act Repeal
         Bill [B 71B – 2008] – Act No 47 of 2008 (assented to and signed by
         President on 3 December 2008).
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Multi-Annual Indicative Programme  and  Country  Strategy  Paper
         between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
         European Community for 2007-2013, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
         of the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South  Africa  concerning  Water  for
         Growth and Development  Programme  (Masimbabane  III)  (SA/001/07),
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
    (c)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning  “Sustainable
         Rural Development in the Eastern Cape (SURUDEC)”  (SA/005/06  Rev),
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (d)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic  of  Germany  concerning
         Technical Cooperation in 2006, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.

    (e)    Protocol between the Government  of  the  People’s  Republic  of
         China and the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  on
         Economic and Technical Cooperation,  tabled  in  terms  of  section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
    (f)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic  of  Germany  concerning
         Technical Cooperation in 2004, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.
    (g)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning “Sector  Wide
         Enterprise,   Employment    and    Equity    Programme    (SWEEEP)”
         (SA/1006/000),  tabled  in  terms  of   section   231(3)   of   the
         Constitution, 1996.

    (h)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South  Africa  concerning  Innovation
         for  Poverty  Alleviation  Sector  wide  budget  support   to   the
         Department of Science and Technology 2008-2012, tabled in terms  of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (i)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of  South  Africa  concerning  “Expanded
         Programme of Partnership for the delivery of Primary  Health  care,
         HIV and AIDS Services” (SA/003/06 Rev), tabled in terms of  section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (j)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  concerning  Official
         Development Assistance Programme (ODA-P) (SA/002/06 Rev), tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (k)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning Programme  to
         Support  Pro-poor  Policy  Development  in  South  Africa   (PSPPD)
         (SA/001/06  Rev),  tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of   the
         Constitution, 1996.

    (l)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South  Africa  concerning  “Expanding
         and Strengthening Community Based Participation in Local Government
         (CBP)”, tabled in terms of  section  231(3)  of  the  Constitution,
         1996.

    (m)    Proclamation No R.41 published in Government  Gazette  No  31512
         dated 13 October 2008: Determining a  date  on  which  the  Diamond
         Export Levy Act, 2007, will come into operation, in  terms  of  the
         Diamond Export Levy Act, 2007 (Act No 15 of 2007).
    (n)    Proclamation No R.41 published in Government  Gazette  No  31512
         dated 13 October 2008: Determining a  date  on  which  the  Diamond
         Export Levy (Administration) Act, 2007, will come  into  operation,
         in terms of the Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Act, 2007 (Act
         No 21 of 2007).

    (o)    Government Notice No 1170 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31561 dated 31 October 2008: Commencement dates, in  terms  of  the
         Financial Services Laws General Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No  22  of
         2008).

    (p)    Government Notice No 1163 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31554 dated 30 October 2008: Notice in terms of  paragraph  (b)  of
         the definition of “Living Annuity” in section 1, in  terms  of  the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (q)    Government Notice No 1164 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31554 dated 30 October 2008: Notice in terms of  paragraph  (c)  of
         the definition of “Living Annuity” in section 1, in  terms  of  the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (r)    Government Notice No 1160 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31548 dated 31 October 2008: Regulations prescribing administrative
         penalties in respect of non-compliance, in terms of the Income  Tax
         Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (s)    Government Notice No R.1236 published in Government  Gazette  No
         31614 dated 21 November 2008: Regulations to be issued in terms  of
         section 10(1) (d)(iii) and (iv), to prescribe conditions  on  which
         the Commissioner  may  approve  on  entity  for  purposes  of  that
         section, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).
 2. The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


    (a)    Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National  House  of
         Traditional Leaders (NHTL) for 2007-2008 [RP 206-2008].

 3. The Minister of Housing

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the  National  Home  Builders
         Registration Council for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
         Information for 2007-2008.

 4. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2007-2008.



 5. The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of  Bloem  Water  for  the  year
         ended June 2008, including the Report of the  Independent  Auditors
         on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Overberg Water for the year
        ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


National Assembly

1. The Speaker

     a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Management  of
        Gifts in the Public Service – March 2008 [RP 39-2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T081205e-insert1 – PAGES 2453-2506

                           MONDAY, 12 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
         Communication-related Information Bill [B 9D – 2006] – Act No 48 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 6 January 2009).

    (2)    National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 36D – 2007]
         – Act No 62 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 5
         January 2009).


    (3)    Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 7D – 2008] – Act No
         63 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 5 January 2009).


    (4)    South African National Space Agency Bill [B 20B – 2008] – Act No
         36 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 11 December
         2008).


    (5)    General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance
         Amendment Bill [B 35D – 2008] – Act No 50 of 2008 (assented to and
         signed by President on 23 December 2008).


    (6)    Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill [B 40D – 2008] –
         Act No 58 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 6 January
         2009).


    (7)    National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B 41D –
         2008] – Act No 53 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 5
         January 2009).


    (8)    Intellectual Property Rights from Publicly Financed Research and
         Development Bill [B 46D – 2008] – Act No 51 of 2008 (assented to
         and signed by President on 17 December 2008).


    (9)    Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill [B 62B – 2008] (assented
         to and signed by President on 6 January 2009).
    (10)   Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill [B 63B – 2008] (assented
         to and signed by President on 6 January 2009).


    (11)   General Laws (Loss of Membership of National Assembly,
         Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill [B 64B
         – 2008] – Act No 55 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on
         6 January 2009).


     12) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 80 – 2008] – Act No 60 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 5 January 2009).


     13) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 81 – 2008] – Act No 61 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 5 January 2009).


     14) National Youth Development Agency Bill [B 82 – 2008] – Act No 54 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 23 December 2008).


2.    Establishment of Ad Hoc Joint Committee


    DECISION BY THE SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE CHAIRPERSON OF
    THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES TO ESTABLISH AN AD HOC JOINT
    COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER MATTERS IN TERMS OF SECTION 12 OF THE NATIONAL
    PROSECUTING AUTHORITY ACT, 1998 (ACT 32 OF 1998)


    1.     The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
         National Council of Provinces, acting jointly after consulting the
         Chief Whip of the Majority Party in the Assembly and the Chief Whip
         of the Council, have decided, in terms of Joint Rule 138, to
         establish an ad hoc joint committee to consider matters in terms of
         section 12 of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act 32
         of 1998).


    2.     The committee is to consider the President’s decision to remove
         the National Director of Public Prosecutions, Adv V P Pikoli, in
         terms of section 12 of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998
         (Act 32 of 1998), and to recommend to the Houses whether Adv Pikoli
         should be restored to office or not, the committee to report by 9
         February 2009.


    3.     The committee may exercise those powers in Joint Rule 32 that
         may assist it in carrying out its task.


    4.     The committee is to consist of 13 members of the National
         Assembly (ANC 8; DA 2; IFP 1; other parties 2) and nine members of
         the National Council of Provinces.


    SPEAKER                                        CHAIRPERSON
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY                  NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
    Date: 12 January 2009                          Date: 12 January 2009

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

      1) The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
         Joint Committee to Consider Matters in terms of Section 12 of
         National Prosecuting Authority Act:

         ANC


         Burgess, C V
         Carrim, Y I
         Komphela, B M
         Magwanishe, G B
         Moloi-Moropa, J C
         Monareng, O E
         Nyambi, A J
         Sibhidla, N N
         Maake, J J (Alt)


         DA


         Delport, J T
         Joubert, L K


         IFP


         Van der Merwe, J H
         ACDP


         Swart, S N

         ID


         De Lille, P

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Speaker and Chairperson


    Message and requisite supporting documents received from the President
    of the Republic in terms of section 12(6)(b) of the National
    Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act 32 of 1998), informing Parliament
    of the removal from office of the National Director of Public
    Prosecutions with effect from 8 December 2008.


    Referred to the Ad Hoc Joint Committee to Consider Matters in terms of
    Section 12 of National Prosecuting Authority Act for consideration and
    report.

                          TUESDAY, 13 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

   1. Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill, 2009, submitted by the
         Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs.

    (2)    Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill, 2009,
         submitted by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
         Development.


         Referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on Criminal Law (Forensic
         Procedures) Amendment Bill and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B 1 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 74) [Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 31692 of 9
             December 2008.]
             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


          b) Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill [B 2 – 2009]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 31759 of 29 December 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Ad Hoc Committee on Criminal
             Law (Forensic Procedure) Amendment Bill of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Establishment of Ad Hoc Committee

    DECISION BY THE SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY TO ESTABLISH AN AD HOC
    COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER THE CRIMINAL LAW (FORENSIC PROCEDURES) BILL


      1) The Speaker, after consulting the Chief Whip of the Majority Party
         and senior whips of other parties in the Assembly, has decided, in
         terms of Rule 214, to establish an Ad Hoc Committee on the Criminal
         Law (Forensic Procedures) Bill, the committee to consider the
         Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Bill and report to the House by
         23 January 2009.


      2) The committee is to exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may
         assist it in carrying out its task.

      3) The committee is to consist of 13 members of the National Assembly,
         as follows: ANC 8, DA 2, IFP 1, and other parties 2.

SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
Date:  13 January 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 2
    December 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
    members of the Assembly of the employment of the SA National Defence
    Force for service in fulfilment of the international obligations of the
    Republic of South Africa to the Southern African Development Community
    (SADC):


CREDA INSERT - T090113e-insert1 - PAGE 8

                           MONDAY, 19 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

      2) The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
         Committee to consider the Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures)
         Amendment Bill:

         ANC
         Sotyu, Ms M M
         Sibanyoni, Mr J B
         Van Wyk, Ms A
         Johnson, Ms C
         Maunye, Ms M M
         Chohan-Kota, Ms F I
         Madasa, Adv Z L
         Mahote, Mr S
         Ntuli, Mr B (Alt)


         DA


         Delport, Dr J T
         Joubert, Adv L K


         IFP


         Seaton, Ms S A


         MF


         Rajbally, Ms S


         UDM
         Madikiza, Mr G T

      2) Mr S B Ntuli has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Defence with effect from 17 November 2008.

                          TUESDAY, 20 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
         Amendment Bill, 2009, submitted by the Minister for Provincial and
         Local Government.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government and the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.

                         WEDNESDAY, 21 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

      (1)   The following member has been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
         Joint Committee to Consider Matters in terms of Section 12 of
         National Prosecuting Authority Act:

         DA


         Schmidt, Adv H C (Alt)


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    The Budget and Strategic Plan of the  Auditor-General  of  South
         Africa for 2009-2012 [RP 288-2008].

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum  for
         2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)    Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee (CAFCOM) for 2007-2008.


4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for the year ended
         June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the
         Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Namakwa Water Board for the
        year ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle Northern Water for
        the year ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the year
        ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.
    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the year
        ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
        ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.
                          THURSDAY, 22 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    Skills Development Amendment Bill [B 49D – 2008] – Act No 37 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 27 November 2008).


   (2)      National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 35B – 2007] – Act
         No 44 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 3 December
         2008).

   (3)      Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of Interrupted
         Service) Bill [B 79 – 2008] – Act No 43 of 2008 (assented to and
         signed by President on 28 November 2008).
2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Cross Boundaries Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
             Matters Amendment Bill [B 3 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec
             75)

National Assembly

The Speaker

   1. Membership of Committees


        1) Mr O E Monareng  has been elected as Co-Chairperson of the Ad
           Hoc Joint Committee to Consider Matters in terms of Section 12
           of National Prosecuting Authority Act with effect from 14
           January 2009.


                           FRIDAY, 23 JANUARY 2009


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Government Notice No 1370 published in Government Gazette No
       31726 dated 15 December 2008: Commencement dates in terms of the
       Insurance Laws Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 27 of 2008).

    (b)    Government Notice No 11 published in Government Gazette No 31772
         dated 9 January 2009: Commencement dates in terms of the Special
         Pensions Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 13 of 2008).

    (c)     Government Notice No 1373 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Designation of which the activities
        do not fall within the meaning of “the business of a bank” (“Ithala
        Limited”, a wholly owned subsidiary of Ithaba Development Finance
        Corporation Limited), in terms of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of
        1990).


    (d)     Government Notice No R.1374 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/640), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R.1375 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1370), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R.1376 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1371), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (g)     Government Notice No R.1377 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/315), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No R.1378 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No 5/89),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91 of 1964).


2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


    (a)    Government Notice No R.1223 published in Government Gazette No
         31601 dated 14 November 2008: Amendment of regulations in terms of
         the Marine Living Resources Act, 2008 (Act No 18 of 1998).


    (b)     Government Notice No 1241 published in Government Gazette No
        31615 dated 21 November 2008: Intention to establish the Vaal
        Triangle Air-Shed Priority Area Air Quality Management Plan, in
        terms of the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act,
        2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


    (c)     Government Notice No 1242 published in Government Gazette No
        31615 dated 21 November 2008: Regulations: Implementing and
        enforcing the Vaal Triangle Air-Shed Priority Area Air Quality
        Management Plan, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


    (d)     Government Notice No 1346 published in Government Gazette No
        31694 dated 12 December 2008: Declaration of the Hantam National
        Botanical Garden, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


    (e)     Government Notice No 1358 published in Government Gazette No
        31707 dated 12 December 2008: Invitation to comment on the Draft
        Policy for the Allocation and Management of Medium-term Subsistence
        Fishing Rights, in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998
        (Act No 18 of 1998).


    (f)     Government Notice No 1380 published in Government Gazette No
        31715 dated 19 December 2008: Invitation for public comment on
        proposed increases and amendments in levies on fish and fish
        products, in terms of section 29 of the Sea Fishery Act, 1988 (Act
        No 12 of 1988).


    (g)     Government Notice No 1381 published in Government Gazette No
        31715 dated 19 December 2008: Invitation for public comment on
        proposed increases in the fees payable in respect of applications
        for and the issuing or granting of rights, permits and licences in
        terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1988 (Act No 18 of 1998).


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


    (a)    Government Notice No 1053 published in Government Gazette No
         31461 dated 3 October 2008: Standards matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    (b)    Government Notice No 1082 published in Government Gazette No
         31485 dated 10 October 2008: Standards matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).
    (c)    Government Notice No 1106 published in Government Gazette No
         31503 dated 17 October 2008: International Trade Administration
         Commission of South Africa: Export Control, in terms of the
         International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


    (d)    Government Notice No R.1123 published in Government Gazette No
         31520 dated 24 October 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
         specification for Replacement Brake Lining Assemblies for Road
         Vehicles, in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).
    (e)    Government Notice No R.1134 published in Government Gazette No
         31520 dated 24 October 2008: Proposed introduction of a compulsory
         specification for Motor Vehicles of Category L, in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


CREDA INSERT - T090123e-insert1 – PAGES 20-55


                          TUESDAY, 27 JANUARY 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
   1. Calling of Joint Sitting by President of the Republic:


      “CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
      COUNCIL OF PROVINCES



      In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
      South Africa, 1996, read with Rule 7(1)(a) of the Joint Rules of
      Parliament, I hereby call a joint sitting of the National Assembly and
      the National Council of Provinces on 06 February 2009 at 11:00, in
      order to deliver my annual address to Parliament.


      With kind regards


      KGALEMA MOTLANTHE”
KGALEMA MOTLANTHE

2.    Bill to be referred to Mediation Committee

    (1)     Bill, as amended by National Council of Provinces, and rejected
        by National Assembly on 27 January 2009, to be referred to
        Mediation Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186(2)(a):


         (a)      Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2D – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 76(1)).

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Draft Municipal Budget and Reporting Regulations in terms of
        section 169(2) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
        Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

2.    The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho on the Facilitation of
         Cross-Border Movement of Citizens of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Kingdom of Lesotho, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
         the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom
        of Lesotho on the Facilitation of Cross-Border Movement of Citizens
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of Lesotho.

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the year
         ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
         on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
         National Council of Provinces, as co-chairpersons of the Joint
         Rules Committee, present the Second Report of the Joint Rules
         Committee for 2008, as follows:

                SECOND REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE, 2008

         The Joint Rules Committee, having on 19 March 2008 considered the
         report of the Task Team on Oversight and Accountability in regard
         to the Oversight and Accountability Model and having agreed to the
         model in principle, recommends the model for consideration by the
         Assembly and the Council:

CREDA INSERT - T090127e-insert1 – PAGES 65-111


         Report to be considered.
         (The report is also available on www.parliament.gov.za)


National Assembly

 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture on the Bible
    Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70B - 2008] (National
    Assembly – Sec 75), dated 27 November 2008:

    The Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, having considered the
    Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70B- 2008] and
    proposed amendments of the National Council of Provinces
    (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 13 November 2008, p
    2135), referred to the committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B
    70C – 2008].

 2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the National Land
    Transport Bill [B 51D - 2008] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 27
    January 2009:

      The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered  the  National
      Land Transport Bill [B 51D  -  2008]  (National  Assembly  -  sec  76)
      amended by the National Council  of  Provinces  and  referred  to  the
      committee, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


CREDA INSERT - T090127e-insert3 – PAGES 112-124


