---
title: 'National Assembly - 24 March 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-03-24
---

TUESDAY, 24 MARCH 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the vacancies which occurred in the
National Assembly owing to the resignation of Mr L R R Reid, Mr M J
Malahlela and Mr L J Modisenyane, have been filled with effect from 5 March
2009, by the nomination of Mr F H Nkoana, Mr T P Sidina and Ms F Bikani
respectively.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)
The SPEAKER: Order! I also have to announce that the vacancies that
occurred due to the loss of membership of the National Assembly by Mr D V
Bloem and Ms E Ngaleka have been filled by the nomination of Ms L M Dunjwa
and Ms H B Mkhize respectively, with effect from 20 March 2009.

In terms of section 48 of the Constitution, members of the National
Assembly must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to
the Constitution before they begin to perform their functions in the
National Assembly.

                                    OATH

Ms Dunjwa and Ms Mkhize accompanied by Ms N P Khunou and Mr H P Maluleka
made and subscribed the oath and took their seats.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, welcome to the National Assembly. [Applause.] Hon
members, would you please welcome the new members. [Applause.]

              CRIMINAL LAW (FORENSIC PROCEDURES) AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move on
behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party:
   That the House —

    (1)     notes that the Ad Hoc Committee to consider the Criminal Law
         (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill was due to Report on 10 March
         2009;


    (2)     further notes that the Committee reported on 23 March 2009; and


    (3)     notwithstanding Rule 214(6)(c), condones the continued existence
         of and the work conducted by the Committee after its term had
         expired.

Agreed to.

              CRIMINAL LAW (FORENSIC PROCEDURES) AMENDMENT BILL

                          (Consideration of Report)

Ms M M SOTYU: Madam Speaker, the Ad Hoc Committee on the Criminal Law
Forensic Procedures Amendment Bill has considered the subject of the
Criminal Law Amendment Bill, that this Bill is one of the best tools to be
used in fighting crime. These amendments to the Bill came as a result of
the review of the criminal justice system and it was identified that there
is a need to strengthen the forensic investigative powers and the capacity
of the SA Police Service.

Currently, the Criminal Procedure Act 51 of 1977 only regulates the taking
of blood samples in criminal cases and the ascertainment of other bodily
features. After lengthy deliberations and consultation with the
stakeholders from different organisations and institutions, it became
obvious that the committee needed more time to pass this piece of
legislation. The committee is totally committed to the fight against crime
and views it as an absolute priority. We therefore recommend that the next
Parliament should be given enough time to consider this Bill as a matter of
urgency.

We would further like to make a request to the opposition parties to send
their members into the committee so that they should not come and oppose
whatever is being said by the ANC but be part of the processes. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker, May I request permission to make a statement
in this regard? Madam Speaker, I can motivate. When normally one agrees to
the fact that only the Chairperson will speak, then that is a fairly
neutral statement, it’s not a political statement as the hon Sotyu has just
made. And therefore I think it is the right of the opposition parties also
to respond briefly in one minute.

The SPEAKER: If you’d like to make declarations, I think that is in order.
You can then take your minute. You may come to the podium if you don’t
mind.

Dr J T DELPORT: I will! Gladly. [Applause.]

Declarations of vote:

Dr J T DELPORT: It is always a pleasure when you are in the Chair, Madam.
Madam Speaker, the remarks made by hon Sotyu were somewhat surprising. It
was quite clear right from the start that there was urgency for the
legislation to be passed and we did not accept that it was not possible at
all.

Two major issues were mentioned and are being mentioned in the report.
Firstly, the implementation plan - that’s absolutely not an argument,
because the implementation can take place over a period. You don’t first
have to ascertain whether you have suitably qualified people; you can train
them afterwards and then implement.

Secondly, there is the whole issue of whether the human rights or the
fundamental rights of an individual are transgressed when a sample is
taken. That is a question of law, and surely it is not necessary, as was
indicated this morning or yesterday in the committee meeting, that one
should travel to other countries to find out what the law is. It was
possible, and we regret that the implementation of this legislation was not
accepted - it could have been done and sorted out, and we regret that it
has not been done.

The SPEAKER: The only problem is, reference to what happened in the
committee is not going to help us much, but reference to what was said by
hon Sotyu is what we are now entertaining here.

Ms S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, the IFP supports the report. I am slightly at
odds with the hon Delport in this regard. I believe that there are a lot of
unanswered questions. There is definitely a need to proceed and to take
cognisance of the number of issues that the committee has raised as
concerns. Therefore, I believe that it is important that this work
continues, rather than be pushed through, as we have tried to do. There are
many, many unanswered questions. There are concerns with regard to human
rights and I believe it is important that we support the report and look to
further investigate the procedures and the concerns raised by the
committee. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, admittedly, the ACDP was not part of this
committee, due to other commitments, mainly being the issue relating to Mr
Pikoli. And yesterday, when we were at the committee meeting, we did
indicate that, from our perspective, we were disappointed that the Bill had
not been finalised and as of this morning, as the Chairperson indicated,
opposition parties should participate in the process. We fully endorse that
and we trust that, God willing, we will participate in this after the
elections, but at this stage we just want to highlight the fact that it was
members of the ANC themselves who indicated that they were disappointed
that the legislation had not been finalised. I think there is consensus
that everyone across the board is disappointed that the legislation had not
been finalised. In our view, it is a disgrace that at this stage the police
do not have access to fingerprints held by the Department of Home Affairs
and the Department of Transport. Obviously, the issue of DNA is also very
important.

We do believe, from the ACDP’s perspective, as indicated by ANC Member of
Parliament Fatima Chohan, that as of 18 February, there was still the
possibility of this legislation having been finalised. The reasons that
have been given in the report are, in our view, not compelling enough and
at that stage we believed that there had always been the possibility of
this urgent piece of legislation being finalised. However, we are all,
across all party lines, in agreement that this tool would be very effective
in fighting crime and we are disappointed that it has not been finalised.
Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Speaker, as ons gaan kyk na wat misdaad in Suid-Afrika
is, dan is dit eintlik skrikwekkend as ons sien dat in die afgelope vyf
jaar in die oorlog in Irak is ongeveer tussen 90 000 en 100 000 burgerlikes
in ’n hewige oorlog gedood. In Suid-Afrika, as ons na die afgelope vyf jaar
se moordsyfer in Suid-Afrika kyk, dan sien ons dat 95 000 burgerlikes in
Suid-Afrika gesterf het en vermoor is, waar ons sê dat ons in ’n
vredesituasie is.

As ’n mens gaan kyk na daardie omvang van misdaad in Suid-Afrika, is dit
uiters teleurstellend dat ons vandag hierheen moet kom om uitstel te kan
verleen sodat die proses verder kan verloop in terme van ons regstelsel en
die hersiening daarvan.

Die mense daarbuite word nog steeds vermoor. Ek wil daadwerklik vir u sê
dat die ANC te laat wakker geskrik het. Hy het ’n Minister van Veiligheid
en Sekuriteit en ’n President gehad wat die werklike toestand op grondvlak
net eenvoudig geïgnoreer het en eintlik in ’n staat van ontkenning was. Ek
het eenkeer hier in die Parlement gesê die grootste bedreiging vir die
veiligheid van ’n land is as sy Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit in ’n
staat van ontkenning is oor die omvang van misdaad, want dan weet hy nie
wat om te doen om daardie misdaad te voorkom nie.

Dit is jammerlik dat ons op hierdie situasie nog moet kom om verder uitstel
te verleen. Die misdadigers daarbuitekant verleen nie uitstel aan die
slagoffers wat die prys moet betaal nie. Ons het geen keuse nie, ons moet
maar aanvaar dat daar verdere geleentheid gegee word vir die komitee om sy
werk af te handel, maar die VF Plus vra dat dit spoedig moet wees dat die
aspekte in plek moet kom sodat die maatreëls kan begin geld om ons
onskuldige slagoffers daarbuite te kan begin beskerm. Dankie. (Translation
of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Speaker, when observing the crime situation in South
Africa, it becomes alarming to realise that over the past five years in the
fierce war situation in Iraq, between 90 000 and 100 000 civilians have
been killed. However, looking at the South African murder rate over the
past five years, we see that 95 000 civilians were murdered here, where we
claim to be in a state of peace.

Considering the true extent of crime in South Africa, it is very
disappointing to have to come here today in order to grant an extension so
that the process in terms of our legal system and its review can take its
course.

The people out there are still being murdered. I really want to tell you
that the ANC has woken up too late from its sleep. They have had a Minister
of Safety and Security and a President who simply ignored the true state of
affairs on the ground and were actually in a state of denial. I once stated
here in Parliament that the biggest threat to a nation’s security was when
its Minister of Safety and Security was in denial about the extent of
crime, because then he would not know what to do in order to prevent such
crime.

It is lamentable that we have to meet in this situation in order to grant a
further extension. The criminals out there are not granting any extensions
to the victims who have to pay the price. We have no choice and we simply
have to accept that further opportunity will be granted to the committee to
finalise its task, but the FF Plus is asking for all these aspects to be
resolved shortly so that the provisions may come into effect whereby our
innocent victims will be protected. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

   REFORM OF CUSTOMARY LAW OF SUCCESSION AND REGULATION OF RELATED MATTERS
                                    BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

   That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

  CONSIDERATION OF RECOMMENDATION FOR APPOINTMENT OF CANDIDATES TO NATIONAL
                       YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BOARD

Mr M JOHNSON: Speaker, today marks a historical moment for the youth of our
country. Indeed, your blood, Solomon Kalushe Mahlangu, is nourishing our
tree of freedom. Having gone through a process that saw the collapse of the
National Youth Commission and the imminent collapse of the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund, a National Youth Development Agency was promulgated.

Today we present a report to the national Parliament to endorse a
recommendation for the seven board members of the National Youth
Development Agency in order to exercise the able minds expected of all of
them. On 5 February 2009 a resolution was passed by the National Assembly,
and on 10 February 2009 also by the National Council of Provinces, to
consider the appointment of members of the board to the National Youth
Development Agency.

Accordingly, the committee placed advertisements in the national and
provincial newspapers, calling on members of the public to submit
nominations from 20 February 2009 to 6 March 2009 of persons to serve on
the board of the National Youth Development Agency. It was requested that
the nominee should be a South African citizen, comply with any other
requirements prescribed by the national legislation, in particular the
National Youth Development Act of 2008, and possess suitable
qualifications, expertise and experience in the area of youth and
development.

The advertisements appeared in 19 national and provincial newspapers. The
extent to which the youth of South Africa is alive and well is shown by the
173 nominations from members of the public and different institutions
received by this committee. The committee considered all the nominations on
9 and 10 March and agreed that 26 people be shortlisted. The names of those
shortlisted candidates were published in the Announcements, Tablings and
Committee Reports of 10 March.

Interviews were subsequently conducted on 12 and 13 March. The names
appeared, as I said, in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports.
The youngest of those was a 14-year-old boy, a Grade 8 pupil, Mr Khan, from
Rondebosch Boys’s High School. He showed confidence by applying and took
time off school. He displayed leadership qualities and is looking forward
to being a junior mayor of the city of Cape Town - lest Helen Zille is
watching. The committee acknowledges and commends him on his confidence and
his involvement with the developmental activities in his community. It was
worth noting that his interest and eventual participation in the interviews
was a confirmation of living up to the theme of a People’s Parliament in
action.

Young women and people with disabilities were also shortlisted and
interviewed. The committee acknowledges their qualities of leadership.
Having interviewed the candidates and deliberated on the performance of
each, supported by their experience and youth development work as well, the
committee overwhelmingly, led, of course, by our hon Swathe from the DA,
recommends the following persons to be appointed to the board of the
National Youth Development Agency. The names are as follows: Mr Khumalo, Ms
Tshabalala, Ms Makeleni, Mr Lungisa, Mr Pillay, Ms Motau and Mr Slabber
from the IFP.

We believe that together with these young board members prospectively, and
the broader society in general, we can do more in bettering the lives of
the young people of our country, our future. The ANC supports this
recommendation.

There was no debate.

Question put: That the following candidates be recommended for appointment
to the National Youth Development Agency Board: Mr M R Khumalo, Ms M
Tshabalala, Ms P Makeleni, Mr A Lungisa, Mr Y Pillay, Ms I Motau and Mr F J
Slabber.

Question agreed to.

Mr M R Khumalo, Ms M Tshabalala, Ms P Makeleni, Mr A Lungisa, Mr Y Pillay,
Ms I Motau and Mr F J Slabber accordingly recommended for appointment to
the National Youth Development Agency Board.

    CONSIDERATION OF SHORTLIST OF CANDIDATES FOR APPOINTMENT TO BOARD OF
                        TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION AGENCY

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Speaker and Members, we are talking about very important
lists here. This is a very important list process, so I suggest you listen
carefully. [Laughter.] The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology
met on Tuesday, 17 March 2009 to consider a shortlist of candidates
recommended to the Minister of Science and Technology by a panel, as
contemplated in the Technology Innovation Agency Act.

The Technology Innovation Agency Act provides for a board of the agency,
consisting of a chairperson, not less than six and not more than nine
members, and the chief executive officer of the agency as an ex officio
member. The board is responsible for the management and control of the
agency.

We wish to take this opportunity to commend the Minister and his panel on
the sterling work done and also congratulate the men and women who made it
onto this final list. Indeed, it is a final list. The Independent Electoral
Commission has no veto on this one. Five of the board members recommended
the serving chairpersons of the current Biotechnology Regional Innovation
Centres, and others are new and emerging. This is in line with our slogan
“Continuity and Change.”

In line with the legislation, the committee has given the Minister a list
of 15 names to select from. The committee was generally unanimous on these
appointments, except for two names, which the DA had some reservations
about. Their arguments were not convincing and they, however, accepted the
decision of the majority. I am sure they will just raise those arguments if
they want to. We are happy to recommend the 15 names as they are in the
Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, but, for the record, Dr M
Ramphele, Ms C Carolus, Mr A Lax, Mr R H R Norton, Dr S T Cornelius, Mrs H
Brown, Prof S Harrison, Mr G C Venter, Dr P Ngwenya, Mr M N Sobantu, Dr I
Surve, Prof A R Martin, Dr M O Albers, Mrs V Fatima, and Mr A K Gupta for
appointment to the board of the agency.

The ANC government continues to inspire confidence in the broad section of
the South African public about their future and the future of its economy.
Investment in research and development remains high on the agenda of our
developmental state and a critical stimulus for scientific innovation,
invention and improvement of the traditional manufacturing processes. We
recommend that these members be appointed to the board of the agency. The
ANC lives. The ANC leads. Our victory is certain. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Declaration of vote:

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Speaker, the Democratic Alliance has, throughout
the process of creating this Technology Innovation Agency Act, been in
favour of this piece of legislation and what it seeks to achieve. However,
in recent weeks, after we were handed the shortlist of candidates to serve
on the Technology Innovation Agency Board, it again became apparent that
the ANC was creating “baantjies for boeties” [jobs for pals], and we
witnessed how the governing party created jobs for pals and supporters on a
scientific board which is supposed to improve the nation’s creative ability
in various fields of industry.

I am not the only one saying this. Let me quote from this morning’s
Business Report. On the front page it says:

   The appointment of Transnet's group chief executive was delayed because
   the person recommended by the company's board was not the one favoured by
   the ANC, a source close to the party's head office, Luthuli House, said
   yesterday.

Speaker, dit doen afbreuk aan enige raad se effektiewe werking as politieke
aanstellings op so ’n raad seëvier. Dit belemmer ook die ander lede, wat
nie daar as politieke aanstelling sit nie, om hul werk behoorlik te doen.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Speaker, it is detrimental to the effective functioning of any board if
political appointments to such a board prevail. It also hinders the other
members, who are not there as political appointments, from doing their jobs
properly.]

One would expect that government demands that senior officials must spend
their time ensuring that smooth and effective running of their departments
takes place and that those officials should thus not be seconded to serve
on boards, which could and should be manned by competent people from the
private sector.

Die aanstelling van ’n provinsiale staatsamptenaar wat nie verbonde is aan
die Departement van Wetenskap en Tegnologie nie is ook nie vir ons
aanvaarbaar nie. Om ’n oud-ambassadeur op hierdie tegniese raad aan te stel
bevorder nie die land se innoveringspotensiaal nie. Om ’n hoof uitvoerende
amptenaar van ’n maatskappy aan te stel, eerder as tegniese bestuurders van
industrieë, is kortsigtig en teenproduktief. Dit dui net weer daarop dat
die ANC geensins bevoeg is om te onderskei tussen eiebelang en landsbelang
nie.

Laastens, om teen hierdie aanstelling te stem, bring die raadslede wat
daarop moet dien se persoonlike prestasies in gedrang, en daarom is die DA
nie te vinde daarvoor nie. ’n Verpolitisering van ’n tegniese raad is iets
waarteen die Parlement moet waak en standpunt moet inneem. Daarom maak die
DA beswaar teen die politieke mantel wat die ANC om rade van hierdie aard
hang. Die DA wil nogtans die raadslede gelukwens met hul aanstelling en die
vertroue uitspreek dat hul die ontwikkeling van tegnologie in Suid-Afrika
sal aanmoedig en bevorder.

Ek wil ook my dank uitspreek teenoor die Departement van Wetenskap en
Tegnologie se amptenare vir die steun wat hulle aan my, as Parlementslid,
gegee het oor die jare. Dit was werklik net op tegniese vlak wat ons mekaar
baie goed geken het, en daarom sê ek vir hulle baie dankie. Ek groet hulle
as vriende en wens hulle voorspoed toe in die belangrike taak wat hulle
doen in diens van ons land. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[We also find the appointment of a provincial public servant who is not
attached to the Department of Science and Technology unacceptable. To
appoint a former ambassador to this technical board does not promote the
innovation potential of this country. To appoint a chief executive officer
of a company rather than technical managers of industries is short-sighted
and counterproductive. It once again goes to show that the ANC is not in
any way qualified to distinguish between self-interest and the interests of
the country.

Finally, by voting against this appointment, the personal achievements of
the serving board members come under fire and the DA is not in favour of
this. The politicising of a technical board is something against which
Parliament must guard and take a stand. Therefore the DA objects against
the political cloak that the ANC is giving to these kinds of boards.
Nevertheless the DA wishes to congratulate the members on their appointment
and express the confidence that they will promote the development of
technology in South Africa.

I would also like to thank the employees of the Department of Science and
Technology for the support they have given me, as a Member of Parliament,
over the years. In reality we came to know one another very well only on a
technical level, and for that reason I would like to thank them. I greet
them as friends and wish them everything of the best for the important work
they do in the service of this country. Thank you very much.]

Question put: That the following list of candidates be recommended for
consideration for appointment to the Board of Technology Innovation Agency:
Dr M Ramphele, Ms C Carolus, Mr A Lax, Mr R H R Norton, Dr S T Cornelius,
Mrs H Brown, Prof. S Harrison, Mr G C Venter, Dr P Ngwenya, Mr M N Sobantu,
Dr I Surve, Prof A R Martin, Dr M O Albers, Mrs V Fatima and Mr A K Gupta.

Question agreed to.

The following list of candidates accordingly to be submitted to the
Minister of Science and Technology for consideration, for appointment to
the Board of Technology Innovation Agency: Dr M Ramphele, Ms C Carolus, Mr
A Lax, Mr R H R Norton, Dr S T Cornelius, Mrs H Brown, Prof. S Harrison, Mr
G C Venter, Dr P Ngwenya, Mr M N Sobantu, Dr I Surve, Prof A R Martin, Dr M
O Albers, Mrs V Fatima and Mr A K Gupta.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
               CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON FATHERS 4 JUSTICE

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON BUDGET VOTE 21: JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL
                                 DEVELOPMENT

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
 CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON PROGRESS REPORT ON NATIONAL POLICY FRAMEWORK
                    FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF SEXUAL OFFENCES

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
 CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON 2006/07 ANNUAL REPORT OF NATIONAL PROSECUTING
                                  AUTHORITY

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
   CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON 2006/07 ANNUAL REPORT OF OFFICE OF PUBLIC
                                  PROTECTOR

Ms C B JOHNSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ll be discussing the first three
reports, being items five, six and seven on the Order Paper. The first
report is a committee report by the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development dealing with Fathers 4 Justice.

Fathers 4 Justice is an NGO that actively campaigns for justice and
equality within the family law environment. They first approached the hon
Sybil Seaton, who then approached the portfolio committee to share with the
committee some of the problems that fathers in particular experience in the
justice system, particularly when it comes to access and custody
proceedings in respect of their children.

For example, some of these problems are the adversarial nature of our court
processes, the high costs of litigation, problems experienced in the office
of the family advocate and also problems that they experience with specific
pieces of legislation.
We took up the matter with the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development. We got a briefing and a progress report from the department,
and many of the issues have been satisfactorily resolved. And therefore,
the committee wishes to thank the department for the work that it has done
up to this point, in particular the work being done by Advocate Shereen
Said and her staff. And we hope that the relationship between Fathers 4
Justice and the department will be further facilitated in future.

We also hope that in the new term of Parliament, Fathers 4 Justice will
also engage the Portfolio Committee on Social Development, as many of the
problems that they raised result from the Children’s Act of which Social
Development is the lead department.

Then the second report is that in respect of Budget Vote 21 for the
department. The committee in this regard welcomes the progress that is
being made by the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development in
relation to various matters raised by the Auditor-General in his report,
including the management of third party funds, asset management, internal
controls to reduce fraud, the automation of the Guardian’s Fund and also
the steps taken by the department in addressing their problems of
underspending.

The committee also welcomes the progress on the building and renovation of
our courts so as to ensure greater access to justice to all our people,
particularly those in rural areas. And we hope that court buildings after
renovation at these courts will also be adequately staffed and properly
equipped to be able to perform their functions.

The committee also welcomes the reduction in the department’s vacancy rates
and commends the department on the work that is being done with regard to
transformation of the judiciary, in particular, the representation of women
on our bench. Also, the increased roll-out of the Thuthuzela Care Centres,
which greatly assist our victims of sexual offences, is also admirable and
we wish to support that.

There were only two areas of concern that the committee raised and that we
believe are being addressed, one being the high number of outstanding
backlog cases, particularly in our regional courts and, while the committee
does appreciate that many measures have been put in place to deal with this
problem, we believe that more can be done.

Finally, the committee noted that there have been certain serious break-ins
in our courts. The committee expressed its concern regarding the lack of
adequate security, but we do believe that this is being attended to as
well.

The last committee report is the one on the Criminal Law Sexual Offences
Act. In terms of the Criminal Law Sexual Offences Amendment Act, which this
House passed in 2007, the department must table its national policy
framework within one year. This date had been extended to March 2009, which
is exactly where we are at this point in time, and therefore the committee
requested a progress report from the department.

We were informed by the department that a lot has been done. A task team
has been put in place consisting of the department, the SA Police Service,
the National Prosecuting Authority, as well as the Department of Health and
the Department of Social Development.

Extensive consultation has taken place and a draft outline has been
submitted by the intersectoral committee. A further round of consultation
with civil society is, however, still required. While the committee is
concerned with the meeting of deadlines, we do appreciate - given the
importance of this very particular nature of the national policy framework,
the importance of public participation and extensive consultation – and we
do understand why the delay has been caused. We therefore support all three
of these reports. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY:  Madam Speaker, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Fathers 4 Justice accordingly adopted.

Report on Budget Vote 21: Justice and Constitutional Development
accordingly adopted.

Report on Progress Report on National Policy Framework for the Management
of Sexual Offences accordingly adopted.

Report on 2006/07 Annual Report of National Prosecuting Authority
accordingly adopted.

Report on 2006/07 Annual Report of Office of Public Protector accordingly
adopted.

    CONSIDERATION OF JOINT REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL
 SERVICES, PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND
 PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SAFETY AND SECURITY ON JOINT PUBLIC HEARINGS ON THE
                    REVIEW OF THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Joint Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 14:43.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         THURSDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      1) Membership of Committees


         The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Committees:
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         Appointed:    Sayedali-Shah, Moulana M R (Alt)


TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)    Reply from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to
         recommendations in the report by the Portfolio Committee on Water
         Affairs and Forestry on price increases of bulk resources (water)
         for the provision of municipal services – section 42 of the Local
         Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
         2003): Botshelo Water bulk water tariff increase

                            MONDAY, 2 MARCH 2009
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on Reform of Customary Law of Succession  and  Regulation  of
   Related Matters Bill [B10D – 2008]  (National  Assembly  –  section  76),
   dated 19 February 2009:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the Reform of Customary Law of Succession  and  Regulation  of
   Related Matters Bill [B10D  -2008]  (National  Assembly  –  section  76),
   amended by  the  National  Council  of  Provinces  and  referred  to  the
   Committee, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

   The Committee, however, wishes to make the following comments:

   1.  The  National  Council  of  Provinces  amended  the   definition   of
        “descendant” in clause 1 of the Bill to provide as follows:
        “‘descendant’ means a person who is a descendant in  terms  of  the
        Intestate Succession Act, and includes –
        (a)      a person who is not a descendant in terms of the Intestate
            Succession Act, but who, during the lifetime  of  the  deceased
            person, was accepted by the deceased person in accordance  with
            customary law as his or her own child;  and
        (b)      a woman referred to in section 2(2)(b) or (c).”.

   2. Clause 2(2)(b) and (c), provides as follows:
        “In the application of the Intestate Succession Act –
        (b)      a woman, other than the spouse of the deceased, with  whom
            he had entered into a union in accordance  with  customary  law
            for the purpose of providing children for  his  spouse’s  house
            must, if she survives him, be regarded as a descendant  of  the
            deceased;
        (c)      if the deceased was a woman who  was  married  to  another
            woman under customary law for the purpose of providing children
            for the  deceased’s  house,  that  other  woman  must,  if  she
            survives the deceased, be  regarded  as  a  descendant  of  the
            deceased.”.


   3. The Committee raised the question whether paragraph  (b)  of  the  new
        definition of “descendant” was necessary since clause  2(2)(b)  and
        (c) already states  quite  clearly  that  these  women  are  to  be
        regarded as descendants.  The Committee expressed the view that  to
        include these women in the definition  while  clause  2(2)  already
        deems them to be descendants amounts to tautology.

   4. The Committee, however –

        (a)      taking into account the benefits that will derive from the
             Bill when it is passed into law, particularly  for  women  and
             children;  and
        (b)      realising that any changes to the Bill at this late  stage
             shortly before Parliament is to dissolve for the 2009  general
             election, will probably give rise to a delay in  enacting  and
             implementing the Bill,
        has decided to approve the Bill as amended by the National  Council
        of Provinces, notwithstanding  its  reservations  about  the  above
        aspect.

   5. The Committee,  however,  requests  the  Department  to  consider  the
        reservations expressed and to  revert  to  Parliament  as  soon  as
        possible after the election, with an amendment if  the  definition,
        as it has been adapted by the National Council of Provinces,  could
        give rise to unintended consequences or if  it  would  improve  the
        quality of the Bill.

   6. The Committee wishes to express its concern about the speed  in  which
        the amended Bill was referred to it for finalisation and wishes  to
        communicate  its  concern  in   this   regard   to   all   relevant
        stakeholders, including the  National  Council  of  Provinces,  the
        programme  structures  in  Parliament  and  the  Department.    The
        Committee urges that we desist from dealing with draft  legislation
        in this manner in future.

Report to be considered.

 2.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on Fathers 4 Justice, dated 19 February 2009.

    The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development
    reports as follows:

    1.      Introduction

     1. The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development
        formed a Sub-Committee: Fathers 4  Justice  in  October  2008.  The
        Chairperson of the  Sub-Committee  was  Carol  Johnson,  MP  (ANC),
        member of the Justice Portfolio Committee, and the process has been
        facilitated by Sybil Seaton, MP (IFP), who is also a member of  the
        Sub-Committee.
    1.2     Fathers 4 Justice actively campaigns for justice,  equality  and
        transparency in family law. It is  involved  in;  arguing  for  the
        right of a child to see both parents after  separation;  contending
        that a strong gender bias exists within the family law system which
        has led to serious injustice and discrimination;  maintaining  that
        better and less adversarial ways are needed to manage the  divorce-
        access-custody system within a framework of  shared  parenting  and
        responsibilities; campaigning for reform and to raise awareness  of
        these issues; highlighting the consequences of parental  alienation
        syndrome; and providing support and advice on legal procedures  for
        those involved in custody and access cases.

    1.3     An initial meeting was held on 8  October  2008  with  the  sub-
        committee and the Regional-Co-ordinator  of  F4J  for  the  Western
        Cape, who briefed the Sub-Committee on the history and  origins  of
        Fathers 4 Justice. A  second  meeting  was  held  in  Durban  on  7
        November 2008 with the Regional Co-ordinator for Gauteng and the Co-
        ordinator for KwaZulu-Natal.


     4. At the meeting in Durban,  Fathers  4  Justice  elaborated  on  the
        systemic problems experienced by fathers  negotiating  the  various
        layers of the justice system in divorce/access/custody proceedings.
        They highlighted their concerns around the  adversarial  nature  of
        family law; the prohibitive costs of  litigation;  the  failure  to
        make mediation mandatory; the  prevalence  in  the  Office  of  the
        Family Advocate of subjective assessments and a lack of consistency
        and standardisation; problems around lack of statistics on how many
        fathers get joint or sole custody; no  educational  information  on
        the rights of fathers in the form of  leaflets  or  pamphlets;  the
        existence in the legal profession/justice  department/courts  of  a
        general  almost  institutionalised  mindset   which   predominantly
        favours the mother when it comes  to  awarding  custody/access  and
        feeds into negative stereotypes of the  father;  and  the  need  to
        promote shared parenting in the best interests of the  child  which
        would be greatly assisted if sections 33 and 34 of  the  Children’s
        Act 38 of 2005 were put into operation.

    2.      Issues considered

    2.1     The Sub-Committee acknowledged the seriousness of the issues and
        points to prevalent capacity  problems  in  the  Family  Advocate’s
        Office. It also noted that the changing of mindset, in terms  of  a
        pre-existing maternal bias was essential, but  was  also  something
        that would only  happen  over  time  and  through  persistence  and
        education.  Additionally,  reforms  in   family   law   to   ensure
        custody/access cases are dealt with on an individual basis in a non-
        adversarial atmosphere should also be linked to other areas in need
        of reform, such as problems around maintenance.


    2.2     The Sub-Committee committed itself to:

         o  Raise  the  issues  with  the   Department   of   Justice   and
           Constitutional Development (DoJ&CD), and specifically  with  the
           Director: Child Justice and Family Law – Promotion of the Rights
           of Vulnerable Groups.
         o Investigate the  possibility  of  liaising  with  the  Portfolio
           Committee on Social Development in  respect  of  the  Children’s
           Act.
         o  Determine  the  progress  of  the  South  African  Law   Reform
           Commission discussion document in terms of  the  development  of
           family/divorce mediation in South Africa and  the  investigation
           into the review of aspects related to the custody of and  access
           to minor children.
         o Determine the status of the Judicial Education Institute.
         o Invite Fathers 4 Justice to a full Portfolio  Committee  meeting
           in  February   2009   with   Department   officials   (including
           representatives  from   the   Family   Advocate’s   Office)   in
           attendance.
    3.      Actions by the Sub-Committee

    3.1      The  Chairperson  of  the  Sub-Committee  contacted  the  Chief
        Director:  Promotion  of  Rights  of  Vulnerable  Groups   at   the
        Department of  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,  Advocate
        Shireen Said, to arrange a meeting in  Cape  Town  on  11  December
        2008. The Department responded to the issues raised and:

              i) Requested that Fathers 4 Justice be encouraged to  approach
                 the DoJ&CD in a  more  structured  way.  In  past  meetings
                 representatives  from  Fathers  4  Justice  have  not  been
                 consistent in identifying  and  prioritising  the  problems
                 they want addressed by the Department.
             ii) Indicated that a policy framework has  been  developed  for
                 the  implementation  of  the  remaining  sections  of   the
                 Children’s  Act,  however,  a  multi-sectoral  approach  is
                 required  with  the  Department  of   Social   Development.
                 Sections 33 and 34 of the Act, which  deal  with  parenting
                 plans, are new to South  African  law  and  have  budgetary
                 implications - this  has  meant  the  re-prioritisation  of
                 funds. There are also training components; Family Advocates
                 require training; and family counsellors must be  appointed
                 and trained in mediation skills. Analysis of case flow will
                 take place to ensure there are enough personnel.
            iii) Acknowledged that the adversarial system  is  not  suitable
                 for every case and there is a need to promote the shift  to
                 shared-parenting and to focus on mediation and  restorative
                 justice. There has been a  shift  in  the  courts  but  the
                 Department  needs  to  determine  if  there  has   been   a
                 measurable change. The implementation plan for the Judicial
                 Education Act 14 of 2008, which  provides  for  a  judicial
                 education institute, is being developed.
             iv) Indicated that it has a budget for production of  pamphlets
                 and highlighted the need to provide  balanced  information.
                 The  Department  queried  the  appropriateness  of  a   new
                 pamphlet released by Fathers 4 Justice entitled - Rights of
                 the Father - which condemns the DoJ&CD for inaction.


     2. Due to time constraints and limitations due  to  the  parliamentary
        programme it was  not  possible  to  arrange  a  meeting  with  the
        Portfolio Committee on Social Development before Parliament rises.


     3.  The  Sub-Committee  established  that  South  African  Law  Reform
        Commission (SALRC) investigation envisages the development  of  new
        legislation to facilitate mediation in  family  law.  A  discussion
        paper is being finalised and the process around providing  comments
        provides an opportunity for Fathers 4 Justice to contribute to  the
        draft legislation. The incoming  Committee  may  possibly  want  to
        monitor the progress of the report.


    3.4     The Sub-Committee also established that the implementation  plan
        for the Judicial Education Institute  is  being  finalised  by  the
        Department. The curriculum will highlight social context and gender
        based issues. The incoming Committee will, in  all  likelihood,  as
        part of its oversight role, monitor progress of the  institute  and
        the training programmes to ensure the  curriculum  provides  for  a
        balanced and gender neutral perspectives on family law matters.


    4.      Committee meeting with stakeholders

     1. On 18 February 2009 a meeting of the full Portfolio  Committee  was
        held. In attendance were representatives from Fathers 4 Justice and
        the Department.
     2. Fathers 4 Justice emphasised their focus on parental  equality  and
        responsibility  and  need  for  equal  access  to  children.   They
        expressed their desire to work with the  Family  Advocate’s  office
        and the Department in co-operative projects  and  to  raise  public
        awareness.


     3. The Department queried the unfounded allegations made by Fathers  4
        Justice regarding meetings with  the  Department  and  submitted  a
        summary  document  to  the  Committee  of  all  correspondence  and
        meetings. They also submitted a report which  recommended  that  as
        the  lead  Department  in  implementing  the  Children’s  Act,  the
        Department of Social Development should be  invited  to  report  on
        aspects relating to the implementation of the  Act.  The  remaining
        sections of the Children’s Act are scheduled to be implemented on 1
        April 2009; however, this is dependent  on  the  regulations  being
        approved. The Department pointed to the restorative aspects of  the
        Children’s Act which seek to reduce acrimony through  family  group
        conferencing, lay forums, and mediation. Educational leaflets  will
        be produced when all sections of the Act are finally implemented.


     4.  While  acknowledging  the  challenge  of  changing  mindsets,  the
        Department stated that as part of  its  analysis  of  jurisprudence
        analysing the trends of the courts, it would seek the trends in  so
        far as which parents obtained custody. The Family Advocate’s Office
        also accepted that standardisation in approach was needed and  they
        are transforming in this regard. The focus must always  be  on  the
        best interests of the child. The Department also provided a summary
        of the key action steps taken in respect of the establishment of  a
        judicial education institute, which involves the establishment of a
        council, acquisition of a  permanent  site  and  development  of  a
        curriculum.

     5. Committee’s response


     1. The Committee appreciates the work done by the Department and hopes
        that improved communication  and  co-operation  between  Fathers  4
        Justice and the Department will be facilitated.


     2.  The  Committee  has  serious  reservations  about   the   sweeping
        statements which border on misrepresentation contained  in  certain
        of the Fathers 4 Justice pamphlets and Fathers 4  Justice  need  to
        rectify this urgently. Moreover, they should not misrepresent their
        interactions with the Department and should ensure they are precise
        and consistent in their communications.


     3. The Committee feels that Fathers 4 Justice need to also engage with
        the Portfolio Committee on Social Development in the  new  term  of
        Parliament, given that the Department of Social Development is  the
        primary  role-player  in  the  implementation  of  the  outstanding
        sections of the Children’s Act.


     4. The Committee believes that it is critical that Fathers  4  Justice
        prioritise the issues they want the Department to address. If  they
        seek assistance, both from the Department and/or Parliament, on the
        matters  they  raise  they  need  to  be  more   focused   and   to
        strategically engage with specific issues.


     5. The Committee expresses the hope that Fathers 4 Justice will become
        more  representative,  so  as  include  more  members  from   other
        communities and disadvantaged groups in our society.


     6. The Committee requests that Fathers 4  Justice  submit,  within  14
        days, concrete proposals for the Committee to include in  its  exit
        report.

     6. Acknowledgements

     1. The Committee recognises  the  considerable  efforts  of  the  Sub-
        Committee Co-Chair, Ms Carol Johnson, and thanks her for it.


     2. The Committee acknowledges with appreciation the very valuable work
        done by the Researcher, Ms  Gulian  Nesbitt  in  assisting  in  the
        processing of this matter and in the shaping of the report.


        Report to be considered.

 3.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on Budget Vote 21: Justice and  Constitutional  Development,
    dated 19 February 2009
    The Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
    having  considered  Budget   Vote   21:   Justice   and   Constitutional
    Development, reports as follows:

    1.      Introduction


    1.1     The briefings on the budget of the Ministry and Department of
        Justice and Constitutional Development took place on 6 and 7 May
        2008.


    1.2     Those who appeared before the Committee for the briefings on the
        budget included Minister B Mabandla; Deputy Minister J de Lange;
        Director General (DG), M Simelane; Deputy Directors General (DDGs),
        S Jiyane, and D Rudman (Legislative Development); Acting Chief
        Financial Officer (CFO), J Johnson; Chief Directors, P Du Randt
        (Court Services), JB Skosana (Policy), B Mbonani ((Acting)
        Strategy), T Ramanyimi, M Sejosengwe, N Makuhubele; Chief State Law
        Advisor, E Daniels; Deputy Chief State Law Advisor, A Johaat;
        Director: Office of the Chief Litigation Officer, N Gawula;
        (Acting) National Director of Public Prosecutions,  M Mpshe;
        (Acting) Deputy National Director of Public Prosecutions, S
        Mzinyathi; (Acting) Chief Executive Officer - NPA, B Simelane;
        Chief Financial Officer - NPA, B Graham; Executive Manager - NPA, D
        Mvelase; (Acting) Executive Manager: Strategy - NPA, K van
        Rensburg.


    1.3     The DG, was only able to attend the Budget briefings for most of
        the first day and not at all on the second day, as he had to attend
        the Ginwala Inquiry hearings on the suspension of the National
        Director of Public Prosecutions. In view of the importance of the
        Ginwala Inquiry, the Committee agreed that the DG could absent
        himself from part of the briefings. It is only because of the
        exceptional circumstances that the Committee agreed to this, but we
        are clear that in general a parliamentary committee’s processing of
        a Department’s budget cannot be done without the full presence and
        participation of a DG.


    1.4     This report gives a brief summary of the presentations made by
        the Department to the Committee, focusing mostly on its
        achievements in the previous financial year, the key activities
        planned for 2008/09, and the challenges to be dealt with. The
        presentations can be obtained from the Committee Secretary, Ms P
        Sibisi.


    1.5     This report should be located in the context of the Committee’s
        “Report on the Annual Report of the Department of Justice and
        Constitutional Development” published in the ATC of 21 November
        2007 and the Committee’s 2008 programme, “Managing the Challenges:
        Too Much Legislation, Too Little Oversight, Too Limited Time”. The
        programme notes: “This year is special because: this is the final
        year of our five-year term; we have a huge legislative load; this
        is an “election year”; and Parliament will be sitting for a shorter
        period than usual”.  Given the huge workload of the Committee, we
        were not able to adequately engage with the Department’s budget;
        and the time period allocated for considering the budget was too
        short; and so the report is not as rigorous and forward-looking as
        we would like it to be; but we hope it will be of some use to the
        new Committee after the next elections as it decides to take
        matters forward.


    1.6     This report reflects too much of what the Department had to  say
        and not enough of the Committee’s views. This is largely an outcome
        of the pressures referred to above, and the inadequate way in which
        we managed the exchange with the Department during  the  briefings.
        The Committee did not effectively engage with the Department on its
        Strategic Plan and needs to do so  at  the  next  quarterly  budget
        briefing with the Department. The value, however, of  covering  the
        Department’s presentations in such detail is that it  provides  the
        Committee with a useful  basis  to  more  effectively  monitor  the
        Department’s progress and more  rigorously  fulfill  its  oversight
        role.


    1.7     The Committee is meant to have a  quarterly  briefing  from  the
        Department  to  review  progress  on  the  implementation  of   its
        Strategic and Business Plans. The first quarterly briefing for  the
        year was called off because of time constraints,  but  despite  the
        difficult year ahead, the Committee must continue to have quarterly
        briefings from the Department; and we should  pursue  many  of  our
        concerns that we did not raise at the budget  briefings,  at  these
        quarterly briefings.


    2.      Minister’s Political Overview


    2.1     The Minister referred to the Department’s key policy priorities,
        which are to enable access to justice for all; enhance
        organisational efficiency; and transform the legal and justice
        system. These priorities guide the work for which the Budget is
        allocated and for which the Department must account.


    2.2     The Minister provided an overview of certain weaknesses in the
        Department’s financial management, which have required the
        Department’s urgent attention, namely asset management, the
        management of Monies-in-Trust, under-spending and supply chain
        management. The Minister informed the Committee on the following
        progress:


    An independent stock-take of moveable assets has been performed and it
        is expected that an accurate asset register will be compiled by mid-
        May 2008.
    A tender evaluation process for the Monies-in-Trust has been concluded.
        The tender process should be finalised by July 2008. The chosen
        service provider is expected to conclude the system development by
        September/October 2008 and full implementation should begin in
        January 2009.
    The Accounting Officer has approved a revised personnel structure for
        the supply chain management division in compliance with the
        framework prescribed by National Treasury. Fifteen positions have
        been advertised, while an additional nineteen positions will be
        advertised once the job evaluation process has been completed.
    There has been an improvement in the Department’s ability to spend its
        budget (from 92.7% in 2006/07 to 97.7% in 2007/08). A further
        breakdown of spending per economic classification reveals that in
        2007/08, the Department spent 99.4% of its budget for personnel and
        operational expenditure. However, it only spent 77% of its budget
        for the procurement of buildings and fixed structures. A major
        reason for the under-expenditure is that the Department relies on
        the Department of Public Works (DPW) for the timely submission of
        invoices.


    2.3     The Minister highlighted key achievements for 2007/08 aimed at
        improving access to justice for all, which is closely linked to the
        Department’s transformation agenda. Of particular importance is
        that the Department is providing courts where previously there were
        none. Four courts have been completed and are ready for opening
        this year (in Daveytown, Middledrift, Sekgosese and Waterval). In
        2008/09, the Department intends to complete the construction of
        five courts, as well as add to or convert five existing courts. The
        Department has also begun the process of developing a further six
        courts, of which the Soweto Magistrates’ Court, and the Mpumalanga
        and Limpopo High Courts have been prioritised.
    2.4     The redesignation of certain courts is a priority. The spatial
        distribution of the magistrates’ courts still reflects the old
        system of demarcation which was based on racial and geo-political
        separation, creating vast disparities in the court infrastructure
        and resources of formerly White and Black areas. Typically,
        communities living in townships and former Bantustans were served
        by branch and periodical Courts, which provided limited criminal
        law adjudication. There are 90 branch Courts and 246 periodical
        courts. These courts exercise the jurisdiction of the main court in
        the district and do not have a budget or any staff of their own.
        Most of the periodical courts are in police stations, while a few
        were on private farms. While the periodical courts on private farms
        have ceased to operate, processes are underway to replace those in
        police stations with circuit courts. Twenty-three of the branch
        Courts will be redesignated as full courts with effect from 1
        August 2008 or as soon as it is practical. This will have a huge
        impact on service delivery as these courts will provide a full
        range of services (criminal, civil, family law and the services of
        the Master of the High Court).


    2.5     The immediate benefits of the redesignation of these identified
        branch Courts include: the reduction of traveling costs; the
        alleviation of congestion in the main courts; meeting the needs of
        communities in certain rapidly growing areas, such as Midrand and
        Khayelitha; and the more efficient management of resources.


    2.6     The Minister informed the Committee that the Department has been
        able to reduce its vacancy rates from 23% to 12%. This includes the
        recruitment of key administrative staff (court managers, clerks of
        court and maintenance officers) as well as judges and magistrates.


    2.7     The modernisation of courts has also been a priority. In this
        regard, the Minister informed the Committee that large numbers of
        officials have been trained to use the justice deposit account
        system. This, in turn, has improved its ability to process
        maintenance payments.


    2.8     A review of the criminal justice system is currently being
        undertaken in conjunction with Business Against Crime. This
        initiative focuses on establishing:


    A new coordinating and management structure for the criminal justice
        system.
    An integrated and seamless information technology system and database.
    The modernisation of all aspects of the criminal justice system.


    2.9     The Minister informed the Committee that the Department
        introduced nine Bills in 2007/08. Other Bills, including on floor-
        crossing, the Directorate of Special Operations, and the regulation
        of video-postponements and the expungement of criminal records will
        be introduced in this financial year.


    2.10    A policy document on the transformation of the judiciary is
        being drafted and will be released soon. Also, a key aspect of the
        transformative agenda is the establishment of professional skills
        within the judiciary.


    2.11    The Minister reported that there has been some progress in
        improving the representation of women on the Bench. Nineteen women
        practitioners recently underwent a specially designed judicial
        education programme and will soon be appointed as acting judges. A
        further intake of 23 women to undergo the same programme is planned
        for June 2008. The Department has also been active in the formation
        of the South African Women Lawyers Association (SAWLA).


    2.12    The Department has also engaged in activities involving foreign
        jurisdictions, for example it has embarked on a programme to assist
        the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in improving its court
        system.


    2.13    While recognizing the challenges, the Committee feels that the
        work on the overhaul of the criminal justice system should be
        accelerated, and the key proposals, even if they are still
        tentative, should be brought before the parliamentary committees in
        the Peace and Stability cluster as soon as possible. The public,
        through Parliament and by other means, should also be given space
        to comment on the emerging new integrated criminal justice system,
        especially as the new system will, it seems, provide for greater
        public participation through enhanced Community Policing Forums and
        Community Safety Forums and other means. In any case, a new
        integrated criminal justice system is of major interest to the
        public – and, surely, it is in the interest of the executive to
        communicate its work on this and get responses from the public,
        organised civil society stakeholders, academic and other experts,
        and others?


    2.14    The Committee welcomes the progress in rectifying the matters
        that were raised by the Auditor-General in his report for the year
        ending 31 March 2007, as well as a number of other issues that the
        Committee had identified flowing from its review of the
        Department’s Annual Report for 2006/07. Such matters include the
        management of Third-Party Funds, asset management, the tightening
        of internal control to reduce fraud, improving controls relating to
        the Department’s information systems, progress in automating the
        management and administration of the Guardian’s Fund, and the
        implementation of the Justice Account Deposit system. The Committee
        is not fully apprised of these issues and will pursue them further
        with the Department, and also send representatives to the meeting
        of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts to be held in June to
        monitor progress in this regard.


    2.15    The Committee welcomes progress on the building and renovation
        of courts as well as the re-designation of courts. While
        recognizing that the Department is dependent on DPW for this, the
        Committee feels that this sub-programme needs to be accelerated,
        especially in view of the importance of ensuring greater access to
        justice. The Committee wants to see far more progress in respect of
        periodical courts, especially in police stations being phased out.
        Of course, the court-building and renovation projects needs to be
        closely linked to other aspects of ensuring greater access to
        justice, for example, by ensuring that the new buildings are
        adequately staffed and properly equipped to fulfill their
        functions.


    2.16    The Committee believes that it is crucial that the Ministry
        effectively consults judges and other relevant stakeholders before
        finalizing its policy framework on the transformation of the
        judiciary and the Bills flowing from this.


    2.17    The Committee welcomes the reduction in the Department’s vacancy
        rates and expects that this will lead to it being more effective.


    2.18    The Committee commends the improvement in the representation of
        women on the bench and is keen to see more effective progress in
        this regard.


    2.19    The Committee fully supports the Department’s assistance to the
        DRC referred to in section 2.12 above.


    2.20    The Committee feels that there is not enough of an alignment
        between the President’s “State of the Nation” address and the
        Department’s plans and would like to see greater synergy in this
        regard, and will certainly monitor developments in this regard. In
        considering next year’s budget, the Committee will expect to see
        greater alignment between the “State of Nation” address and the
        Department’s plans.


    3.      Overview of the Budget


    3.1     The DG, Mr M Simelane, expanded on the Minister’s overview,
        providing further details. He told the Committee that, as a result
        of historical processes, the Department deals with many extraneous
        matters that do not form part of its core business. While it is
        slowly trying to reduce its role in such matters, this remains a
        challenge.


    3.2     With regard to Court Services, the construction of courts should
        be the Department’s biggest area of work. It is, however,
        constrained by the processes that surround capital works projects.
        The DG also informed the Committee that the Department is grossly
        underfunded in this regard. An added factor is that the
        Department’s previous under-spending has impacted negatively on the
        allocation of funds to it by National Treasury.


    3.3     The DG addressed the problem of the shortage of office
        accommodation, particularly for judicial officers. He informed the
        Committee that the Department is discussing with the National
        Prosecuting Authority (NPA) the possible relocation of prosecutors
        to office accommodation that is not situated within court
        buildings.


    3.4     The DG also informed the Committee of the need for more
        professional staff within the Department, particularly at the
        Courts and in the Master’s Office. While historically certain
        functions have been performed by administrative staff, these, he
        argued, would be more usefully done by legal graduates.


    3.5     The Department has now made all of its forms available
        electronically so that the public no longer need to go to a court
        to get the forms they need. Unfortunately, as yet, these forms
        cannot be submitted to the Department electronically but the
        intention is that, in future, it will be possible to do so.


    3.6     The DG informed the Committee that there are approximately 110
        disciplinary matters involving fraud and theft. Very often it is
        poor financial management in the courts that has contributed to the
        theft of monies. To address this problem, the Department has not
        only focused on strengthening its financial procedures but also on
        creating a culture of compliance through awareness, training and
        discipline. In addition to laying a criminal charge, the Department
        intends suing for the recovery of monies that have been stolen.


    3.7     The Chief Financial Officer, Mr J Johnson, provided an overview
        of the key financial aspects of the budget:


    In 2007/08, the Department spent R7.36 billion or 97.7% of its final
        Budget, which is a significant improvement on its expenditure in
        2006/07, which was 92.4% of its final Budget. Analysis of spending
        per economic classification reveals that difficulties in
        expenditure occurred mainly in connection with “payments for
        capital assets”.
    The main appropriation to the Department increases from R7.5 billion in
        the 2007/08 financial year to R8.3 billion in 2008/09. This amount
        does not include a direct charge against the National Revenue Fund
        of R1.4 billion for judges and magistrates’ salaries, which brings
        the main appropriation for 2008/09 to R9.7 billion.
    Over the MTEF, the Department receives new allocations to its baseline
        of R256.3 million in 2008/09; R404.5 million in 2009/10; and R537.8
        million in 2010/11.


    3.8     These new allocations are for the following policy priorities:


    Increased capacity in the Legal Aid Board.
    IT modernization projects via the Integrated Justice System (IJS)
        programme.
    Implementation of the Public Service Co-ordinating Bargaining Council
        (PSCBC) Resolution 1 of 2007, which sets out the agreement reached
        concerning salaries and other conditions of service for the years
        2007/08 to 2010/11, in the Department.
    Charges for rental accommodation.
    The appointment of additional magistrates and judges.


    3.9     The CFO highlighted the following achievements relating to the
        Department’s financial management in 2007/08:


    As mentioned above, expenditure has increased from 92.7% to 97.7%.
    Within the year, spending has improved and the March spike has decreased
        from 16% of total expenditure in previous years to 13% in 2007/08.
    Early re-prioritisation of monies was used to fund scanners (R36
        million), CCTV interface for children’s courts (R25 million), and
        the funding of Legal Aid Board cases (R16.8 million).


    3.10    The Department expects the following spending pressures in
        2008/09:


    A number of capital works projects are due to be finalised during the
        first quarter of the new financial year.
    The Department intends submitting a rollover application of R117 million
        for approval by National Treasury. This is R117 million for the
        payment of capital work projects in progress.
    The impact of salary agreements (specifically, the Occupation Specific
        Dispensation (OSD) for legally qualified personnel) will most
        likely require that the Department request an additional
        appropriation later in the year.
    The Department is funding new courts with no concurrent additional
        allocations for personnel and operational expenditure.


    3.11    The Committee, as noted in 1.6 above did not adequately engage
        with the Department on its Strategic Plan.


    3.12    The Committee welcomes the reduction in under-spending.
        Obviously, though, it is the quality of the spending that is also
        crucial.


    3.13    As noted in 2.15 above, the Committee would like to see greater
        progress on the court-building project. We support an increase in
        funding for the court-building sub-programme. We note with concern
        that there is no concurrent additional allocations for personnel
        and operational expenditure despite the building of new courts, and
        will pursue this matter with the Department at the Committee’s next
        quarterly meeting on progress on implementing the Department’s
        Strategic and Business Plans.


    3.14    The Committee is not clear about the implications of moving
        prosecutors from the court buildings and will pursue this further
        with the Department.


    3.15    The Committee welcomes the availability of forms electronically
        that people would otherwise have to go to the courts to get.
        Obviously, these forms should be able to be submitted
        electronically as well, and this should be made possible as soon as
        possible.


    3.16    The Committee welcomes the increased allocations for the
        appointment of additional magistrates and judges, and for increased
        capacity of the Legal Aid Board. The Committee will pursue further
        with the Department exactly what the full needs are in regard to
        this and how these increased allocations measure up to these needs.


    3.17    The Committee would like to be briefed on developments in
        respect of the disciplinary matters on fraud and theft at the next
        quarterly budget briefing.


    3.18    The Committee is keen to see progress on the capital works
        projects referred to in 3.10 above.


    4.      Programme 1: Administration


     1.  The  Administration  programme  includes  the  management  of  the
        Department;  development  of  strategies  and  policies   for   the
        efficient administration of justice;  and  research,  including  on
        improving legislation  and  making  Constitutional  amendments.  It
        comprises five sub-programmes, namely  Minister,  Deputy  Minister,
        Management, Corporate Services and Property Management.


     2. The Administration programme receives R941 million, which comprises
        11.6% of the Department’s budget.


     3. The Corporate Services sub-programme  dominates  expenditure  under
        this programme, consuming 51% of the programme’s  budget.  Property
        Management follows, with 41%.


     4. The Administration programme achieved the following in 2007/08:


         • The approved staff establishment as at 31 March 2008 was 16  415
           with  2  716  vacancies,  of  which  1  978  (12%)  were  funded
           vacancies.  The  funded  vacancy  rate  has  been  significantly
           reduced from 23% in 2006/07 to 12% in 2007/08.
         • With regard to the rollout of basic IT infrastructure, 529 (94%)
           sites country wide have been networked. This  has  included  the
           provision of ICT infrastructure, hardware, various  applications
           and IT literacy training. Seven sites are outstanding –  six  of
           which are  under  construction,  while  the  remaining  site  is
           waiting for Telkom connectivity.
         • E-scheduler, which is an electronic case management system  that
           allows courts to schedule cases properly  and  to  identify  and
           address backlogs and blockages,  has  been  implemented  in  469
           courts. There are six e-scheduler sites  that  are  outstanding,
           five of which are under construction.
         • The Justice Deposit Account System (JDAS) was rolled out to  431
           sites, while the ‘Payment Anywhere’ module  has  been  developed
           and is ready for implementation.
         • To strengthen  the  functioning  of  procurement  activities,  a
           revised personnel establishment for the supply chain  management
           division  in  full  compliance  with  the  management  framework
           prescribed by National Treasury has been approved.
         • On the issue of court security, 127 courts are  to  be  secured.
           The tender process is at the final stages of evaluation.
         • On the Cyberia group matter, there  is  a  full  internal  audit
           report and a second legal opinion is  being  obtained  before  a
           final decision is made.


     5. Key concerns that have been identified by the Department  for  this
        financial year include the filling of vacancies, strengthening  the
        Department’s financial management systems,  addressing  limitations
        in the Department’s IT and improving its communications section.


    4.6     The Committee welcomes the significant reduction in vacancies,
        but, of course, the real test will be improvements in service
        delivery flowing from the increased staff. The Committee is
        concerned that the Department’s human resource development plan
        remains outstanding contrary to Public Service Regulations and
        requests the Department to report on the progress it has made on
        this at the next quarterly budget briefing


    4.7     The Committee welcomes progress on the e-Scheduler and other
        technological roll-outs.


    4.8     The Committee discussed quite extensively with the Department
        the controversy that surrounds the award of a tender to the Cyberia
        Group, as well as the steps that it has taken to deal with matter.
        It would seem that there may be systemic problems in the award of
        tenders that require addressing. The Committee was told that there
        is a report of the internal audit committee dealing with the
        matter. If possible, the Committee would like to be briefed on this
        report. We certainly expect to be briefed on progress regarding
        this matter at the next quarterly budget briefing.


    4.9     The Committee will monitor progress in regard to achieving the
        goals set out in 4.5 above.


    5.      Programme 2: Court Services


    5.1     The Court Services  programme  provides  and  manages  efficient
        court services, and facilitates the resolution of  criminal,  civil
        and family law matters.


    5.2     The allocation to  Court  Services  allows  it  to  further  the
        Department’s key strategic priorities by:

         •  Ensuring  that  there  are  sufficient  and  appropriate  court
           buildings, facilities and infrastructure  so  as  to  facilitate
           access to justice.
         • Providing support to vulnerable groups.
         • Implementing an effective  court  management  system,  including
           case flow management and ensuring  quality  and  cost  effective
           court services.
         • Transforming and improving customer relations/services,  thereby
           promoting greater confidence in the justice system.
         • Creating the space for the Department to participate in  Justice
           and  Crime  Prevention  Strategy  (JCPS)   cluster   activities,
           including through implementing  the  Integrated  Justice  System
           (IJS) programmes, improving the effectiveness  of  the  criminal
           justice system, reducing the backlog of cases and  dealing  with
           sexual offences.


    5.3     It is a major priority programme of the Department and  receives
        42% of the overall budget. Court Services  has  10  sub-programmes:
        Constitutional  Court;  Supreme  Court  of  Appeal;  High   Courts;
        Specialised Courts; Lower  Courts;  Family  Advocate;  Magistrate’s
        Commission; Government Motor Transport; Facilities Management;  and
        Administration of Courts.


    5.4     The Court Services programme receives R3.4 billion for  2008/09.
        The Lower Courts sub-programme  once  again  dominates  expenditure
        receiving 64% of the overall programme allocation. This is in  line
        with the Department’s objective of improving access to justice  and
        services.


    5.5      The  presentation  highlighted  a  number  of  achievements  in
        2007/08, as well as continuing activities in 2008/09:


         • Six courts were completed and are ready for official opening. In
           addition, this year (2008/09) construction of  five  courts,  as
           well as additions or conversions  to  five  existing  courts  is
           planned. During 2008/09, the development process  for  six  more
           courts will begin.
         • Ongoing activities  to  improve  court  efficiency  include  the
           rollout of the digital court recording system, the piloting  and
           further extension of the audio video postponement  project,  the
           continued implementation of the case flow management system, the
           further development of a Justice Management  Information  System
           to enhance capacity to collect information for the  purposes  of
           monitoring court performance and initiation of the case  backlog
           reduction project.

      . The Court Services programme’s focal areas for 2008/09 include:


       • Facilities  management  and  Restoration  and  Maintenance  Project
         (RAMP).
       • Family advocacy, maintenance, child justice and alternative dispute
         resolution (ADR).
       • Monitoring and improving court performance.
       • Improving budget expenditure and project management.


     7. Some of the priorities identified by  the  Department  for  2008/09
        include the need to improve its case flow management system, reduce
        case backlogs and improve the facilities and infrastructure of  the
        courts.


    5.8     The Committee’s views on the building of courts are noted in
        sections 2.15 and 3.13 above, The Committee further notes the
        Department’s intention to re-designate certain branch courts, as
        this will not only enhance access to justice, but improve
        operational efficiency by allowing court managers to plan the
        optimal use of their courts. This should extend the number of hours
        the courts sit, contributing to enhanced court performance.


    5.9     The Committee, once again, notes its concern at the general
        decline in court performance, as well as the high number of
        outstanding and backlog cases, particularly in the regional courts.
        This concern was expressed in the Committee’s report on the
        Department’s Annual Report referred to in section 1.5 above.
        Obviously, the reduction of case backlogs is a major priority.The
        Apex Priorities set by Government aims to reduce the number of
        pending trial cases by 30% by 2009. According to the Estimates of
        National Expenditure 2008, the aim, over the Medium Term
        Expenditure Framework (MTEF), is to reduce the number of backlog
        cases by 5% each year, and the outstanding court roll from 196 183
        in 2007/08 to 186 374 in 2008/09. While the Committee appreciates
        that the Department has put in place many measures to address the
        problems relating to overall court performance and,  specifically,
        to the reduction of case backlogs, we believe that there needs to
        be more concentrated attention on this and, even more, definite,
        definable, concerted, if incremental, progress in this regard. We
        understand that improvement of court performance is a major
        priority in the new integrated justice system being worked on by
        the executive. The Committee is especially keen on a comprehensive
        briefing on the new system, as we indicated in our 2007 report on
        the Department’s Annual Report, and are to negotiate an appropriate
        date for this briefing with the Department – which, as we
        previously indicated, should also involve other parliamentary
        committees in the JPCS cluster.


    5.10    The Committee notes the recent major break-ins at the courts and
        expresses its concern about the lack of adequate security at the
        courts. Of course, we realise the Department has to work with the
        SAPS and other state structures on this, but we urge the Department
        to do more in this regard. We welcome the advanced stage of
        planning to upgrade security in 127 courts and will monitor
        progress.


    6.      Programme 3: State Legal Services


    6.1.    This programme includes the Government’s legal and legislative
        services; administration of deceased and insolvents estates and the
        Guardian’s Fund (the Master’s Office); the preparation of
        legislation; and the introduction of constitutional amendments.


    6.2.    Accordingly, spending on this programme is organised into four
        sub-programmes, namely State Law Advisors; Litigation and Legal
        Services; Legislation and Constitutional Development; and Master of
        the High Court.


    6.3.    This programme receives R503 million for 2008/09, which
        comprises 42% of the overall allocation to the Department for its
        programmes. Within the programme, the Master of the High Court sub-
        programme receives 47% of the overall programme allocation,
        followed by the Litigation and Legal Services sub-programme, which
        is allocated 37%.


    6.4.    The DDG, Mr D Rudman, provided an overview of the Bills that
        have been prepared, some of which are before the Committee and
        others which are still to be introduced.


    6.5.    Details of the projects with which the South African Law Reform
        Commission is busy were also provided. Its priority projects are
        those relating to Statutory Law Revision (Project 25), Privacy and
        Data Protection (Project 124) and Trafficking in Persons (Project
        131).


    6.6.    The Chief State Law Advisor, Mr E Daniels, advised the Committee
        that it has now filled all senior posts in the Office. In the past
        year, the Office has begun to extend its services to
        municipalities, as well as to the provincial legislatures. The
        Office has also attended to 61 Bills and has received 32 Bills this
        year. In addition, it has completed 609 opinions, international
        agreements and regulations.


    6.7.    In an increasingly litigious society, the services offered by
        the Office of the Chief Litigation Officer are of great importance
        to the State. The Office has identified a number of challenges,
        including a poor image and poorly managed relations with its
        stakeholders. It plans to address these challenges by:


    Strengthening its internal capacity (through improved physical
        resources; a skills audit and skills development plan; and
        appointing more administrative and professional staff).
    Taking on legal interns (candidate attorneys, legal secretaries and para-
        legals).
    Strengthening its relationship with stakeholders (A State Litigation
        Management Forum is to be established to improve communication
        between State Attorneys and their client departments. Also, Service
        Level Agreements between State Attorneys and their client
        departments are planned).
    A State litigation blueprint is to be developed to ensure the efficient
        management of litigation involving the State.
    A litigation risk analysis is to be conducted.


    6.8.    The Committee welcomes the money the State Law Advisors Office
        has saved for the State. In addition, to the extent that its
        resources allow, the Committee welcomes the plans to extend the
        services of the State Law Advisors to the municipalities. Also, the
        translation of legislation into at least three official languages
        is commendable.


    6.9.    The Committee supports the initiatives of the Office of the
        Chief Litigation Officer to manage the course of litigation brought
        against government departments. The Committee strongly believes
        that government departments should not waste valuable resources
        defending cases that are obviously indefensible and are
        inconsistent with the principles, values and content of our
        Constitution and legislation. There have been outrageous examples
        of this over the years – and it simply must come to a stop. The
        Committee feels that the Directors General should be personally
        held accountable for cases that have obviously no chance of being
        won in court and are inconsistent with our transformation goals.
        The role that the Office of the Chief Litigation Officer has to
        play in countering the tendency towards pursuing indefensible cases
        is extremely important and the Committee commends the steps it has
        taken and hopes to see significant progress.


    6.10.   The Committee remains concerned about the state of the Masters
        Offices, even if there might be some improvements in the past few
        months. MPs are often approached by their constituents about the
        appalling service they receive from the Master’s Office. The
        Committee believes that there is an urgent need for significant
        improvement in the provision of services by the Masters Office, and
        will arrange a specific briefing on this with representatives of
        the Masters Office and the Department.

    6.11.   The Department used to report on the implementation of
        legislation. It is unclear to the Committee why this practice has
        fallen away. We will raise this with the Department with a view to
        reinstating it so that we can more effectively fulfill our
        oversight role.

    6.12.   The Committee is also concerned about the delay in finalising
        the regulations pertaining to the Sheriff’s Board and requests that
        the Department provide it with a written progress report within the
        next month.


    7.      Programme 4: National Prosecuting Authority


    7.1.    This programme provides for prosecution services, witness
        protection (particularly in serious criminal cases), and the
        investigation and prosecution of serious, complex and organised
        crime, and aims to remove the profit from crime. Expenditure under
        this programme is organised into four sub-programmes: Public
        Prosecutions, Witness Protection, Directorate of Special
        Operations, and the Asset Forfeiture Unit.


    7.2.    The National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) programme receives R2.1
        billion for 2008/09. This is 23.9% of the overall departmental
        allocation, which is slightly more (1.5%) than in 2007/08. The
        allocation increases in real terms by 9.8%, which is well above the
        inflation rate. This increase is significantly more than the case
        for any of the other programmes in the Vote.


    7.3.    The NPA’s CFO, Mr B Graham, highlighted a number of challenges,
        particularly relating to the target of employing two prosecutors
        for each court. The cost for each employee within the NPA far
        exceeds the NPA’s budget for compensation of employees. Very few
        external applications have been received for the vacancies. He
        believes that there are neither sufficient funds nor enough
        external applications to meet the target.


    7.4.    There is the expectation among prosecutors that they will
        receive the OSD. However, there are not enough funds in the NPA’s
        budget for this and it will need to approach National Treasury to
        request an additional allocation.


    7.5.    In respect of office accommodation, the NPA strongly opposes the
        move of its prosecutors from the courts. While it acknowledges that
        there is a critical shortage of space (which makes the proposed
        appointment of 280 additional prosecutors in this financial year
        extremely difficult), there are considerable difficulties in
        securing rental accommodation, not least of which is that DPW
        stipulates that no lease can be taken out for longer than two
        years. This not only creates problems in securing rental
        properties, it also results in wasteful expenditure. Also, from an
        operations management perspective, the NPA is concerned about the
        security risks associated with dockets being moved from one
        building to another.


    7.6.    More generally, the NPA expressed its concern at the
        mainstreaming of the sexual offences courts. The NPA is of the view
        that this may deter the specialisation of presiding officers in
        sexual offence matters. The NPA, however, has received donor
        funding to build 47 Thuthuzela Care Centres in the next 36 months.
        Seven of the 47 are planned to be delivered by the end of March
        2009. Thuthuzela Care Centres are 24 hour one-stop service centres
        where victims have access to all services that include police,
        counselling, doctors, court preparation, and a prosecutor so as to
        ensure a strong therapeutic effect on victims. They are aimed at
        turning victims into survivors. These multi-disciplinary care
        centres have been established to streamline the process of
        reporting, care–giving, investigation of cases and the subsequent
        prosecution of the case. It has proved to be an appropriate system
        designed to effect changes in women’s experiences and to provide a
        clear focus on the preservation of the integrity of the evidence,
        with a view to securing a conviction rate and providing support for
        the survivor through prosecutor-led investigations. A victim-
        centred approach is adopted, where reporting and management of rape
        cases is removed from police stations to a victim friendly centre
        situated within a hospital. In this way, the survivor is in a
        position to access assistance from the medical staff, investigating
        officers, prosecutors, counsellors, and emergency support services
        on 24-hour basis. These Centres aim to eliminate secondary
        victimisation, reduce case cycle time, and increase convictions.
        Currently there are ten such Centres operating.


    7.7.    The NPA briefly highlighted a number of its strategic priorities
        and projects for 2008/09. These include:


         • An increased  focus  on  operational  efficiency:  The  NPA  has
           started  to  investigate  the  benefits  of  implementing  “lean
           thinking” in the NPA. “Lean thinking” is a  management  approach
           which focuses on maximising output by eliminating wastage. “Lean
           thinking” is increasingly being applied in government in England
           and in South Africa in  Health  Care,  SARS  and  Home  Affairs,
           Transnet etc.  Waste is eliminated by  removing  all  activities
           that do not add value or are imperative to perform although they
           do not add any value. The NPA is  currently  implementing  “lean
           thinking” at two sites:  the recruitment section of the HRM&D at
           head office as well as at the magistrates’  court  in  Pinetown.
           Stakeholders  and  partners  are  participating  in  the   last-
           mentioned site.
    The promotion of crime prevention at community level: The NPA recognises
        that the SAPS is the lead agency in crime prevention, but believes
        that it needs to assist the SAPS through the execution of its own
        mandate.  The NPA has embarked on a project to investigate this
        role and the findings indicate that the NPA can have a significant
        role in problem-solving in the community that positively impacts on
        the fight against crime. This role is not intended to encroach on
        the work of the SAPS but to engage in a symbiotic relationship with
        them and other partners. The approach is one in which the
        prosecutor works pro-actively within a particular geographic area,
        to develop long-term, pro-active partnerships between the
        prosecution, law enforcement, public and civic organisations and
        the community, with a view to solving particular community crime
        problems, improving public safety and enhancing the quality of life
        in these neighborhoods. The NPA will prepare for the
        institutionalisation of the concept of a community prosecutor by
        defining their roles and responsibility, establishing the posts and
        procuring the funds to appoint community prosecutors.
    The NPA is required by the DPSA to develop Human Resources strategies
        which integrate with future strategies and operational plans, in
        order to ensure that the future staffing needs are met.  Developing
        an HR plan is essential in order to enable the NPA’s human
        resources to meet its strategic and operational objectives and to
        ensure it obtains its vision.  The objectives of the project are to
        determine the attributes and quantity of staff required; develop
        plans to enable the organisation to optimally utilise its human
        resources; allow the organisation to forecast surplus and shortage
        of staff based on fluctuations in demand; and develop a multi-
        skilled, representative and flexible workforce that will enable the
        NPA to rapidly respond to changes in the operational environment.
        The project includes the design of processes, systems and plans.
    The prevailing justice system in South Africa is retributive.  Since the
        crime rate in South Africa still remains high in spite of the
        Criminal Justice System’s punitive and rehabilitative focus, a
        paradigm shift to restorative justice and its applications is
        necessary and may hold promise. According to restorative justice
        literature, the problem posed by a crime should be considered
        through the harm it causes. Therefore the primary function of the
        response should not be to punish, nor to rehabilitate, but to
        repair or compensate for the harm caused. A shift to a system in
        which the court-based, adversarial system and restorative justice
        complement each other, can meet the needs of communities by
        confronting the offenders, and holding them accountable for their
        actions. A more effective and satisfactory response to crime will
        also be provided through this approach since the needs of the
        victims are taken into consideration and offenders are assisted in
        taking responsibility for their actions on an individual level. The
        NPA is piloting the implementation of Restorative Justice to
        determine its impact.


    7.8     The Committee feels that the NPA presentation was very useful
        and welcomes some of the innovative and promising projects that the
        NPA is undertaking aimed at improving its services. The Committee
        is particularly interested in the NPA’s work on community
        prosecutors and restorative justice, and will pursue this further.


    7.9.    The Committee expresses its concern about the difficulties that
        the NPA anticipates in meeting the target of two prosecutors per
        courtroom; this includes the failure to attract many external
        applicants, the shortage of office accommodation, and an inadequate
        budget for the compensation of employees. When asked why two
        prosecutors per courtroom in particular, the NPA informed the
        Committee of its intention to carry out a scientific study to
        determine maximum operational efficiency. Such a study is most
        welcome, although it obviously should have been carried out much
        earlier.
    7.10.   The Committee is also concerned that the budget is insufficient
        to meet the expectations of prosecutors that they will receive the
        OSD. This will negatively impact on the NPA’s capacity to attract
        and retain staff with the necessary skills and experience, which
        has already been identified as a challenge. The Committee supports
        the NPA’s decision to approach National Treasury for additional
        allocations to meet this commitment.


    7.11.   The Committee requires a greater insight into the full extent of
        the problems of office accommodation, as well as the proposal by
        the Department to relocate prosecutors from the courts. It is also
        unclear to the Committee how this will impact on the plans to
        increase the number of prosecutors to two per court. In this
        regard, the Committee intends requesting  the Department to brief
        it fully on the matter, and that this include its reasoning for the
        proposed move, the implications for the NPA, what is being done to
        solve the challenges raised in connection with the proposal, and
        the relevant timeframes.


    7.12.   The Committee does not fully understand the reasoning for
        mainstreaming sexual offences courts, as well as the implications
        of doing this. The Committee will pursue the matter further.


    7.13.   The project to build new Thuthuzela Care Centres, which provide
        care centres for victims of child abuse and rape, as well as
        establishes, renovates and launches sexual offence courts, is most
        welcome. The Committee is keenly interested in the project plans
        and would like to be informed periodically of the progress that is
        made.


    8.      Programme 5: Auxiliary and Associated Services


    8.1.    This programme provides for a variety of auxiliary services
        associated with the Department’s aims. Expenditure under this
        programme is mostly in the form of transfer payments to the Office
        for the Control of Interception and Monitoring of Communication,
        the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC), the Commission
        on Gender Equality (CGE), the Special Investigating Unit, the Legal
        Aid Board (LAB), the Public Protector, Justice Modernisation
        (National Crime Prevention Strategy), the President’s Fund and the
        Represented Political Parties Fund.


    8.2     This programme receives R1.4 billion in 2008/09. Within the
        programme, itself, there has been little change in spending
        priorities. As has been the case in past financial years, the Legal
        Aid Board sub-programme dominates expenditure, receiving 47% of the
        allocation to the programme. The next biggest sub-programme is
        Justice Modernisation, which receives 24.67% of the overall
        programme allocation.


    8.3.    The increased allocations over the MTEF are largely in the form
        of transfers to the LAB for the appointment of additional public
        defenders, as well as for the justice modernisation programme.


    8.4.    The allocation to the Special Investigating Unit over the MTEF
        is to allow for its growth so as to address its capacity issues.


    8.5     The Committee published reports on the 2006-07 Annual Reports of
        the SAHRC, CGE in the ATC on 13 February 2008 and the LAB on 21
        November 2007. The Committee’s views on these organisations are set
        out in these reports and the Committee is acting on decisions it
        took that are contained in these reports. The Committee will be
        meeting with these organisations shortly, and will not, in the
        circumstances, pursue issues further in this report


    8.6     The Committee remains of the view that the Legal Aid Board
        should play a limited role in providing legal representation in
        civil matters, especially in the case of farm workers, especially
        in respect of evictions. The Committee has been engaging with the
        Department and the Land and Agriculture Portfolio Committee on this
        and is to take this matter forward. We also feel that the LAB
        should play a role in civil matters in specific categories
        affecting children, In particular, in the case of farm workers who
        are being evicted, the Committee is adamant that the legal
        obligation imposed on the State to provide legal representation by
        the relevant legislation needs to be fulfilled and has taken up the
        matter with all the relevant stakeholders.


    9.      Overview of Committee’s Response to the Budget


    9.1.    The Committee’s views raised in this section relate to more
        general matters. Our views on specific matters relating to the
        Department’s programmes and budgets can be found in the relevant
        sections of this report, and will not be repeated here.


    9.2.    As we noted in our Report of 21 November 2007 on the
        Department’s 2006-07 Annual Report, the Committee recognises the
        scope and magnitude of the tasks that the Department has to attend
        to and is acutely aware of its capacity and other constraints. It
        may be that the Department has taken on too many responsibilities?
        Certainly, it is not clear to the Committee that the Department is
        effectively prioritising its activities or sufficiently focused on
        a set of core functions. Is the Department being strategic enough
        in its allocation of energy and resources to its different
        functions? Should the Department really be taking responsibility
        for Third Party Funds, or should these be dealt with by other
        public and private sector structures?”  The Department is moving
        towards gradually shedding itself of direct responsibility for
        Third Party funds, but we are still not clear that it is being
        strategic or focused enough in its fulfillment of its mandate. The
        link between the Department’s Medium Term Strategic Plan, Annual
        Business Plan, programmes and budget was not clearly set out. We
        believe that within the context of the Department’s overall
        strategy there should be a limited, more definable, measureable set
        of targets with clearer deadlines that are prioritised and that
        serve as a “building block” to develop greater capacity to identify
        and more effectively achieve other targets within its mandate.


    9.3.    The Committee is very pleased to hear of the Department’s
        progress in addressing the problem of its under-expenditure, and
        accepts that many of its difficulties in this regard arise from
        government processes relating to capital works projects.
        Nevertheless, the Committee wishes to caution the Department that
        although the progress it has made in this regard is praiseworthy,
        merely reducing under-spending is in itself not enough. What is
        spent must obviously be spent productively.  The Committee will try
        to ensure that it receives quarterly reports from the Department
        not only of what has been spent but how and where it is being
        spent.


    9.4.    The Committee is pleased that the presently fragmented system by
        means of which information is collected across the JCPS cluster is
        receiving attention and, in this regard, supports the suggestion of
        a need for a national database. Indeed, when considering the Child
        Justice Bill, for example, the Committee experienced firsthand how
        difficult it is to obtain reliable statistics for the purposes of
        making informed decisions. The Committee does, however, recognise
        that the problems associated with the creation of a seamless system
        capable of gathering meaningful information across the JCPS cluster
        makes this an extremely challenging task.


    9.5     As mentioned in 2.13 above the Committee is very keen to engage
        further with the Department on the proposed overhaul of the CJS,
        and feels strongly that the views of the public on the new CJS must
        be canvassed as soon as possible.


    9.6     Without infringing on the independence of the Chapter 9
        institutions, the Committee acknowledges that, in future, it will
        be useful to have their input, as well as that of the other
        institutions listed under the Auxiliary and Associated Services
        programme, on their budgets and strategic plans for 2008/09. In
        many instances, the Department merely acts as a conduit when it
        comes to the allocation of funds. Accordingly, the Department is
        not well placed to provide sufficient information on the planned
        activities of these institutions for 2008/09.


    10.     Towards an Exit Report


    10.1     This  report,  together  with  other  recent  reports  of   the
        Committee, should serve as the basis for the “exit report”  of  the
        Committee and contribute, without being presumptuous, to the  post-
        2009 elections Justice Committee’s shaping of  it’s  programme  for
        it’s initial year. Obviously, there are many issues taken up by the
        current Committee that we will not be able to fully address by  the
        end of our term, and we would hope that the incoming Committee will
        take these matters further. In any case, we will  raise  these  and
        other issues in the proposed “exit report”.
    11.     Appreciation


    11.1    The Committee thanks the Minister, Deputy Minister, DG and all
        those who appeared before the Committee for the Budget briefings
        for their co-operation.


    11.2    The Committee acknowledges with appreciation the very valuable
        work done by Ms Christine Silkstone in shaping this report.

    Report to be considered.

 4.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on a Progress Report on the National  Policy  Framework  for
    the Management of Sexual Offences, dated 19 February 2009.

    The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development
reports as follows:

    1.      Introduction

     1. The Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and  Related  matters)  Amendment
        Act came into effect in December 2007. In terms of  s62(1)  of  the
        Act the Minister of Justice and  Constitutional  Development  must,
        within one year after implementation, adopt and table the  National
        Policy  Framework  for  the  Management  of  Sexual   Offences   in
        Parliament.

     2. Given competing demands on the legislative schedule,  an  extension
        for the submission of this framework was made through the  Judicial
        Matters Amendment Act, 2008. An  extension  was  granted  to  March
        2009.


     3. The Department provided the Committee with a progress report on the
        consultation process and development of the draft  national  policy
        framework document.

    2.      Consultation process

     1. Consultation with various stakeholders took place in early 2008 and
        by late 2008 the national policy framework took shape  and  a  task
        team was  established  comprising  the  Department,  South  African
        Police Services, National Prosecuting Authority, and Departments of
        Health and Social Development. After  analysing  the  situation  it
        became clear that the framework would not be completed by  December
        2008.


     2. The Department pointed to the ongoing challenges of  the  clustered
        approach  and  the  difficulties  of  compiling  one  comprehensive
        document.  After  analysing  different  departmental  policies  and
        programmes, combined with  the  need  to  re-allocate  budgets,  it
        became clear that the  timelines  were  underestimated.  The  Final
        Policy Framework must still be approved by the  relevant  Ministers
        and  further  consultation   is   required   with   civil   society
        stakeholders, who will provide the necessary technical expertise to
        the process.


     3.  The  Department  submitted  an  outline  of  the  National  Policy
        Framework to the Director-General’s  Inter-Sectoral  Committee  for
        the Management of Sexual Offences Matters on 17  February  2009.  A
        further round of consultation with civil society is required.
    3.      Committee’s response

     1.  The  Committee  welcomes  the  Department’s  progress  report  and
        acknowledges the inter-sectoral task  of  developing  the  national
        framework is an extensive one.


     2. The Committee  is,  however,  concerned  about  the  need  to  meet
        deadlines and finds it regrettable that  deadlines  have  not  been
        met.


     3. The Committee will arrange a meeting with the Minister  of  Justice
        and Constitutional Development to further discuss the matter.


     4. Acknowledgements

      . The Committee acknowledges with appreciation the valuable work of
        the Researcher, Ms Gulian Nesbitt, in the shaping of this report.

        Report to be considered.

 5. Joint report of the Portfolio Committee on  Correctional  Services,  the
    Portfolio Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,  the
    Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on joint public  hearings  on
    the ‘Review of the Criminal Justice System’, dated 19 February 2009

      The  Portfolio  Committees  on  Correctional  Services,  Justice   and
      Constitutional Development, and Safety and Security report jointly  as
      follows:


     1. Introduction


     1.  The  National  Assembly’s  Portfolio  Committees  on  Correctional
        Services, Justice and Constitutional Development,  and  Safety  and
        Security and the National Council of Provinces’ Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs jointly held public hearings in
        the provinces on the ‘Review of the Criminal Justice System’ (CJS),
        which contains government’s proposals for a new integrated criminal
        justice system.


     2. The  Committees  received  oral  and  written  submissions  at  the
        hearings. There was  a  substantial  overlap  in  the  issues  that
        emerged. These common issues are captured in section 5,  while  the
        Committees’ response is set out in section 6 of the report.


     3. The report was prepared in considerable haste without the extent of
        collective discussion that the Committees would have preferred. The
        Committees had other very pressing business  to  attend  to  before
        Parliament concludes its very brief 2009 first quarter  sitting  to
        make way for the elections, and have not been  able  to  give  this
        report the  attention it would have  otherwise  received.  However,
        the  Committees  feel  that  the  Report  covers  the  key   issues
        reasonably and has to be adopted before the end of  this  five-year
        term of Parliament. It would  not  be  fair  to  expect  the  post-
        elections  incoming  Committees  to  finalise  the  Report.  It  is
        expected that they will follow up on the  matters  raised  in  this
        Report.

     1. Composition of delegation


    2.1.    Members who  attended  public  hearings  in  the  Eastern  Cape,
        KwaZulu-Natal, Free State and Northern Cape were:


        National Assembly: Bloem, DV (ANC) (Co-Chair); Jeffrey,  JH  (ANC);
        Johnson, CB (ANC); Mabena, CDM (ANC); Meshoe, KRJ (ACDP);  Ngwenya,
        W (ANC); Seaton, S (IFP); Sibanyoni, JB (ANC); Sotyu, MM (ANC) (Co-
        Chair); Tolo, LJ (ANC); Van Wyk, A (ANC).


        National Council of Provinces: Mkhalipi, BJ (ANC); Worth, DA (DA).


    2.2.    Members who attended public  hearings  in  Gauteng,  Mpumalanga,
        Limpopo and North West were:


        National  Assembly: Carrim, YI (ANC)  (Co-Chair);  Cele  MA  (ANC);
        Chikunga, LS (ANC); Joubert, LK (DA); Khaoue, MK (ANC); Moatshe, MS
        (ANC); Mahote, S (ANC); Sosibo, J (ANC)


        National Council of Provinces: Mack, NJ (ANC); Mokoena,  ML  Kgoshi
        (Co-Chair); Moseki, ALJ (ANC); Mzizi, MA (IFP); Nyanda, F (ANC).


    2.3.    Members who attended public hearings in the Western Cape were:


        National Assembly: Bloem, DV (Chair)  (ANC);  Chikunga,  LS  (ANC);
        Cupido, H (ACDP); Khaoue, MK (ANC); Moatshe, MS (ANC);  Ngwenya,  W
        (ANC); Schippers, J (ANC); Sibanyoni, JB (ANC);  Sosiba,  J  (ANC);
        Tolo, LJ (ANC).
        National Council of Provinces: Moseki, ALJ (ANC); Mzizi, M (IFP).


     2. Context

    3.1.    Although an  overview  of  the  Review  of  the  CJS  was  first
        presented at the parliamentary hearings on the ‘Scorpions Bills’ in
        August 2008, it was clear at that stage that  these  important  and
        far-reaching plans deserved greater and more focused attention, and
        that the public needed to be given the opportunity to make  further
        input. Although public comment was invited on the  CJS  during  the
        public hearings on the “Scorpions Bills” in August 2008,  very  few
        comments were received as people who  took  part  in  the  hearings
        focused solely on the Bills.


    3.2.    It became necessary to therefore hold specific hearings  on  the
        proposed new CJS.  These hearings  also allowed the Committees to:


         • Give feedback on the ‘Scorpion’s Bills’.
         • Hear about  problems  encountered  when  incidents  of  domestic
           violence, rape and other sexual  crimes,  are  reported  to  the
           police.
         • Inform the public of their rights, as well as the obligations of
           the state towards victims of crime, in  terms  of  the  Victims’
           Charter.
         • Facilitate the strengthening of relationships between local  and
           provincial law enforcement agencies  and  the  communities  they
           serve.


    3.3.    More than 18 000 people attended the  public  hearings  held  in
        eight provinces between 24 November and 5 December 2008 and in  the
        Western Cape on 27 and 28 January 2009.
    3.4.    During the  2008  hearings,  the  Committees  divided  into  two
        multiparty delegations, each visiting four of the eight  provinces.
        One delegation held public hearings in the Eastern  Cape,  KwaZulu-
        Natal, Free State and Northern Cape, while the other held  hearings
        in Gauteng, Mpumalanga,  Limpopo  and  North  West.  A  multi-party
        delegation subsequently participated in  the  Western  Cape  public
        hearings.


    3.5.    The location of the hearings  was  chosen  so  that  submissions
        could be heard from those living in both urban and rural areas.

|Province           |Place                |Date                 |
|Eastern Cape       |Mthatha              |24 November 2008     |
|Gauteng            |Vereeniging          |24 November 2008     |
|Eastern Cape       |Port Elizabeth       |25 November 2008     |
|Gauteng            |Bronkhorstspruit     |25 November 2008     |
|KwaZulu Natal      |Empangeni            |26 November 2008     |
|Mpumalanga         |Tonga                |26 November 2008     |
|KwaZulu Natal      |Ezingolweni          |27 November 2008     |
|Mpumalanga         |Ermelo               |27 November 2008     |
|Northern Cape      |Kuruman              |1 December 2009      |
|Limpopo            |Rabali               |1 December 2009      |
|Northern Cape      |Britstown            |2 December 2009      |
|Limpopo            |Mokopane             |2 December 2009      |
|Free State         |Fouriesberg          |3 December 2009      |
|North West         |Taung                |3 December 2009      |
|Free State         |Kroonstad            |4 December 2009      |
|North West         |Phokeng              |4 December 2009      |
|Western Cape       |Paarl                |27 January 2009      |
|Western Cape       |Mitchells Plain      |28 January 2009      |

    3.6     To facilitate public participation, supporting documents on  the
        CJS Review  and  the  Victim’s  Charter  were  made  available  and
        distributed before the hearings. These were translated into all  of
        the eleven official languages.

     7. To ensure that everything said at the hearings could be  understood
        by all present, a  full  translation  service  was  provided.  This
        included sign language translation.


     8. At each hearing, department officials gave a  presentation  on  the
        CJS Review and the Victim’s Charter. Attention was  also  drawn  to
        the  ‘16  days  of  activism’  campaign.  An  overview   of   these
        presentations is provided in section 4 below.

     9. As the hearings were also intended to strengthen  the  relationship
        between  communities  and  local  and  provincial  law  enforcement
        agencies, officials from the SAPS, the Department  of  Justice  and
        Constitutional Development,  the  National  Prosecuting  Authority,
        Legal Aid and the Department of  Correctional  Services  were  also
        present to respond to issues raised by the public.


    10. Many people spoke about their personal experiences of the  criminal
        justice system. While some problems or queries that were  mentioned
        could be dealt with immediately, this was not always possible,  and
        those wishing to do so were encouraged to make their submissions in
        writing.


     3. Overview of presentations on the CJS review, Victim’s  Charter  and
        Women and Child Abuse


        At each of the hearings, officials briefed the public  on  the  CJS
        Review and the Victim’s Charter. The problem  of  women  and  child
        abuse was also highlighted:


      1. CJS Review


      1. In November 2007, Cabinet approved a 7-point plan to transform the
         criminal justice system. Overall, the intention is ‘to establish a
         new,  modernised,  efficient  and  transformed  criminal   justice
         system. Among other things, this will  entail  setting  up  a  new
         coordinating and management structure  for  the  system  at  every
         level, from national to local, bringing together the judiciary and
         magistracy, the police,  prosecutors,  correctional  services  and
         Legal Aid Board, as well as  other  interventions,  including  the
         empowerment of the  Community  Police  Forums’  (President  Mbeki,
         State of the Nation Address, February 2008).


      2. The review of the CJS entails 2 processes: the first, involves in-
         depth research looking at long term solutions; the second, focuses
         on short to medium term solutions, mainly of a  practical  nature,
         aimed  at  removing  blockages  in  the  investigation  and  court
         processes.


      3. The purposes of the review are  basically to:
           • Improve public confidence in the criminal justice system  and,
             consequently, enhance its legitimacy.
           • Remove weaknesses and blockages in the system  through  short,
             medium and long term interventions.
           • Improve co-ordination and management of the system as a whole.
           •  Put  in  place  an  appropriate,  effective  and   integrated
             information technology and communication system, as well as  a
             national and reliable database that serves the entire criminal
             justice system and provides relevant and timely information to
             all stakeholders.
           • Facilitate community involvement.


      4. A comprehensive  analysis  of  the  criminal  justice  system  was
         undertaken and found  a  system  that  spans  multiple  government
         departments and agencies,  involving  vast  number  of  personnel,
         processes  and  information,  and  which  is  “dysfunctional   and
         fragmented”. The review indicated the need for a radical departure
         to transform the present criminal justice system.


      5. On the basis of this, seven transformative changes were adopted by
         Cabinet and underpin the establishment of  this  new,  modernised,
         efficient and transformed criminal justice system. These are:


           • The adoption of a single  vision  and  mission  leading  to  a
             single  set  of  objectives,   priorities,   and   performance
             measurement  targets  for  all  departments  in  the  criminal
             justice system. At present the Departments operate  as  if  in
             silos.
           • The establishment of a new, realigned,  single,  co-ordinating
             and management structure, headed by an Executive  Member,  who
             has co-ordination and management functions and  not  executive
             powers. At present, the Deputy Minister of  Justice  has  been
             appointed to drive these activities. The Departments, however,
             remain responsible for the execution of the any plans in terms
             of the new system.
           • The  making  of  substantial  changes  to  the  present  court
             processes  in  criminal  cases,  especially  in  the  regional
             courts.
           • The  implementation  of  key  priorities  identified  for  the
             component parts of the criminal justice system which are  part
             of or impact on the  new  court  processes,  especially  those
             relating to capacity.
           • The establishment  of  an  integrated  and  seamless  national
             criminal     justice     system     information     technology
             database/system.
           • The modernisation of all aspects of the systems and  equipment
             of  the  criminal  justice   system.   (For   example,   video
             postponements allow for  the  postponement  of  cases  without
             having to transport  awaiting  trial  prisoners  to  and  from
             court. The  introduction  of  increased  and  enhanced  expert
             capacity in the respective departments  -  for  example,  more
             forensic experts).
           • The involvement of the  population  at  large,  especially  by
             introducing changes to the community policing forums.


      6. Several initiatives  have  already  been  introduced  or  will  be
         introduced  shortly:  Small  Claim’s  Courts  will  be   held   on
         Saturdays; Regional Courts will be given civil  jurisdiction;  and
         at least one court will be  able  to  deal  with  a  case  in  the
         language common to the area.

      2. Service Charter for Victims of Crime (Victims’ Charter)

      1. The ‘Service Charter for Victims of Crime’ focuses on  the  rights
         of victims of crime and the obligations of the state to  them.  It
         seeks to balance the rights of the accused and the  victims  in  a
         way that is consistent with  the  Constitution  and  international
         norms. Victims of crime have the following 7 rights:
           • The right to be treated with fairness  and  dignity  and  with
             respect for a person’s dignity and privacy.
           • The right to offer information.
           • The right to receive information.
           • The right to protection.
           • The right to assistance.
           • The right to compensation.
           • The right to restitution.




      3. Women and Child Abuse


      1. As the public hearings coincided with the  ‘16  Days  of  Activism
         Against Gender Violence’ campaign, the issue of domestic  violence
         against women and children was also highlighted.


      2. The Domestic Violence Act, 1998, is aimed at protecting victims of
         domestic violence. The SAPS plays a key role in enforcing it:  The
         SAPS must open a case if there is a complaint, and keep a register
         of such  complaints.  The  SAPS  must  see  to  the  safety  of  a
         complainant if this is necessary. Under the Act,  the  victim  may
         apply to the court for a  protection  order,  which  the  SAPS  is
         responsible for enforcing. The ‘Victim Empowerment  Programme’  is
         particularly important for  providing  the  necessary  support  to
         victims of domestic violence.


      3. A major problem in curbing domestic violence is that  complainants
         often withdraw charges. This serves to encourage perpetrators,  as
         they know that they are unlikely to be  held  legally  accountable
         for their actions. Women, who experience  abuse,  have  a  broader
         responsibility to not only report but also to follow through  with
         their complaints. The community can also play an important role in
         the curbing of domestic violence.

      4. Issues Emerging from the Hearings

      1. Safety and Security

    The majority of submissions were about the public’s experience of  their
    interactions with the police:


      1. Police Corruption, Brutality and Misconduct: Complaints of  police
         corruption, brutality and  misconduct  were  widespread.  However,
         these complaints  were  also  countered  by  recognition  among  a
         minority of those  who  spoke  at  the  hearings  that  there  are
         hardworking and honest police who  persist  despite  the  lack  of
         resources and the threats to their lives.


      2. Inefficiencies  and  Delays:  There  were  many  complaints  about
         inefficiencies and  delays,  particularly  when  responding  to  a
         complaint. Many expressed their frustration  at  the  difficulties
         they had in obtaining information about progress made in  a  case:
         dockets going ‘missing’; complainants being  unable  to  speak  to
         anyone who was prepared to take responsibility  for  a  case;  and
         matters dragging on for years with no adequate explanation for the
         delays.


      3.  Mismanagement  of  Police  Vehicles:  Closely  related  was   the
         observation   that   police   vehicles   stand   idle,   or    are
         misappropriated for private use. Their lack  of  availability  for
         official use contributes to delays  in  responding  to  calls  for
         assistance from the public.


      4. Taking  of  Statements:  Many  complained  that  the  police  need
         training to take statements and are often  ignorant  of  the  laws
         they are meant to enforce. Statements taken  by  the  police  were
         described as factually or procedurally incorrect, causing cases to
         be dismissed or delayed.


      5. Accessibility: There were also concerns about the accessibility of
         the police. Having to travel long distances to report a crime is a
         problem, and there were calls for more stations.


      6. Community Police Forums: Many submissions supported more effective
         and expanded Community Police Forums (CPFs):
            ▪ People  active  in  the  CPFs  complained  about  a  lack  of
              resources, such as office space to work from; and petrol  and
              phone allowances to report crimes on behalf of  complainants.
              There was a suggestion that they be given  T-shirts  so  that
              they are easily identifiable to the community.
            ▪ In many cases, the relationship  between  the  CPFs  and  the
              SAPS is not good although, in some cases, the  CPFs  and  the
              police are working well together. Some people complained that
              the police were not  interested  in  making  the  CPFs  work.
              Others felt that the police expected the  CPFs  to  do  their
              work for them.
            ▪ A lack of co-operation between the ward committees  and  CPFs
              was also raised as a problem in some places.
            ▪  Attention  was  drawn  to  the  need  for  legislation  that
              supports the ‘Neighbourhood Watches’.
            ▪ Many people who are active in the  CPFs  are  unemployed.  At
              present they volunteer their services. However, a common view
              was that government should pay volunteers for their services.
              Some felt that they should receive some form of accreditation
              for the work they do which could assist them in getting jobs.
              CPF members and volunteers, felt some,  should  also  receive
              preference when police engage in recruitment drives.


      7. Rotation of  Police:  When  police  become  overly  familiar  with
         individuals in the communities they  serve,  they  often  tend  to
         favour certain individuals – or so it  is  seen.  This  perception
         impacts negatively on the image of the police,  undermining  their
         legitimacy in the eyes of  the  communities  they  serve.  It  was
         suggested that it would be better that  police  officials  do  not
         work in the place where they live, and are rotated  regularly,  as
         familiarity with an area made it easier for corrupt  practices  to
         develop. But it was also recognised that rotating police  officers
         has practical drawbacks, and would be disruptive to  their  family
         lives.
      8. Requirement of Drivers Licence Unfair: There were  some  who  felt
         that it is discriminatory to require that  recruits  to  the  SAPS
         possess a driver’s licence. This entry requirement places the poor
         and those in rural communities at  a  disadvantage,  as  they  are
         unable to afford driving lessons.


      9. Taverns: Alcohol is often a factor in the incidence of crime.  The
         view is that the number of  existing  taverns  should  be  closely
         regulated, as should their hours of operation. Nor should they  be
         allowed to  operate  close  to  schools.  There  were  pleas  that
         communities are consulted before licences are granted.


     10. Allocation of Resources: The allocation of resources to the police
         should take into account local circumstances. For example, if  the
         area being policed covered very mountainous areas, horses or  4x4s
         would be needed.


     11. Police Bias: The perception exists that there is discrimination in
         the way in which reported crimes are dealt with. In  some  places,
         the feeling  was  that  the  police  responded  more  swiftly  and
         invested more energy  when  investigating  cases  involving  white
         victims. There were also complaints that cases involving those who
         are politically connected, wealthy  or  powerful,  are  often  not
         pursued. At hearings in rural areas a common submission  was  that
         the police and courts do not act against white farmers.


     12. Border Policing: In Limpopo and Mpumalanga, concern was raised  at
         the ineffectiveness of the SAPS in addressing  cross-border  crime
         (such  as  human  trafficking,  guns,  drugs,  stolen  cars,   and
         stocktheft). Previously, the South African National Defence  Force
         patrolled these borders on foot but this function has  been  taken
         over by the SAPS. Much unhappiness was expressed at the  inability
         of the police to effectively perform this function.


     13. Witness Protection: It was also raised that the police  are  often
         reckless with information. By disclosing the identity of witnesses
         to criminals, the police place witnesses at risk  from  criminals,
         who then are able to intimidate them.


     14. Forensic Laboratories: Some people complained that there  are  not
         enough  forensic  laboratories,  causing  unacceptable  delays  in
         finalising cases. These delays also contribute to cases ultimately
         being withdrawn.


     15.  Domestic  Violence  Cases:  Some  maintained  that   instead   of
         protecting women and children from domestic  violence,  protection
         orders can place them in further danger from their  partners,  and
         can result in the break up of families. The manner  in  which  the
         police deal with domestic violence cases is critical.  There  were
         complaints that the police are reluctant  to  become  involved  as
         they regard domestic violence cases as ‘domestic matters’. A  lack
         of sensitivity by the police when dealing with victims of domestic
         violence was also remarked on. That men  too  can  be  victims  of
         domestic violence was highlighted, as was the need to ensure  that
         their cases are taken seriously and that they too are treated with
         sensitivity.

      2. Justice

    While there were fewer submissions that dealt directly with the  Courts,
    distrust of, even bewilderment at the way the judicial system works  was
    evident:
      1. Rights of Victims vs Accused: People were enraged that those  they
         know to be criminals  are  allowed  to  roam  freely  because  the
         charges against them are dropped  or  they  get  bail  or  receive
         lenient sentences. There was a general feeling  of  anger  at  the
         failure to properly balance the rights of accused and victims. The
         system  at  present  disproportionately  favours  accused  at  the
         expense of their victims, said many people. There were  complaints
         about the release on bail of people accused of committing  serious
         crimes. While some misunderstood what bail is (that to be released
         on bail is the same as being  acquitted)  many  felt  simply  that
         these perpetrators are a danger to the community -  not  only  can
         they commit further crimes but they are also  free  to  intimidate
         witnesses. Some felt that the Constitution should  be  amended  to
         curtail the rights of the accused. Many believe that  the  support
         given to victims of sexual crimes is inadequate. The  system  does
         not protect victims of sexual crimes, who face secondary trauma at
         the hands of the law. The view was expressed  that  it  is  unfair
         that accused have attorneys – whether state appointed  or  private
         practitioners - to protect their interests, while victims  do  not
         enjoy  the  same  privilege.  Also,  witnesses,  especially  child
         witnesses, should be protected.


      2. Children Have Too Many  Rights:  Some  believed  that  ‘children’s
         rights’ in the new democracy significantly contributes to problems
         when adults (parents and teachers) attempt to discipline children,
         contributing to the breakdown  of  societal  norms  and  fostering
         delinquency. Some held that there  is  too  much  freedom  in  the
         country now. Children have too many rights. When  parents  attempt
         to impose discipline, children threaten to take them to court.


      3. Bias of Magistrates and Judges: Dismay was expressed at  perceived
         inconsistencies in  sentencing,  especially  in  rape  and  murder
         cases. Some felt  that  these  inconsistencies  are  explained  by
         racism, or other form of discrimination or bias  on  the  part  of
         judicial officers. These views displayed a deep sense of  distrust
         of those who mete out the law.


      4.  Expungement  of  Criminal  Records:  Some   believed   that   the
         consequence   of   possessing   a   criminal   record    can    be
         disproportionately harsh, especially for petty offenders who  have
         gone on to be law-abiding citizens. In particular, the  possession
         of a criminal record makes it very difficult to  find  employment,
         and can be a factor leading to recidivism.


      5. Languages: The predominant use of English and Afrikaans in  courts
         is alienating to those appearing in our courts, and undermines the
         legitimacy of the justice system in the eyes of the public.  There
         are also too few translators in some of the courts.


      6. Time Taken to Finalise Cases: There was frustration at the  length
         of time it takes to finalise a case.


      7. Traditional Courts: The need  to  fast-track  the  integration  of
         Traditional Courts within the ‘mainstream’ criminal justice system
         was mentioned.


      3. Correctional Services

      1. Prison Escapes: Concern was expressed at  the  number  of  escapes
         from prisons. When escapes occur, lives are endangered, especially
         of witnesses, it was said. The problem of  corruption  within  the
         Department of Correctional Services was  raised,  particularly  in
         connection with officials being implicated in the escapes.


      2. Rehabilitation: The majority of  participants  who  spoke  on  the
         matter were opposed to prisoners being given education in  prison.
         They felt that prisoners have a better life than themselves,  with
         too many privileges. They said that it is  unfair  that  prisoners
         are fed, have access to television and receive free education  and
         job training,  while  those  on  the  outside  must  struggle  for
         survival. They felt that prisons are just too comfortable to be  a
         deterrent to crime. However, some  felt  that  if  criminals  were
         properly educated while in prison they would not  be  inclined  to
         commit crime after they were released.


      3.  Overcrowding:  Several  people  referred   to   problems   around
         overcrowding in prisons. Some said that bail should be allowed for
         people who commit petty crimes.


      4.  Parole:  Some  said  that  the  Department  should  consult  with
         communities before parolees are returned to the community as  they
         may not be welcome back in these communities.


      5. Prison Gangs: There was much concern at the continued existence of
         prison gangs.  People  said  that  it  is  wrong  that  first-time
         offenders are placed with hardened criminals, who  might  also  be
         gangsters.


      4. General

      1. Traditional Healers: Traditional healers were very active  at  the
         hearings, almost acting as a lobby  group  with  common  concerns.
         They complained that when they  are  accused  of  witchcraft,  the
         police often fail to protect them. Some maintained that  not  only
         are they consulted by members of the community but also are  asked
         by  the  police  for  help  in  solving  crimes.  They  should  be
         recognised as part of the policing system, they  held.  They  said
         that it  was  not  true  that  they  helped  criminals  to  escape
         detection. They accused traditional healers from Zimbabwe of doing
         this.  They  pointed  out  that  they  registered  as  traditional
         healers, unlike traditional healers from Zimbabwe, who were  freer
         to engage in such activities.


      2. Support for Victims of Sexual Crimes: There was anger and  concern
         at the high incidence of rape, especially of young  children.  The
         need for better and more counselling facilities for  rape  victims
         was raised.


      3. Disabled Persons: There were concerns  that  police  stations  and
         courts are not able to accommodate the needs to disabled  persons.
         This makes it even more difficult for disabled persons  to  access
         the CJS.


      4.  Community  Support  for  Crime:  Many  also  pointed   out   that
         communities tacitly support crime when  buying  stolen  goods,  or
         when they do not report a crime.

      5. Committees’ Response

      1. As indicated in section 1.3 above,  the  Committees  have  had  to
         finalise this report in considerable haste, without the considered
         collective discussion we would have preferred. However, we believe
         the report will serve as a useful  basis  for  the  post-elections
         incoming Committees to take matters forward.
      2. In some respects much of what emerged in the public  hearings  was
         predictable. But it was the depth of frustration and the closeness
         of the people to the edge that was striking. The  glaring  message
         that emerged from the public hearings is that people  are  utterly
         fed up about crime, have little faith in the  police  and  courts,
         and want the state to take much tougher action against  criminals.
         If people still want to play a role in reducing crime, it  is  not
         clear for how long they will wait for results.  They  seem  to  be
         willing to take the law into their own hands.  Increasing  numbers
         of them are probably already doing so.


      3. The Committees believe that we cannot just wave our  human  rights
         principles at people. But  we  cannot  just  succumb  to  people’s
         current frustrations either. We need to connect with where  people
         are, and engage them about the need for a  constitutionally  sound
         balance between the  rights  of  the  victims  of  crime  and  the
         accused. The government’s proposed “Victims  Charter”  which  sets
         out the rights of victims and  the  state’s  obligations  to  them
         should, the Committees believe, be processed expeditiously.


      4. More immediately, there has  to  be  a  swift,  simple,  effective
         message to people that the state genuinely cares for them  and  is
         serious about crime. The Committees believe that the  government’s
         new 7-point CJS  has  to  be  improved,  aspects  prioritised  and
         expeditiously implemented.


      5. The Committees believe  that  for  the  CJS  Review  to  be  fully
         effective, it will need to also address  the  problems  of  police
         corruption and misconduct.


      6. The Committees feel that there is an urgent need to strengthen the
         Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD),  whose  task  it  is  to
         investigate  complaints  of  death  of   detainees,   and   police
         misconduct and crime allegedly committed by members of the  police
         force. The ICD is largely ineffective. It may well be necessary to
         have separate legislation for the ICD, instead  of  including  the
         ICD in the SAPS Act, as is the case at present. Attention is drawn
         to the report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on
         the South African Police Service  Amendment  Bill  (Announcements,
         Tablings and Committee  Reports,  20  October  2008)  which  makes
         suggestions on an improved independent oversight mechanism for the
         SAPS.


      7. The Committees note many submissions were  about  police  vehicles
         being unavailable to respond to a crime that  is  being  reported.
         This, the Committees were told, cannot be attributed to there  not
         being enough vehicles within the SAPS. While  there  may  be  some
         mismanagement  of  vehicles  at  station  level,  the   Committees
         understand that the problem lies mostly with  the  allocation  and
         distribution of vehicles at National  and  Provincial  level.  The
         Safety and Security Committees are  aware  of  the  problem,  have
         taken it up with the Department and intend  to  bring  it  to  the
         attention of the incoming committees to take up further.


      8. As raised in 6.3 above,  the  Committees  note  that  there  is  a
         perception that the rights of accused are  given  preference  over
         those of victims. Anger at the unfairness of this  was  especially
         evident in connection with the granting of bail, where communities
         see perpetrators arrested and then swiftly released only to commit
         further  crimes  and/or  to  intimidate  witnesses.  The  Victims’
         Charter  is  an   important   instrument   that   elaborates   and
         consolidates the  rights  and  obligations  relating  to  services
         available  to  victims  of  crime.  While   this   initiative   is
         commendable,  much  more  remains  to  be  done  if  the  concerns
         expressed by the public are to be addressed. The Committees  notes
         that the Victims Charter embraces restorative  justice  principles
         in  a  system  that  is  at  present   largely   adversarial   and
         retributive. To give effect to the Victim’s Charter will involve a
         paradigm shift, with accompanying allocation of  resources  -  and
         the relevant Parliamentary Committees need to monitor this.


      9.  The  Committees  feel  that  it  is  crucial  that  the  CPFs  be
         strengthened. There has to be a  clear  policy  framework  for  an
         expanded role for CPFs. The issues raised in the  public  hearings
         about CPFs above need to be urgently addressed.  The  Gauteng  CPF
         system seems most advanced. We need to improve on  it  and  extend
         CPFs  throughout  the  country.  Within   budgetary   constraints,
         government  needs  to  consider  paying  CPF  members  a  stipend.
         Consideration should also be given to providing CPF members across
         the country with a common T-shirt so that they can be  identified.
         Street committees,  neighbourhood  watches,  ward  committees  and
         school governing bodies  can  also  be  used  to  mobilise  people
         against  crime.  Discussions  should  be  held  between  national,
         provincial and local government on the possibilities of  effective
         working relations between ward committees and CPFs, and  the  need
         for ward committees to prioritise crime in their work.


     10. The Committees note that there are plans  to  introduce  community
         safety  forums,  which   are   forums   catering   for   community
         participation in all areas of the criminal justice system and  not
         only in the area of policing. The vision is  that  the  CPFs  will
         become part of these larger  community  participation  structures.
         Parliament  should  closely   monitor   the   implementation   and
         allocation of resources  to  these  structures.  In  the  interim,
         communities should be encouraged to participate  in  the  existing
         CPFs, and consideration be given to measures,  as  raised  in  6.9
         above, that will encourage this.
     11. The Committees note the concerns of  people  about  the  technical
         capacity of the police, as referred to in sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.4
         and feel that the training of police on basic functions  like  the
         taking of statements needs to be considerably stepped up – and the
         Committees will monitor this closely.


     12. Many people expressed their bewilderment at the how the CJS works,
         and showed little understanding of the  underlying  constitutional
         principles. The Committees feel that there  needs  to  be  ongoing
         public education involving all the Departments within the Justice,
         Crime Prevention and Security (JCPS) Cluster  on  how  the  system
         works; the role of the various  departments  within  the  Cluster;
         bail, sentencing and parole, etc.


     13.  Many  people  expressed  their  disapproval  for  certain  rights
         contained in the  Constitution,  particularly,  children’s  rights
         which were argued to undermine parental authority; and  the  right
         to bail which was said to  favour  criminals  over  victims.  More
         generally, issues relating to  xenophobia  and  racism  were  also
         raised. The Committee feels that  not  enough  is  being  done  to
         deepen  public  understanding  of  the  Constitution,   and   more
         specifically of the Bill of Rights. This understanding should also
         aim to increase awareness not only of the right itself, but of the
         reason for it being part of the Bill of Rights. Also, there should
         be an explanation for how conflicting rights are managed in  terms
         of the Constitution. The Chapter 9 institutions should  assist  in
         this.


     14. Attention was drawn to the need for the  police  to  show  greater
         sensitivity when dealing with victims of domestic violence and  in
         cases involving sexual crimes.  The  plight  of  male  victims  of
         domestic violence was also mentioned.  The  Committees  feel  that
         more should be done to ensure that the  police,  court  officials,
         presiding officers and any  other  officials  within  the  justice
         system who may come into contact with victims of domestic violence
         receive the necessary training to equip them to  deal  with  these
         victims, including male victims of domestic  abuse,  knowledgeably
         and sensitively.


     15. Although the Committee accept that there are  many  problems  with
         the implementation of the Domestic  Violence  Act,  the  Committee
         cannot agree with the view expressed  by  some  that  overall  the
         legislation  does  more  harm  than  good.  However,   given   the
         complexities of such matters, it believes that it would be  better
         if protection orders were accompanied by effective  programmes  to
         reduce the potential for  violence  of  the  male  partner,  where
         possible, and more monitoring  by  the  state.  Parliament  should
         continue to closely monitor the implementation of the legislation,
         including ensuing that the ICD regularly submits  its  reports  on
         police compliance with the requirements of the Act and that  these
         are useful reports.


     16. The accessibility  of  our  courts  was  constantly  raised.  This
         included the need for the courts to be conducted in the  languages
         common to the area. The Committees welcome the initiative  of  the
         Department of Justice to address this problem – but feel that more
         should be done, and will follow up on this.


     17. The Committees are aware of  the  problem  that  criminal  records
         pose,  especially  in  getting  employment.  Recently,  Parliament
         passed legislation that  will  allow  for  the  expungement  of  a
         person’s criminal record for minor crimes after a  certain  number
         of years have elapsed. However, this is a complex issue  requiring
         a careful balance that safeguards the rights of the public against
         criminals, while recognising that possessing a criminal record can
         cause undue hardship. The Justice  Committee’s  concerns  on  this
         were conveyed to the  Executive  with  the  request  that  further
         research is conducted, and that it reports to  Parliament  on  its
         findings within 24 months. This matter can  be  addressed  further
         through this process.


     18. The Committees note the  problems  relating  to  the  shortage  of
         forensic laboratories and  the  relevant  expertise  pose  to  law
         enforcement. It is pleased to see that the CJS Review  intends  to
         tackle this problem  as  part  of  its  7-transformative  changes.
         However, given the existing severe shortage  of  laboratories  and
         capacity, the Committees believe  that  implementation  may  prove
         particularly challenging, requiring that the  incoming  committees
         within the Cluster closely monitor progress made.


     19. The Committees note that some submissions related to  problems  of
         accessibility for  disabled  persons.  It  is  vital  that  police
         stations and courts  are  accessible  to  the  disabled,  and  the
         Departments should ensure that this is happens.


     20. The Committees notes views on the rehabilitation of offenders,  as
         well as their reintegration once they  have  served  their  prison
         term, as referred to in 5.3.2 above. Many were deeply resentful of
         the  seemingly  favourable  conditions  in  prisons   that   allow
         prisoners to receive food, education, and  skills  training,  etc.
         The Committees believe that the Department of Correctional Service
         needs to do much more to  educate  the  public  on  the  value  of
         rehabilitation  to  society.  That  for  some  prison  appears  an
         attractive, even cushy option, however, suggests  the  desperation
         of people and reinforces the need to urgently improve  the  living
         condition of the poor.


     21. The Committees note that many people  asked  that  communities  at
         least be notified before offenders are  released.  The  Committees
         feel that much more needs to be done to  ensure  that  communities
         are involved when offenders are  released,  and  will  raise  this
         further with the relevant stakeholders.


     22. The Committees note that the Ministry of Justice is working  on  a
         major policy and legislative framework for the  transformation  of
         the  judiciary  –  and  urges  that   this   work   be   finalised
         expeditiously.


     23. As mentioned by a participant  in  the  hearings,  the  Committees
         believe  that  the  boundaries  of  police  structures  should  be
         consistent with municipal boundaries.


     24.  The  Committees  recognise  that  it  will  not  be  possible  to
         significantly reduce crime unless there is an improvement  in  the
         socio-economic conditions,  including  economic  growth,  creating
         jobs and delivering services. But we will  also  not  be  able  to
         significantly improve socio-economic conditions unless  we  reduce
         crime. The global  financial  and  economic  crisis  means  slower
         economic growth rates and a reduction in jobs in  our  country  in
         the immediate period. Hence  reducing  crime  will  be  even  more
         challenging  –  but  crucial  to  doing  so  will  be  the  active
         involvement of ordinary people.


     25. The Committees feel that it is also important that we have strong,
         stable families, with parents taking  greater  responsibility  for
         children, despite the socio-economic challenges. In the  hearings,
         it was almost as if some parents  were  pleading  that  the  state
         takes over their parenting responsibilities. Of course, the  state
         must create better conditions for viable families  –  but  parents
         have to parent. Traditional leaders and  traditional  healers  can
         also  play  important   roles   in   reducing   crime.   Religious
         institutions are crucial.


     26. The  Committees  have  identified  many  issues  in  this  Report,
         especially in this section, that the executive needs  to  act  on.
         But  the  Committees  also  need  to  act  to  ensure  that  these
         recommendations are acted  on  –  and  it  is  proposed  that  the
         incoming post-elections Committees meet within 6  weeks  of  their
         being convened to shape a programme of oversight and  other  forms
         of action to advance the issues raised in this report.


     27. Finally, the Committees note the many challenges  confronting  the
         CJS. Considerable effort will  be  required  to  deal  with  these
         challenges. It is vital that  the  government  finalises  the  new
         integrated CJS  as  soon  as  possible  taking  into  account  the
         submissions made by ordinary people at the public hearings and the
         views of the parliamentary Committees.  The  government  needs  to
         develop a phased, strategic implementation plan.  Crucial  to  the
         success of the implementation of the new CJS will  be  the  active
         participation of all the key stakeholders,  including  parliament,
         the judiciary, SAPS, NPA, business, trade unions, NGOs,  technical
         experts  and  other  sections  of  civil   society.   The   active
         participation  of  ordinary  people  is  vital  too.  We  need   a
         concerted, massive, sustained onslaught on crime.  The  Committees
         feel that if we all work effectively together we will, over  time,
         significantly  reduce  crime.  As  a  participant  in  the  public
         hearings said “We defeated apartheid. We must  defeat  crime  like
         that.” The Committees agree.

    7.      Acknowledgements

      1. Organising  the  public  hearings  required  considerable  effort.
         Despite some hiccups, the Committee Section was very competent  in
         organising very successful hearings, and should be  commended  for
         its work. The Committees are very grateful to Ms Zanele Mene,  the
         Committee Section Manager, and the rest of  her  team  and  others
         from the staff of parliament who participated in the  hearings  in
         various ways.

      2. The Committees acknowledge the contribution of  the  parliamentary
         Content  Advisors,  in  particular  Ms  Christine  Silkstone,  who
         substantially shaped the content of this report.

         Report to be adopted.


                            FRIDAY, 6 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled


    (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration:

         (a)      Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
             Division of Revenue Bill for 2009-2010, tabled on 11 February
             2009 in terms of section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal
             Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).
2.    Membership of Assembly

     a) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        loss of membership by Ms M M Mdlalose with effect from 5 February
        2009, has been filled with effect from 10 February 2009 by the
        nomination of Mr S A P Ngcobo.

     b) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        loss of membership by Mr M T Likotsi with effect from 9 February
        2009, has been filled with effect from 9 February 2009 by the
        nomination of Mr B Xuma.

3.    Resignation of Members

     a) Mr L R R Reid resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
        effect from 17 February 2009.

     b) Mr L J Modisenyane resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
        effect from 25 February 2009.

     c) Mr M J Malahlela resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
        effect from 1 March 2009.

     d) Ms S M Camerer has tendered her resignation as Member of the
        National Assembly to take effect from 16 March 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
    (a)    Shortlist of candidates for appointment to the Board of
          Directors of the Technology Innovation Agency in terms of section
          5(5) of the Technology Innovation Agency Act, 2008 (Act No. 26 of
          2008), submitted by the Minister of Science and Technology.


          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology for
          consideration and report.

                           TUESDAY, 10 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


    (a)     The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        resignation of Mr L R R Reid with effect from 17 February 2009, has
        been filled with effect from 5 March 2009 by the nomination of Mr F
        H Nkoana.

    (b)     The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        resignation of Mr L J Modisenyane with effect from 25 February
        2009, has been filled with effect from 5 March 2009 by the
        nomination of Ms F Bikani.

    (c)     The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        resignation of Mr M J Malahlela with effect from 1 March 2009, has
        been filled with effect from 5 March 2009 by the nomination of Mr T
        P Sidina.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security


    (a)     The Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate on Domestic
        Violence for the period January-June 2008, tabled in terms of
        section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of
        1998).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Report on the suspension of Ms T C Oliphant, an additional
        magistrate at the Wynberg, Western Cape, in terms of section
        13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (b)     Progress report on the Inquiry into allegations of misconduct of
        MsA Bacharam, dated 16 February 2009, in terms of section 13(3)(f)
        of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast Water for the
        year ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2008.
    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of BushbuckridgeWater for the
        year ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee for the Appointment of members
    to the NationalYouth Development Agency Board, dated 10 March 2009:
    The Committee placed adverts in national and provincial newspapers
    calling on members of the public to submit nominations, from 20 February
    until 06 March 2009, of persons to serve on the Board of the
    NationalYouth Development Agency. 173 nominations were received by the
    Committee.
    The committee considered the nominations on the 9 and 10 March 2009 and
    agreed that the following persons be shortlisted to be interviewed on
    the 12 and 13 March 2009:
    Mr V Sidali
    Mr EB Letsoalo
    Mr MW Thango
    Mr G Essop
    Mr VN Mbanga
    Mr S Nair
    Ms A Coetzee
    Ms N Ntanjana
    Mr PR Mnisi
    Ms N Moleko
    Mr MR Khumalo
    Mr L Marincowitz
    Mr O Sipuko
    Ms I Motau
    Mr LI Maile
    Mr S Khan
    Mr G Mackenzie
    Ms P Kadi
    Mr BR Buys
    Mr M Tyhali
    Mr FJ Slabber
    Ms M Tshabalala
    Ms P Makeleni
    Mr A Lungisa
    Mr Y Pillay
    Mr DD Adams

                          WEDNESDAY, 11 MARCH 2009

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on the State of
    Readiness of the South African National Defence Force and the State of
    the South African Defence related industry

     A.     INTRODUCTION


    The Portfolio Committee on Defence held a series of closed meetings
    with the Department of Defence (DOD) to discuss matters relating to the
    combat readiness of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
    and the current state of the South African defence-related industry.
    These meetings were conducted in Tshwane from 25-27 November 2008.


    While adhering to the principles of accountability and transparency,
    national security considerations require that details of the
    discussions remain confidential. The Portfolio Committee therefore
    submits its recommendations to Parliament for consideration and
    adoption.


    B.     SCOPE OF DISCUSSIONS


    i)     Combat readiness of the South African National Defence Force
    Combat readiness refers to the extent to which the SANDF can maintain
    and sustain its core capabilities to fulfil its mandate.  The SANDF’s
    mandate is to provide, manage, prepare and deploy defence capabilities
    commensurate with the needs of South Africa.  The four Arms of Service
    of the SANDF- the SA Army, SA Air force, South African Military Health
    Services and the SA Navy - made presentations in this regard.


    ii)    State of the South African Defence-related industry
    In order to maintain its combat readiness, the SANDF must have access
    to a local defence industry that is capable of developing, supplying
    and maintaining systems and products necessary for the defence force to
    perform its tasks.  Matters discussed related to the relationship
    between the DOD and defence-related industry; the alignment of the
    defence industry to national defence objectives; acquisitions; the
    capacity of the local defence industry to meet the demands of the
    SANDF; foreign ownership; and the transformation and formulation of the
    White Paper on the Defence-related industry.


    C.     DELEGATION


    The parliamentary delegation was led by the Chairperson of the
    Portfolio Committee on Defence and comprised both members of the
    Portfolio Committee on Defence and Joint Standing Committee on Defence:


       • Mr S B Ntuli        (Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence)
       • Dr E Schoemann      (Chairperson: Joint Standing Committee on
         Defence)
       • Dr G W Koornhof     (ANC)
       • Mr H Fazzie         (ANC)
       • Mr N Fihla          (ANC)
       • Mr L N Diale        (ANC)
       • Mr R Shah           (DA)
       • Adv H Schmidt (DA)
       • Mr  A Botha         (DA)
       • Dr S Pheko          (PAC)


    D.     RECOMMENDATIONS


    (a)    It is crucial that greater communication between the political
         authority (the Minister of Defence and the Commander-in-Chief) and
         the SANDF should be sought.  This consultation is vital for
         Government to ensure that the SANDF is adequately resourced,
         equipped and funded to fulfil its mandate, especially as the SANDF
         is continuously being used as a foreign policy tool.


    (b)    The finalisation of the Defence Update should be prioritised as
         a matter of urgency. Since this document provides a long term
         indication of the defence needs, the delays in both its
         finalisation and implementation mean that effective monitoring of
         defence activities is limited. The Department should submit this
         document to Parliament as soon as possible. A date for the
         submission will be directly communicated to the Department. The
         South African Army Vision 2025, which addresses the challenges in
         the SA Army, must be incorporated into the Defence Update. The
         Portfolio Committee on Defence will not be able to support an
         incomplete Defence Update, since this has been a long outstanding
         matter and should inform  all operations of the SANDF.


    (c)    The current budgetary allocation of the DoD, as a percentage of
         the gross domestic product (GDP) is inadequate to address current
         operational challenges. The Committee recommends an increase in the
         annual budget allocation of the Department of Defence from the
         current 1.2 percent of GDP to 1.7 percent during the next four
         years. All possible efforts should be made to ensure that current
         limited resources are effectively directed to national defence
         priorities.  This entails improvements in the current planning,
         management and monitoring of departmental spending, ensuring value
         for money for the DoD. The Committee maintains that the funding of
         the SANDF must be mandate driven and should not be hampered by
         financial restrictions.


    (d)    In addition to the above-mentioned recommendation, a decision to
         modernise the SA Army is needed and this must be funded as a matter
         of urgency.


    (e)    It is the view of the Committee that the SANDF has come to a
         cross-road, namely whether it is a finance driven national defence
         force or whether it should migrate to a mandate driven national
         defence force. A decision has to be made at the highest level
         whether the future SANDF will be relevant and be a national asset
         properly and adequately funded for its mandates received from
         Government or whether it will continue its current downward spiral
         of becoming inadequate to fulfil its constitutional mandate.


    (f)    Competition for scarce skills impact negatively on the SANDF’s
         ability to recruit and retain personnel.  The Department of Defence
         should consult with the Department of Public Service and
         Administration regarding the development and implementation of a
         special dispensation for SANDF members, particularly those of
         pilots and other scarce skills positions. The Department should
         submit a report on the progress made in this regard.


    (g)    The Department should finalise the review process of the legal
         contracts that bind officers contractually to serve for a specified
         period after the completion of their specialised training.
         Employment contracts should be adequately safeguarded and must be
         accessible.


    (h)    In order for the Reserve Force to fulfil its role of providing
         the bulk of the landward conventional capability, it is recommended
         that Members of the Reserves should participate in a conventional
         exercise every three years, starting at unit level and building up
         to a combined formation level exercise. The budget for the
         continuation of training for the Reserves should be ring-fenced.


    (i)    The current ineffective border patrol is a matter of grave
        concern for the Portfolio
         Committee and poses a threat to the security of our country and our
         people with millions of people flowing unchecked into and out of
         our country. This crisis must be addressed urgently by the
         responsible departments, including a possible future role for the
         Department of Defence.


    (j)    A sophisticated local defence industry is crucial for the SANDF
         to maintain the necessary state of readiness in the most cost
         effective manner.  In this regard, the Department should resolve
         the following issues as a matter of urgency:


           • The completion of the policy framework for the restructuring
             of the South African defence related industry. This should
             entail improved communication with stakeholders in the defence
             industry.


           • The capacity of Denel and Armscor to support the SANDF in
             maintaining its capabilities.

           • The DoD must report once a year to Parliament on progress made
             with the development and implementation of the Defence
             Industry Strategy. Other stakeholders including the
             Departments of Trade and industry, Public Enterprises and
             Science and Technology must be invited to participate in such
             a report. This must be presented to the Portfolio Committees
             on Defence, Trade and Industry, Public Enterprises and Science
             and Technology.

           • The AMD Board must report to Parliament twice a year. In the
             first parliamentary term, AMD should present its annual plan
             for the defence industry while the progress made in the
             implementation of these plans must be reported during the
             fourth parliamentary term.


    Report to be considered.


                            FRIDAY, 13 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72D – 2008] – Act No 4 of 2009
         (assented to and signed by President on 6 March 2009).


      2) National Environmental Management: Waste Bill [B 39D – 2007] – Act
         No 59 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 6 March
         2009).


                            MONDAY, 16 MARCH 2009

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

Report of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on the appointment of  members  to  the
National Youth Development Agency Board, dated 16 March 2009:

The Committee was established on the 5 February 2009 by a resolution of  the
National Assembly and  10  February  2009  by  resolution  of  the  National
Council of Provinces to consider the appointment of members of the Board  to
the National Youth Development Agency.

The Committee consisted of the following members:

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

Mr JJ Combrinck        ANC
Mr M Johnson                      ANC
Mr BM Mkongi                 ANC
MS NR Mokoto                 ANC
Ms WS Newhoudt – Druchen          ANC
Ms NN Sibhidla               ANC
Mr Y Wang                    ANC
Mr GR Morgan                 DA
Mr MM Swathe                 DA
Ms SP Lebenya – Ntanzi       IFP
Mr LW Greyling               ID
Mr IE Jenner                      ID

NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

Western Cape
Mr W Douglas

Kwazulu - Natal
Mr DD Gamede

Limpopo
Ms HF Matlanyane

Gauteng
Ms F Mazibuko
Mzizi, Mr MA (alt)

Eastern Cape
Mr DG Mkono
Mr MO Robertsen (alt)

Northern Cape
Mr RJ Tau
Mr MC Goeieman (alt)
Mpumalanga
Ms MP Themba

North West
Ms JF Terblanche

Free State
Dr FJ Van Heerden
Mr TS Setona (alt)

The committee placed adverts  in  the  national  and  provincial  newspapers
calling on members of the public to submit  nominations,  from  20  February
until 06 March 2009, of persons to serve on the Board of the National  Youth
Development Agency. It was required that the nominees should:
    • be South African citizens
    • comply with any other requirements prescribed by national legislation,
      in particular the National Youth Development Agency Act, 2008
    • possess suitable qualifications, expertise and experience in the  area
      of the youth.


The adverts appeared in the following newspapers:


National Newspapers
City Press
Rapport
Sunday Times

Provincial Newspapers
Argus
Burger-Wes
Daily Dispatch
Diamond Field Advertisers
EP Herald
Ilanga
Limpopo Mirror
Mail & Guardian
Mpumalanga News
Pretoria News
Potchefstroom Herald
Sunday Tribune
Sowetan
Star
Volksblad

173  nominations  from  the  members  of  the  public  and  from   different
institutions were received by the Committee.

The Committee considered all the nominations on the 9 and 10 March 2009  and
agreed that the following 26  persons  be  shortlisted.  The  names  of  the
shortlisted candidates were  published  in  the  Announcement  Tablings  and
Committee (ATC) Reports of the 10 March 2009. The following candidates  were
interviewed on the 12 and 13 March 2009:

Mr V Sidali
Mr EB Letsoalo
Mr MW Thango
Mr G Essop
Mr VN Mbanga
Mr S Nair
Ms A Coetzee
Ms N Ntanjana
Mr PR Mnisi
Ms N Moleko
Mr MR Khumalo
Mr L Marincowitz
Mr O Sipuka
Ms I Motau
Mr LI Maile
Mr S Khan
Mr G Mackenzie
Ms P Kadi
Mr BR Buys
Mr M Tyhali
Mr FJ Slabber
Ms M Tshabalala
Ms P Makeleni
Mr A Lungisa
Mr Y Pillay
Ms DD Adams

The youngest candidate was a 14 year old boy, a grade eight (8) pupil, Mr  S
Khan from Rondebosch High School. He showed confidence by applying and  took
time off from school. He  displayed  leadership  qualities  and  is  looking
forward to be a Junior Mayor  of  the  City  of  Cape  Town.  The  Committee
acknowledged and commended him for his confidence  and  his  involvement  in
developmental activities in his community.

It was worth noting that his interest  and  eventual  participation  in  the
interviews was a  confirmation  of  living  up  to  the  theme  of  People’s
Parliament in action.

Young women and people living with disabilities were  also  shortlisted  and
interviewed. The Committee acknowledged their qualities of leadership.

Having interviewed the candidates and  deliberated  on  the  performance  of
each, the Committee recommends to the National  Assembly  and  the  National
Council of Provinces that the following persons be appointed  to  the  Board
of the National Youth Development Agency:

   1. Mr MR Khumalo
   2. Ms M Tshabalala
   3. Ms P Makeleni
   4. Mr A Lungisa
   5. Mr Y Pillay
   6. Ms I Motau
   7. Mr FJ Slabber

Report to be considered.

                           TUESDAY, 17 MARCH 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Proclamation No 2 published in Government Gazette No 31808 dated 21
        January 2009: Referral of matters to existing special investigating
        unit and special tribunal, in terms of the Special Investigating
        Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).
     b) Proclamation No R. 3 published in Government Gazette No 31811 dated
        22 January 2009: Commencement of the South African Judicial
        Education Institute Act, 2008 (Act No 14 of 2008).

     c) Government Notice No R. 43 published in Government Gazette No 31809
        dated 22 January 2009: Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the
        Judges’ Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No
        47 of 2001).

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     a) Albany Coast Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2009-10,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (b)     Amatola Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (c)     Bloem Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2009-
        10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (d)     Botshelo Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).
    (e)     Bushbuckridge Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2009-10,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


     f) Lepelle Northern Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
        for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     g) Magalies Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2009-
        10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


     h) Mhlathuze Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2009-
        10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (i)     Namakwa Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (j)     Overberg Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (k)     Pelladrift Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2009-10,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (l)     Rand Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2009-
        10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (m)     Sedibeng Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (n)     Umgeni Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (a)    Government Notice No 182 published in Government Gazette No
        31933 dated 20 February 2009: Publication of a board for
        Isimangaliso Wetland Park Authority, in terms of the World Heritage
        Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


     (b)    Government Notice No 190 published in Government Gazette No
        31912 dated 20 February 2009: Notice of intention to make
        regulations regarding fees for the provision of aviation
        meteorological services in terms of section 28 (b) of the South
        African Weather Services Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).

     (c)    Government Notice No R.209 published in Government Gazette No
        31962 dated 27 February 2009: Threatened or Protected Species
        Amendment Regulations, 2009 in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

     (d)    Government Notice No R.210 published in Government Gazette No
        31963 dated 27 February 2009: Threatened or Protected Species
        Second Amendment Regulations, 2009 in terms of the National
        Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
        2004).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
    shortlist of candidates for appointment to the Board of Directors of
    the Technology Innovation Agency in terms of section 5(5) of the
    Technology Innovation Agency Act, 2008 (Act No. 26 of 2008), dated 17
    March 2008.

    The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having considered
    the short listed candidates for the Technology Innovation Agency Board,
    (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 06 March 2008),
    recommends that the House approve the following candidates:
 1. Dr Mamphele Ramphele
 2. Ms Cheryl Carolus
 3. Mr Alan Lax
 4. Mr Ross HR Norton
 5. Dr Steven T Cornelius
 6. Mrs Helen Brown
 7. Prof. Susan Harrison
 8. Mr Gordon Craig Venter
 9. Dr Patrick Ngwenya
10. Mr Msomi Nhlanhla Sobantu
11. Dr Iqbal Surve
12. Prof Adam Rom Martin
13. Dr Michel Oswald Albers
14. Mrs Vawda Fatima
15. Mr Atul Kumar Gupta


    Report to be considered

                          WEDNESDAY, 18 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled
      1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government:


          a) Albany Coast Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2009-10,
             tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


        (b)      Amatola Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
             for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (c)      Bloem Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
             2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (d)      Botshelo Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
             for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (e)      Bushbuckridge Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for
             2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (f)      Lepelle Northern Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water
             Tariffs for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).


          g) Magalies Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
             2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          h) Mhlathuze Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
             2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (i)      Namakwa Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
             for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (j)      Overberg Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
             for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (k)      Pelladrift Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2009-
             10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


        (l)      Rand Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
             2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (m)      Sedibeng Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
             for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (n)      Umgeni Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
             for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
           Government Association (SALGA) for 2007-2008, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 151-2008].


                           THURSDAY, 19 MARCH 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 19 March 2009:


          a) Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B 1 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 74).


          b) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
             Amendment Bill [B 3B – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75)


          c) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec
             76)


          d) Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Assembly


      a) A vacancy occurred in the National Assembly owing to the loss of
         membership of Mr L J Tolo (ANC) with effect from 2 March 2009.


      b) A vacancy occurred in the National Assembly owing to the loss of
         membership of Mr D V Bloem (ANC) with effect from 6 March 2009.


      c) A vacancy occurred in the National Assembly owing to the loss of
         membership of Ms E Ngaleka (ANC) with effect from 6 March 2009.


      d) The date on which the resignation of Ms S M Camerer as Member of
         the National Assembly becomes effective, has been moved from 16 to
         28 March 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Pelladrift Water Board for
        the year ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
        30 June 2008.

                            FRIDAY, 20 MARCH 2009

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development on the 2006/07 Annual Report of the Office of the Public
    Protector, dated 19 February 2009

    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
    having considered the 2006/07 Annual Report of the Office of the Public
    Protector, reports as follows:

    1.      Introduction


    1.1     The Committee was briefed on the 2006/07 annual report of the
        Office of the Public Protector (OPP) on 19 February 2008.


    1.2     Those who appeared before the Committee for the briefing
        included: Mr Z Docrat; Ms K Masiba; Ms P Mogaladi; Adv ML Mushwana;
        Ms S Thoke; and Adv M Shai.


    1.3     This Report should be seen against the background of a very busy
        and somewhat shortened parliamentary year. The Committee has had to
        be realistic about what it can accomplish in terms of oversight in
        the time it has available to it before Parliament rises.


    1.4     Our main concern is to assess how the OPP has performed,
        especially when measured against its Strategic Plan and the
        specific targets it set for itself for the 2006/07 financial year
        under review.


    1.5     The approach of this report is to first give a brief summary of
        the OPP‘s presentations to the Committee and then to offer our
        response to them in section 7 of this report.


    2.      Overview by Public Protector, Advocate Lawrence Mushwana


    2.1     The Public Protector, Advocate Lawrence Mushwana, provided an
        overview of the Office’s activities and performance for 2006/07.


    2.2     The Office of the Public Protector (OPP) was established by the
        Constitution as a state institution supporting democracy to ensure
        government’s accountability and to provide remedies for
        maladministration and abuse of authority. In order to do this, the
        Public Protector is empowered to investigate, report on, and
        suggest remedial action for a wide range of wrongdoings in the
        public administration.


    2.3     The OPP consists of a national office, together with 9
        provincial offices. In addition, there are regional offices in the
        North West, Western Cape and Mpumalanga, while there are plans to
        open further regional offices in the Northern Cape, Eastern Cape,
        Kwa-Zulu Natal and Free State.


    2.4     The Public Protector highlighted certain achievements in the
        2006/07 year under review:


          • The recruitment and appointment of managers to key positions.
            Of particular significance was the appointment of the Chief
            Executive Officer (CEO) on 1 April 2007, as the Office had been
            without a CEO for approximately two years.


          • 73 clinics and 167 information sessions were conducted as part
            of the OPP’s outreach programme, the purpose of which was to
            increase accessibility to and public awareness of the Public
            Protector.
          • The OPP participated in a ‘landscaping survey’ conducted by the
            European Union (EU) through the Civil Society Advocacy
            Programme (CSAP). The study resulted in a number of valuable
            recommendations, which the OPP is implementing with the
            European Union’s financial assistance.


    2.5     The Public Protector also mentioned various challenges that the
        OPP has been faced with in the 2006/07 year under review:


          • There were difficulties in filling critical posts, including
            those of the Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer;
            the Senior Manager: Information Technology; the Senior Manager:
            Human Resources; the Senior Manager: Provincial Co-ordination;
            the Senior Manager: Communications and the Senior Manager:
            Administration. While most of these posts have since been
            filled, the vacancies nevertheless impacted on the OPP’s
            ability to achieve its strategic objectives for 2006/07. This
            is particularly evident in the performance of Programme 4:
            Knowledge Management and Communications and Information
            Technology.


          • As a result of problems with its information communications
            technology, the Public Protector lacks an electronic system to
            manage its cases. This has meant that statistics are compiled
            manually, which not only makes the collation of statistics time
            consuming but also makes tracking the progress of cases
            difficult. While external auditors have been appointed to
            verify these manually compiled statistics, the underlying
            problem experienced with SITA that led to there being no
            computerised system remains unresolved.


          • Although there is some collaboration, ensuring systems for
            effective collaboration and co-operation with the other Chapter
            9 institutions remains a challenge.


          • Making the OPP more accessible, especially in remote areas, is
            yet another challenge.


          • There is a need to increase public awareness of the Public
            Protector’s work.


    3.      Programme Performance


     1. The Office of the Public Protector has 4 programmes:

    • Investigations and Reporting;
    • Communication Services;
    • Corporate Support Services; and
    • Knowledge Management and Information Technology.

     2. The Investigations and Reporting programme, conducts national,
        special and provincial investigations. Key achievements for this
        programme in the 2006/07 year under review include:

         • A total of 12 629 new cases were received in 2006/07, although
           this is less than the 17 415 cases received in 2005/06. Of the
           cases received in 2006/07, 2 781 fell outside the jurisdiction
           of the Public Protector.  13 434 cases were finalised in 2006/07
           compared to 17 619 in 2005/6.
         • In 2006/07, 8 systemic and 22 own initiative investigations were
           conducted, of which 9 were finalised.
         • 95% of cases were finalised in the targeted turnaround time of 2
           years.
         • The Executive Manager: Provincial Co-ordination was appointed to
           improve the effective and efficient co-ordination of provincial
           offices.

     3. The Communications programme has 2 sub-programmes: Outreach, and
        Marketing and Communications. The programme’s overall objective is
        to improve internal and external communication and to encourage a
        common vision and improved profile for the Office of the Public
        Protector. Selected achievements for the 2006/07 year under review
        include:
         • An outreach strategy was adopted and an Outreach Co-ordinator
           and 5 facilitators were appointed by the Civil Society Advocacy
           Programme (CSAP) to assist the Office to implement this
           strategy.
         • 73 clinics were conducted, and flowing from these clinics 1 852
           complaints were lodged.
         • 167 information sessions were conducted in order to increase
           public awareness, far exceeding the target of 5 information
           sessions per province.
         • On the issue of collaboration with other Chapter 9 bodies,
           although a collaboration plan has not been achieved, areas for
           collaboration have been identified with the assistance of the
           CSAP.
         • A communications and marketing strategy was developed to improve
           communication and flow of information to stakeholders.


    3.4     The Corporate Support Services programme has 4 sub-programmes:
        Human Resource Management; Finance and Supply Chain; Administration
        and Support; and Security Management. This programme aims to
        achieve and sustain an efficient and effective corporate support
        programme. Selected achievements for the 2006/07 year under review
        include:


    A draft retention strategy was developed, while the implementation of
        the remuneration strategy is ongoing and is expected to be
        finalised during 2007/08.
    A costing model for investigations was partially developed, in that
        levels of complexity for cases received have been defined and key
        variables have been identified to be included in a costing model.
    A divisional budgeting model has been developed and budget guidelines
        prepared. Also, the OPP’s accounting system is able to produce
        budget monitoring reports for each business unit.
    A Security Management Unit was established and needs analysis conducted
        for 7 of the OPP’s 9 offices.


    The Knowledge Management and Information Technology programme, was
        unable to fill the post of Knowledge and Research Manager and,
        consequently, was unable to meet most of its targets for the year
        under review. It did, however, report the establishment of an
        African Ombudsman Resource Centre at the University of KwaZulu-
        Natal as a key success for 2006/07.


    4.      Corporate Services


     1. The Office of the Public Protector has 238 posts, of which 205 were
        filled on 31 March 2007. There were also 6 additional posts. These
        are posts funded by the European Union through the Civil Advocacy
        Support Programme starting from 1 January 2007 to allow the OPP to
        expand its Outreach programme.


     2. With regard to employment equity, 42% of the OPP’s employees are
        African males, 21% African females, 21% White males, 8% White
        females, 4% Coloured males and 4% Indian males. These percentages
        remain the same in terms of senior management. The OPP’s staff
        comprises 71% males and 29% females.


     3. The average vacancy rate for the OPP is 13.9%, while its turnover
        rate is 17.1%, the majority (88%) of which are resignations.


    5.      Financial Matters


     1. The Public Protector receives its budget allocation in the form of
        a direct transfer from the Department of Justice and Constitutional
        Development. In 2006/07, the Public Protector received R62.9
        million in total revenue in 2006/07, while total expenditure was
        R62.4 million.


     2. For the fifth consecutive year, the Auditor General gave an
        unqualified audit opinion with no matters of emphasis.


     6. Way Forward and Selected Challenges Identified in the Year Ahead:
        2007/08


     1. The OPP identified two aspects to its strategic framework for
        2007/08 - organisational and operational. The organisational
        framework identifies the need for the OPP to remain lean,
        professional and to be able to expand or contract its staff
        complement according to its caseload. The use of database of
        contractors is envisaged. The operational framework identifies 3
        focus areas:


         • A thematic approach where specific themes are identified for the
           year.
         • A project approach is aimed towards ensuring a more professional
           approach to investigations. Each investigation will be project
           managed (requiring a project charter, timeframes, budget lines
           and clear strategies). This approach also intends that cases are
           finalised within a year. Cases that take longer than a year to
           finalise will require special approval.
         • A mobile office to make the OPP more accessible.

   2. The strategic goals identified for 2007/08 are as follows:

         • Programme 1: Investigation and Reporting. The focus is on
           improving Service Delivery Indicators (SDIs). The costing of
           investigative activities remains a challenge and is a priority
           for 2007/08.
         • Programme 2: Executive Management. This is a new programme
           focusing on strategic management, marketing and communications
         • Programme 3: Outreach Programme. This is to be a separate
           programme that mainly uses the CSAP budget. An outreach co-
           ordinator was appointed to take charge of implementation of the
           strategy defined in 2006/07.
         • Programme 4: Corporate Services. Policies and procedures that
           have been developed must be implemented.


     3. Selected key challenges or constraints identified for 2007/08
        include:


         • Despite the fact that the OPP’s receives its budget as a
           transfer from the Department of Justice and Constitutional
           Development, the mere fact that its budget falls within the
           Department’s budget allocation creates the perception that the
           OPP is not independent.
         • The OPP continues to be reliant on SITA for its information
           technology needs despite ongoing problems with the services
           offered by SITA.
         • The term of the present Public Protector is to come to an end at
           the end of November 2009. In order to ensure continuity and the
           smooth transfer of knowledge, it is preferable that the
           appointment process is initiated and completed well in advance
           of the expiry date and that Parliament plays its role in
           ensuring that this happens.


    7.      Committee’s Response


     1. The Committee commends the Public Protector for having received an
        unqualified audit opinion from the Auditor General with no matters
        of emphasis for five consecutive years.


     2. The OPP’s initiative to increase public awareness of its services
        is welcome, but the Committee feels more needs to be done.  The OPP
        reported hosting 167 workshops and holding 73 clinics. The mere
        fact that these workshops and clinics were held speaks only to the
        OPP’s outputs and says little regarding the intended outcome, which
        is increased public awareness. The Committee suggests that the OPP
        revisit the measures by which it evaluates the effectiveness of its
        outreach programmes. Furthermore, the Committee notes that the need
        to increase public awareness was also raised as a concern by the Ad
        Hoc Committee on Operational Problems in the Office of the Public
        Protector, which found that the OPP needed an effective
        communication strategy to allow it to keep the public adequately
        informed of its work and progress with cases. It is pleasing that a
        communication strategy has been developed to improve communication
        with and the flow of information to stakeholders. But the Committee
        is unable to tell what its effective outcome has been. The flow of
        internal communications was also a matter of concern to the Ad Hoc
        Committee and the Committee urges that the OPP finalise an internal
        communication strategy.
     3. While the various Chapter 9 and associated institutions have
        distinct mandates, it is important that they use available
        resources as advantageously as possible, and a strong argument
        exists in favour of greater and more structured collaboration. Not
        only can this assist in facilitating a seamless approach to
        complaints handling, it creates the potential for joint public
        awareness campaigns, human rights advocacy and training campaigns,
        etc. While the Committee is pleased to hear that there has been
        some progress in ensuring collaboration, albeit mostly informal,
        between the relevant institutions, it nonetheless believes that a
        great deal more can be achieved in this regard. Obviously, the
        responsibility to ensure co-operation and collaboration is that of
        all the Chapter 9 and related institutions, not only the OPP. It
        has raised this matter with all the relevant institutions that
        account to it, and will monitor this carefully.


     4. The Committee finds it completely unacceptable that the OPP
        compiles its statistics manually. While an explanation was given
        for this longstanding problem, the Committee found the OPP’s answer
        unconvincing, and expects the problems to be solved by the time the
        OPP presents its next Annual Report to the Committee.


     5. The Committee finds the OPP’s statistics relating to the receipt
        and finalisation of cases for 2006/07 to be incomplete: in previous
        years, the Public Protector provided the number of cases carried
        forward, but in 2006/07 only the cases received, finalised, and non
        jurisdictional cases were reported on. The Committee was able to
        deduce from previous years that the number of cases carried forward
        appears to hover around 12 000 to 13 000. It would have been
        preferable for this information be included in the 2006/07 Annual
        Report. The Committee does not understand why this did not happen
        as in previous years, as details of the number of backlog cases,
        and cases carried forward would have provided the Committee with
        greater clarity as to the OPP’s capacity to deal with its caseload.


     6. The Committee finds it interesting that the number of new cases has
        dropped from 22 350 in 2004/05 to 12 629 on 2006/07. It is
        encouraging that the number of cases finalised has increased
        overall from 7 539 in 2004/05 to 13 434 in 2006/07, although this
        is a significant decline from 2005/06 where 17 619 cases were
        finalised. The Committee would be interested in why the fluctuation
        in the number of cases received and finalised occurred.


     7. The Committee welcomes the OPP’s attempts to reduce the time it
        takes to finalise its cases. This is important not only for the
        sake of the individual concerned, but also as a means of increasing
        public confidence in the efficiency and effectiveness of the
        Chapter 9 institutions. However, the present target of two years
        seems to the Committee to be rather lengthy. It accepts, however,
        that this is just a start, and that the OPP intends to further
        reduce the time it takes to finalise its cases.


     8. The Committee understands the Public Protector’s concern regarding
        the need for the process of appointing a new Public Protector to
        begin well before the expiry of the present incumbent’s term of
        office, in order to ensure continuity and the opportunity for the
        transfer of knowledge. This is a concern that has also been raised
        by the other Chapter 9 institutions that appear before this
        Committee regarding their own change of leadership. In addition to
        including this matter in its exit report, the Committee intends to
        raise the matter of appointments generally with the Speaker.


     9. The Committee was interested to hear of the initiative involving
        the European Union Civil Society Advocacy Project, which produced a
        landscaping report and many recommendations that the OPP is
        implementing. The Committee would like to know more about this,
        particularly the proposed recommendations and will pursue this
        further with the OPP.

    10. The Committee is aware of the dissatisfaction with the lack of
        legislative uniformity in the procedures to determine the salaries
        and conditions of service that are applicable to the various heads
        of the Chapter 9 institutions, as well as the lack of consultation
        with regard to increases. It also notes the regrettable failure to
        consult with the Public Protector on the recommendations relating
        to the remuneration of Independent Office Bearers, despite the
        relevance of these recommendations to the Public Protector. The
        Committee will pursue this further with the relevant stakeholders.


    11. The Committee notes that the Ad Hoc Committee on the Operational
        Problems in the Office of the Public Protector raised specific
        concerns regarding the ongoing litigation between the Public
        Protector and the Deputy Public Protector.  While the Committee
        respects every person's constitutional right to litigate in order
        to protect and enforce their rights, the Committee hopes that this
        matter, between the two highest officials in the OPP, can be
        resolved in a responsible and sensible way.

     7. Acknowledgements


     1. The Committee thanks the Public Protector and all those who
        appeared before the Committee for their co-operation.
     2. The Committee acknowledges with appreciation the very valuable work
        done by Ms Christine Silkstone in shaping this report.

        Report to be considered.

2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the 2007-2008 Annual
   Report of the Department of Labour, dated 11 February 2009:

      The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having considered the 2007-2008
      Annual Report of Department of Labour, reports that it has concluded
      its deliberations with the following recommendations:


      (1)   The Minister of Labour should ensure that the Department of
           Labour reports to the Committee on a quarterly basis on progress
           made in correcting issues that were noted by the Auditor-General
           in their annual report.


      (2)   The Department of Labour (DOL) should consider engaging the
           Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA) on the
           issue of the filling of vacancies in the Department of Labour.


      (3)   The Minister of Labour should ensure that the process of filling
           of acting positions within the department is speeded up.


      (4)   The Portfolio Committee on Labour, in the fourth Parliament,
           should be informed of the reasons for the DOL to approach the
           National Treasury for virements.
      (5)   The Portfolio Committee on Labour in the fourth Parliament
           should monitor the implementation of the recommendations of the
           Standing Committee on Public Accounts and the external auditors.


           Report to be considered.

                            MONDAY, 23 MARCH 2009


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
      a) Government Notice No 110 published in Government Gazette No 31872
         dated 6 February 2009: Stopping and reallocation of conditional
         allocations, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2008 (Act No
         2 of 2008).

      b) Government Notice No R. 144  published in Government Gazette No
         31892 dated 13 February 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
         1/1/1374) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
         of 1964).

      c) Government Notice No R. 145  published in Government Gazette No
         31892 dated 13 February 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
         2/306) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).
      d) Government Notice No R. 146  published in Government Gazette No
         31892 dated 13 February 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
         2/307) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

     (e)    Government Notice No 289  published in Government Gazette No
         32005 dated 11 March 2009: Notice in terms of paragraph 2C of the
         Second Schedule in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
         1962).


     (f)    Government Notice No 290  published in Government Gazette No
         32005 dated 11 March 2009: Notice in terms of paragraph (b) of the
         definition of “living annuity” in section 1in terms of the Income
         Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     (g)    Report of the South African Reserve Bank of the annual general
         meeting of shareholders for 2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Criminal Law (Forensic
     Procedures) Amendment Bill [B 2 – 2009] dated 23 March 2009:




     The Ad Hoc Committee on the Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures)
     Amendment Bill having considered the subject of the Criminal Law
     Amendment Bill [B 2- 2009], reports as follows:

   1. Introduction


            1. The Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill was
               referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on the Criminal Law
               (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill on 13 January 2009. The
               Committee was required to report to the National Assembly by
               23 January 2009. The Committee held its first meeting on 20
               January 2009 and subsequently requested an extension on the
               reporting date.


            2. On 18 February 2009 the National Assembly passed a motion
               granting the Committee extension to report on the Bill by 10
               March 2009.


      1. Composition of Committee
            1. The following members of the National Assembly were
               appointed to serve on the Committee:


               Chohan-Khota, FI (ANC); Johnson, C (ANC); Madasa, ZL (ANC);
               Mahote, S (ANC); Maunye, MM (ANC); Ntuli, B (ANC);
               Sibanyoni, JB (ANC); Sotyu, MM (ANC); Van Wyk, A (ANC);
               Delport, T (DA); Joubert, L (DA); Seaton, S (IFP); Rajbally,
               S (MF); Madikiza, GT (UDM).


         2.2     Ms MM Sotyu was elected Chairperson.

     3.     Context of the Bill

          3.1    The Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill
               seeks to:
                  • Address gaps in our current legislation dealing with the
                    collection, storage and use of fingerprint and
                    Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) evidence.
                  • Provide for the establishment and administration of a
                    National DNA database (NDDSA).

          3.2    Currently, the Criminal Procedure Act, No 51 of 1977 only
               regulates the taking of blood samples in criminal cases and
               the ascertainment of other bodily features. The Bill is
               intended:

                  • To expand the powers of the police to collect and store
                    DNA samples and fingerprints.
                  • To establish and administer a National DNA database.
                  • To give the police access to the electronic databases of
                    the Department of Home Affairs which currently stores
                    fingerprints of 31 million citizens and approximately 2,
                    5 million foreigners, and the Department of Transport
                    where 6 million thumbprints are stored. At present the
                    police only have access to its own database which only
                    stores fingerprints of a limited number of convicted
                    persons.

          3.3    The Memorandum on the Objects of the Bill states that
               access to a DNA database and an expanded fingerprint
               database will greatly enhance the capacity of the police in
               its fight against crime. In particular the following
               advantages are noted:

                  • It will help the police to solve more crimes and match
                    suspects to crime scenes;
                  • It will increase the likelihood of identifying unknown
                    perpetrators and will also assist in linking
                    perpetrators with multiple crime scenes;
                  • More suspects will make use of plea bargain procedures
                    where evidence has positively linked them to crime
                    scenes;
                  • DNA and fingerprint evidence can also be used to prove
                    the innocence of an accused person;
                  • It can be used in certain instances to identify missing
                    persons or unidentified human remains.


   4. Public Participation


          4.1    The Committee advertised in five national newspapers
               inviting interested parties to submit written comments on
               the Bill. Ten submissions were received of which six
               stakeholders participated in the public hearings held on 3
               February 2009. Members of the Committee (in their individual
               capacity) received additional submissions after the closing
               date for submissions, which could not be considered due to
               time constraints.


          4.2    The Department of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
               further presented 95 written submissions to the Committee.
               However, the majority of these submissions were from
               individuals merely expressing their support for the Bill.


       5. Visit to the South African Police Service (SAPS) Criminal Record
          Centre and Forensic Science Laboratory

          5.1    The Committee visited the SAPS Criminal Record Centre and
               Forensic           Science Laboratory in Pretoria in order
               to better understand the more practical aspects relating to
               the forensic capacity within the SAPS, such as the
               organizational structure, personnel strength, staff turnover
               and resources, training needs and budget allocations of
               these structures.


          5.2    Members raised a number of concerns which are contained in
                  documentation available from the Committee Section, which
               included:

                  • Concerns around the lack of information regarding the
                    SAPS future plans to address capacity building, scarce
                    skills and personnel shortages in order to achieve the
                    objects of the Bill.
                  • Concerns were raised regarding the National roll-out
                    strategy of the fully-automated, robotic analyzing
                    processing machines/units currently only situated in
                    Pretoria.
                  • The need for intensive increase in the capacity and
                    training of police station members in the taking and
                    safe-guarding of non-intimate blood samples.
                  • Concerns around the number of police stations each
                    Forensic Science laboratory is capable of servicing and
                    the laboratory’s ability to handle the influx of large
                    numbers of samples.
                  • Concerns around the need for safeguards to ensure the
                    integrity of samples including the need to ensure
                    independence of the forensic services from the SAPS, and
                    adequate storage facilities.


           Some of these concerns were addressed, while others are still
           outstanding.


   6. Processing of the Bill

           6.1   The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
                 briefed the Committee on the objectives of the Bill,
                 followed by a briefing by the Research Unit of the
                 Parliament of South Africa on their analysis of the Bill.


              2. The Committee continued with the processing of the Bill by
                 hosting public hearings which were followed by
                 deliberations. A total of ten written submissions and six
                 oral submissions were made to the Committee.


              3. During the Committee deliberations, a number of issues
                 emerged which, in the view of the Committee, required
                 either further elucidation or re-consideration.


           6.4   The amount of time allocated to the Committee to consider
                 the Bill was extremely limited. The Committee also required
                 an implementation plan from the South African Police
                 Service, which was not made available to the Committee
                 during the deliberations.


   7. Findings

           7.1   The process of the public hearings was limited due to the
                 time constraints faced by the Committee. The public needs
                 to be well informed about the contents and implications of
                 this Bill as it is an integral part of the review of the
                 criminal justice system. Therefore the Committee is of the
                 view that the public should be afforded more time to
                 participate in the process through public hearings.


           7.2   The Committee found that the Bill is important in the
                 fight against crime in South Africa, that it is a crucial
                 element in the revamping of the criminal justice system and
                 it is disappointed that it could not be finalised in time.
                 However, time constraints hampered the Committee’s progress
                 on the Bill.


           7.3   The research findings provided to the Committee (as well
                 as that contained in some of the public submissions) in
                 relation to the Bill have revealed a number of important
                 issues that need thorough consideration. The use of DNA
                 sampling has raised serious legal challenges in countries
                 where this technology is fully operational. For example,
                 many of the submissions made to the Committee raise serious
                 constitutional questions, in particular relating to the
                 right to privacy.  A further serious legal concern relates
                 to the powers of police officers to be able to take such
                 bodily samples without first having to obtain a warrant
                 from a court. Other concerns relate to the use of DNA
                 sampling and the retention of samples and profiles in a DNA
                 database, even if a person is not convicted by a court,
                 which could be regarded as a violation of civil liberties
                 and rights. During the deliberations Departmental officials
                 (from Safety and Security and Justice and Constitutional
                 Development) responded to some of these concerns and the
                 Committee made proposals in order to address these concerns
                 but could not take a final decision.


           The view of the Committee is that South Africa must learn from
                 these international experiences so that the possibility of
                 legal challenges is avoided and that more information is
                 needed before the Committee can proceed.


              4. Other issues that need to be considered involve the
                 management and control of DNA services and the actual
                 database itself. In some countries such an exercise is
                 outsourced to private laboratories, while in other
                 countries it remains a state-owned function. Furthermore,
                 some countries outsource this function to agencies outside
                 of their police departments while others, like South
                 Africa, retain it within the police. All these aspects have
                 their own advantages and disadvantages that need to be
                 taken into account when deliberating on the Bill. However,
                 the Committee could not thoroughly investigate these
                 advantages and disadvantages.


           7.5   The Committee’s concluding remark is that, generally,
                 little is known about DNA sampling and profiling in South
                 Africa and therefore more time should be given to the
                 Committee in order to thoroughly attend to every aspect of
                 the Bill, so that a piece of legislation, without any
                 unforeseen and unintended consequences, can be passed.


           7.6   The Committee members raised concerns around the general
                 implementation of the legislation and, in particular,
                 around the capacity of the SAPS to be able to implement the
                 legislation effectively. Parliament has the responsibility
                 to pass legislation which is implementable. Therefore the
                 Committee has identified the need for intensive scrutiny of
                 the implementation plan.
   8. Recommendations
           8.1   The importance of the Bill in the fight against crime
                 cannot be overemphasised. The Committee is totally
                 committed to the fight against crime and view it as an
                 absolute priority.


           8.2   The Committee recommends that the next Parliament consider
                 this Bill as a matter of urgency.

Report to be considered

                           TUESDAY, 24 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 24 March 2009:


          a) Reform of Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of
             Related Matters Bill [B 10D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             76(1)).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Status of Bill
      In view of the adoption by the House, on 24 March 2009, of the Report
    of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures)
    Amendment Bill, the status of the Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures)
    Amendment Bill, as introduced in the National Assembly, remains
    unchanged.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
     a) Government Notice No 309 published in Government Gazette No 32013
        dated 20 March 2009: Technical changes of public entities, in terms
        of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     b) Government Notice No 310 published in Government Gazette No 32013
        dated 20 March 2009: Listing of public entities, in terms of the
        Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     (c)    Government Notice No 311 published in Government Gazette No
        32013 dated 20 March 2009: Listing of public entities, in terms of
        the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Represented Political
        Parties’ Fund for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 262-2008].


     b) Report on the withholding of remuneration of Ms T C Oliphant, in
        terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
        of 1993).


