---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 February 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-02-09
---

                           MONDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: is it appropriate for the
hon Trevor Manuel and the hon John Jeffery to talk throughout the time that
you were bowing to the House and during prayers? I just thought I would
draw your attention to the fact that they are behaving very badly today.

The SPEAKER: I thought you were also observing that moment. You must have
been very busy. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Well, that’s a very good point, Madam Speaker. [Laugher.]
Well said. I was so intrigued by their bad manners that I got carried away
myself. Thank you. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Ellis. Can you please take your seat.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancies which occurred in the National
Assembly owing to the passing away of Mr J Schippers and Mr E Saloojee had
been filled by the nomination, with effect from 4 February 2009, of Mr C J
Hlaneki and Ms N F Nojozi respectively.

                         OATH OR SOLEMN AFFIRMATION

Mr Hlaneki and Ms Nojozi, accompanied by Mr M R Sonto and Mr S K Louw, made
and subscribed the oath and took their seats.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I welcome you to the National Assembly. Please
allow me to shake hands with the new members. [Applause.]

                             PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that she had received a copy of the President of the
Republic’s address delivered at the Joint Sitting on Friday, 6 February
2009, and that the speech had been printed in the Minutes of the Joint
Sitting.

                   PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS

                                  (Debate)

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Mr President, hon
members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, last Friday we were
challenged by our President in his state of the nation address to have hope
about our future as a country and a people. He called on us to have the
resilience of Madiba’s long walk to freedom. We know from our struggle
against apartheid and the last 15 years of freedom that the source of this
hope and resilience is our collective strength as a nation, working
together for a better life for all. We should be able to claim what we have
achieved as a nation on the basis that our success is the result of the
actions of each one of us working towards the same goals.

As government, we will not abrogate our role and responsibility. We are not
a government that sits back and watches. We don't put the fate of our
country in the invisible hand of the markets. We are a developmental state;
we lead where we ought to, facilitate where we must and even regulate where
necessary.

We are in the trenches, through many of our programmes, in carrying out the
following: combating poverty, inequality and unemployment; promoting shared
economic growth; and closing the gap between our first and second
economies. There is just so much we can achieve on our own, but more when
we work together.

The Southern Africa Trust, an NGO that promotes regional policy dialogue on
poverty issues, posted a question on its website, which goes: "If you could
change one thing forever, what would it be?" Lorna Maseko, SABC TV producer
and presenter, gave an answer that speaks to the core of the philosophy of
the kind of nation we have been working so hard to build. She says, and I
quote:

   If I could change one thing forever, I would start with me, and then the
   community around me. So many times we want to change the world, but
   people in our immediate surroundings need the help that we could offer
   without having to travel miles away.

Many South Africans - across race, religion, regions, gender and class -
share and practise this attitude. For instance, Florence Mbokazi of the
Masoyi Home-based Care Project in Mpumalanga, which caters for orphaned
children, gave an account of how government and people like Lorna Maseko
work together to alleviate hardship in our communities. She said, and I
quote:

   We are working hands to hands with all the departments - the Department
   of Education, the Department of Health, the Department of Social
   Development. We are also working directly with social workers and
   teachers. We are hands to hands. We refer each other. Like the Department
   of Education, if they see a particular child in need, they refer her to
   home-based care. And then the Department of Health, if they see these
   people have TB, but they don't have food, while we have food they are
   referred to us. If we see people who need a drip we refer them to the
   Department of Health. Also, we find the children who must get grants and
   we refer them to the Department of Social Development.

These are life experiences of South Africans working together to respond to
challenges. I wish to commend the Children's Institute and the University
of Cape Town for putting together a booklet from which the above life
experiences have been drawn.

We also commenced many programmes that improve dialogue between business,
government and labour, not least of which are the joint working group
meetings that are frequently held with relevant representatives. A recent
example of the outcome of such constructive dialogue has been the joint
statement of response to the international economic crisis in which
business, government and labour drafted and tabled a short and medium-term
plan to work together in order to ride the current economic crisis with the
least fall-out, as well as to be able to respond to the recovery in a
proactive manner.

The Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa, which is a
high-level, collaborative initiative of government, business, organised
labour and the education and training sectors to accelerate the provision
of priority skills, is yielding encouraging results. The Jipsa strategy
involves broadening the training pipeline, retaining people in skilled
employment and training them more effectively and to higher quality
standards. Jipsa depends on the consistent and committed participation of
all its social partners. The work of Jipsa has influenced a paradigm shift
around skills development, enabling various players to see it in a new
light.

The ANC-led government has, since 1994, enjoyed the support of the
overwhelming majority of our electorate based on its clear and practical
programme aimed at reversing the legacy of apartheid and taking our country
to greater heights. In its election manifesto of the inaugural democratic
elections of 1994, the ruling party was humble but ready to lead our
country, and I quote:

   The ANC is ready to govern: we are ready to listen. In developing our
   policies over the years, we have consulted widely, most recently in
   people's forums. We have also discussed with role-players in the economy,
   education and other areas.
Within five years, since 1994, the ANC-led government had laid the
foundation for a South Africa we want by, among other things, carrying out
the following: putting in place one of the best constitutions in the world;
sweeping away racist and oppressive laws; introducing 490 laws in five
years to ensure equality and improve the lives of all; putting in place
measures to bring about equality in the treatment of all South Africans,
including introducing affirmative action; entrenching worker rights; and
setting in motion measures for improving the quality of life of all South
Africans, particularly in areas of water and sanitation, housing,
accessible health care, land reform and education.

In its 2004 election manifesto, the ruling party accordingly committed
itself again. It said, and I quote:

   We will build on the foundations that have been laid, which were not
   there when we took over, to achieve faster progress towards a better life
   for all.

For the current mandate that is now nearing its end, the ANC-led government
was informed by the commitment made to the electorate in 2004 to build “A
people’s contract to create work and fight poverty”. In its manifesto for
the 2004 elections, the ruling party looked back on the previous 10 years
and the road ahead, and I quote:

   The change that happened 10 years ago was a result of struggle and
   sacrifice. Led by the ANC, it was change that created an opportunity for
   us to chart our future together.


   Over the past 10 years, after centuries of colonialism and apartheid, a
   new era has dawned for South Africa.

The President addressed us on Friday on how the ANC-led government has
lived up to promises made in the past and the programme of action to enable
the next administration to “hit the ground running".

The ruling party has been consistent in its election manifestos and the
programmes developed in government that: We can do more when we work
together; we learn from our experiences; we want faster change to achieve
more; and we will listen to our people and respond to their voices.

Our government izimbizo are but one example of how we reached out to voices
in our communities. The War on Poverty campaign has also enabled us to
interact intimately with the challenges of poverty on the ground.

Government has been sincere and the first to admit that in spite of all the
achievements that are well documented by our work across the country, on
our continent and across the world, more still needs to be done; and that,
still, we can do better when we work together.

Some of our compatriots have sounded alarm bells that we are about to
become a failed state. Others, like one of the contributors to the recently
launched 2008 Transformation Audit of the Institute for Justice and
Reconciliation, claimed: “We have a fractured, weak, incompetent state.”

Surely they don’t know the South Africa we live in. Failed states do not
have functioning parliaments like the one we have. Failed states have no
well-run economies that can survive the weight of crumbling global
financial markets. In weak, incompetent states people don’t dare speak out
about the head of state and continue to be free. So, we don’t know what
they’re talking about when they say we are about to be a failed state.

We have been frank about challenges facing our Public Service, and we have
even instituted corrective measures to improve our efficiency and
effectiveness in the delivery of government services. Our country would not
have survived the recall of the former President, for example, had it not
been for our dedicated and patriotic public servants who ensured that the
transition was smooth and painless for our country and people. All in all,
we have a competent and working Public Service that holds our country
together and ensures that the machinery of the state runs smoothly,
regardless of political storms.

Perhaps these critics should listen to the words of Lira, our songbird, in
her response to the aforementioned question posted on the website of the
Southern Africa Trust, when she said:

   If I could change one thing forever, I would change the way that we as
   South Africans see ourselves and our country. We never celebrate the
   great things about ourselves. We so easily, willingly put emphasis on the
   negative. Have you looked around and realised what great people we are?
   We thrive in difficult situations; we are forgiving and innovative. I say
   we start celebrating who we are.

[Applause.]

I also wish to refer them to the website of the International Marketing
Council which is carrying a photo of the current James Bond Aston Martin,
with Bond holding the Proudly South African flag keyholder.

The poet, Kira Sutton, joins Lira and James Bond in his poem I have a dream
for this nation:

   I have a dream for this nation, for which we should learn to be proud
   That it would start with YOU
   And move through the crowd


   Let’s spread the love, the faith and the hope
   This country is full of potential
   Only fear will cause you to mope!


Our people also have full confidence in our democracy and the direction it
is following. The results of the 2008 Voter Participation Survey of the
HSRC, which was commissioned by the Independent Electoral Commission, show
that almost 80% of the respondents were interested in national and
provincial elections, as opposed to 19% who were was not interested. The
survey also shows that 75% of the respondents vote because they believe
their vote can make a difference, as opposed to 31% who thought voting was
just pointless.

Sixty-eight percent of the respondents indicated that they vote to ensure
that they get quality education, health care and better service. We still
need to do more, together, to achieve the objectives we set for ourselves.

When South Africans flock to the polls in the coming months they will be
doing so with high expectations. Like the 68% in the HSRC survey, they will
want the new government of the next five years to continue the effort to
provide quality health care, education and better services. Those in our
rural areas, who have always turned up in big numbers to cast their vote,
want to see our land reform programme accelerated and their parts of our
country fully developed.

The unemployment rate, which is still high by our standards, has to be
decisively tackled by improving and accelerating our programmes which are
aimed at creating decent work and sustainable livelihoods. Our work in
turning around and revamping our criminal justice system has to be stepped
up to intensify our fight against crime and corruption.

Young people remain high on the government’s agenda. Institutional support
is one way we can ensure our young citizens are developed.
I have no doubt that the merger of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the
National Youth Commission into one entity, the National Youth Development
Agency, will go a long way in fast-tracking and streamlining youth
development in our country. This is an example of how we have learnt
lessons from our experiences of the past 15 years and agreed on a way of
how to improve our institutions. This new agency will maximise new and
existing youth development programmes, with a view to strengthening
implementation capacity at local and provincial levels. We call on all
young people to support and interact with this agency after its launch
later this year.
The electricity shortages at the beginning of 2008 made everyone aware of
the critical importance of improving energy efficiency.
We will continue to work with stakeholders, especially through the National
Stakeholder Advisory Council on Electricity, and at Nedlac, to address the
challenges arising from the campaign of energy efficiency. We particularly
want to thank organised business and organised labour for their strong co-
operation.

I take this opportunity to applaud the Ethekwini Municipality for launching
an energy office, which is the first of its kind in South Africa. This
office aims to establish the municipality as a leading local authority in
promoting and implementing energy management to achieve a sustainable
energy future for businesses and residents of Ethekwini.

The President paid tribute to some of our fallen heroes, including members
who served this Parliament with honour and commitment. The coming elections
will give the party that will win a mandate based on a programme presented
to the electorate. But we all, collectively, have a responsibility as
leaders of our various political formations to make our country work and
realise the dream that heroes like Solomon Mahlangu and Onkgopotse Tiro
were prepared to sacrifice their lives for. And, I end by reminding us of
what the preamble of the Constitution says:

   We, the people of South Africa,
   Recognise the injustices of our past;
   Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land;
   Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
   Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
   diversity.

Let us see this realised. I thank you. [Applause.]

Die LEIER VAN DIE OPPOSISIE: Agb Speaker van die Parlement van Suid-Afrika,
agb President van die Republiek van Suid-Afrika, mede-burgers, binnekort
begin ons met die aftel van dae na die volgende algemene verkiesing, ’n
geleentheid wat ons in die DA met groot optimisme benader.

Ons het die eerste roeringe van verandering op die politieke toneel in
April 2006 gevoel, toe plaaslike regering na plaaslike regering in die
hande van die amptelike opposisie en opposisie-geleide koalisies beland
het.

Ons het dit sterk in Mei 2007 aangevoel toe die DA die Stad Kaapstad se
burgemeester, Helen Zille, as leier verkies het, en dié verkiesing met
buitengewone entoesiasme onder die algemene publiek ontvang is.

Oor die laaste drie maande het ons dit weer wyk na wyk ervaar soos wat
mense tydens tussenverkiesings na vore gekom het en toenemend daarin
volhard het om die party aan my linkerkant, eerder as die party aan my
regterkant, as die party van regering te erken.

Bygesê was daar oor die laaste jaar dramatiese veranderinge in die
politieke omgewing wat ’n skielike paleisrevolusie, as gevolg van interne
struwelinge in die regerende party, ingesluit het, maar nie daartoe beperk
is nie.

Die nuutgevonde vloeibaarheid wat hierdie gebeurlikhede vir ons politieke
arena tot gevolg gehad het, het ’n historiese geleentheid vir
betekenisvolle verandering teweeg gebring. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker of the Parliament of South
Africa, hon President of the Republic of South Africa, fellow citizens,
soon we will start counting down the days before the next general election,
an event which we in the DA are approaching with great optimism.

We felt the first stirrings of change in the political landscape in April
2006, when local authority after local authority fell into the hands of the
official opposition and opposition-led coalitions.

We felt it strongly in May 2007, when the DA chose the mayor of the City of
Cape Town, Helen Zille, as their leader and this choice was welcomed with
extraordinary enthusiasm by the general public.
Over the past three months we have again experienced it in ward after ward
during by-elections, as people would come forward and increasingly persist
in acknowledging the party to my left, rather than the party to my right,
as the party of government.

Not forgetting the dramatic changes over the past year in the political
arena, including a sudden palace revolution that included, but was not
limited to internal wrangling within the ruling party.

The new-found fluidity that these events created in our political arena has
occasioned an historic opportunity for meaningful change.]

This changing reality was admirably appraised in the weekend press by one
of our party’s most promising new, young candidates, Lindiwe Mazibuko, who
personifies what I like to call the new South African woman – the woman
whose position in society is determined by choice and not by custom or
culture.

She writes:

   I believe that the DA will be a central part in this new political
   realignment and I look forward to having a part to play on the long,
   exciting journey which lies ahead for all of us. I believe that voters
   will have the chance to transcend identity, race and history — however
   important these may be - to cast votes based on issues, principles and
   plans of action, rather than the fear that each of us is only safe among
   people who look and speak like we do.

These words resonate with the same values which, as President Motlanthe so
graciously acknowledged on Friday, inspired Helen Suzman to represent “the
values of our new Parliament in the Chambers of the old”.

I dedicate this speech to her and her enduring legacy and it gives me great
pleasure to acknowledge the presence of her daughter, Frances Jowell, in
this Chamber today. [Applause.]

Helen showed us that the fight for equality and justice should not be
abandoned when the odds are poor, or the cause unpopular, but to persevere
because it is the right thing to do.

Certainly we can strive to emulate her example by asking that the Fourth
Parliament starts its work by implementing the major recommendations of the
recent independent assessment of Parliament, conducted as part of the peer
review process.

Primary amongst these is the need for a review of the present party-list
system in line with the recommendations of the Van Zyl Slabbert report,
which attempts to capture the benefits of both the constituency-based and
proportional representation electoral systems, to ensure proper
parliamentary oversight and accountability to the people while not unduly
silencing the voice of minorities.

Our present system creates a dangerous distance between elected party
representatives and constituents, whilst simultaneously creating an
obsequious closeness between them and the party bosses.
Die DA neem die kwessie van wetsgehoorsame Suid-Afrikaanse burgers wat
hulself tydelik oorsee bevind en sonder omhaal gestroop is van hul
grondwetlike reg om te stem, hof toe.

Vandat die Konstitusionele Hof - ongeag hoeveel dit teen alle ingewing
indruis - besluit het dat gevangenes mag stem, is dit selfs meer onhoudbaar
dat duisende wetsgehoorsame burgers, wat hulself tydelik oorsee bevind,
daarvan weerhou word om te stem om die ontwil van logistieke eenvoudigheid.

Hierdie is eenvoudig ’n onaanvaarbare stand van sake. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The DA is taking to court the issue of law-abiding South African citizens
who are overseas temporarily and have been capriciously stripped of their
constitutional right to vote.

Since the Constitutional Court ruled, regardless of how it went against all
our dictates, that prisoners may vote, it has become even more untenable
that thousands of law-abiding citizens who are temporarily abroad are being
barred from voting for the sake of logistical simplicity.

This is simply an unacceptable state of affairs.]

However, if there was a single issue which, this past year, made many South
Africans feel deeply insecure, it was the unbridled attacks on the
judiciary and the ambivalent and troubling confluence of ruling party and
state, where the rule of law was directly threatened by the law of rule.

Overgeset synde, die regstaat is bedreig deur die magstaat. As
hofbeslissings nie die regerende party behaag het nie, is die howe in die
openbaar gekruisig. Waar hofbeslissings wel populêre opinie weerspieël het,
is hulle geprys.

Niemand kan vertroue hê dat die gereg sal seëvier as die instellings wat
die nederiges en sagmoediges moet beskerm teen dié wat populisme en mag
nastreef nie immuun blyk teen party-politieke inmenging nie, hetsy dit as
gevolg van onpartydige aanstellings, bevooroordeelde suiweringsaksies of
baantjies vir boeties, gedoen word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[In other words, the rule of law was directly threatened by the law of
rule. If court decisions were not to the liking of the ruling party, the
courts were publicly lambasted. When a court decision did reflect popular
opinion, the courts were praised.

Nobody can be confident that justice will prevail if the institutions which
are supposed to protect the humble and the meek from those who strive for
populism and power do not appear to be immune to party-political
interference, whether  through prejudiced appointments, acts of biased
purging or jobs for pals.]

If the President, as he stated on Friday, wants to regain some of the moral
high ground which has been lost, and also root out the corruption and
contractual manipulation which is such an alarming feature of our political
landscape, then he and his party must address these issues by personal
example, and practise what they preach.

He must grasp this opportunity to reinvigorate the Constitution that
catapulted us onto the world stage a short decade or more ago, rather than
be tempted to fritter away, for illusory and inevitably temporary
advantage, the principles of the rule of law, the fundamental rights which
guarantee our democracy and the essential, protected relationship between
the individual and the state. A firm and necessary commitment to the
institution of a judicial inquiry into the arms scandal would be a good
start.
Madam Speaker, there are epic moments in history, often catalysed by
catastrophe, which permit fundamental cultural change, as Benjamin Barber
says in a thought-provoking article on fundamental values. Such a moment is
upon us now.

The convergence of the change of government in the United States and the
collapse of the global credit economy marks such a moment where radical
change is possible.

While the government can take some credit for the fact that we have fared
relatively better than some other emerging economies during the current
global credit crisis, there is no way that we can pretend to be immune to
the impact of successive waves of failure which are still washing against
our shores.

A tsunami, I regret to say, is probably still on its way. Fifty million job
losses projected globally is certainly nothing less. We need to be
forewarned and forearmed.

This is clearly a highly complex problem that needs complex stakeholder-
negotiated solutions and even radical change. It is an issue on which our
commitment to multilateralism in international affairs should also be
copied on the domestic front.

It is not the divisions that are important in the challenges we face today,
but the dire consequences that these challenges hold for our common future.

We need a co-ordinated national response, involving all political parties,
government, labour and the private sector. We expect to be taken into your
confidence, Sir, even on a weekly basis, on what is being done to contain
and prevent job losses. There are simply not enough conversations going on
and the resultant uncertainty will further undermine our chances of
recovery.

The lack of communication and virtual isolation which became the hallmark
of the Mbeki era cannot be tolerated again. The opportunities for debate,
for answering questions and for making statements on issues of public
importance that Parliament offers us must be grasped with enthusiasm and
never again be allowed to become meaningless exercises in executive
sleights of hand.

We have some suggestions on how the impact of the crisis can be
ameliorated. Firstly, we can do so by driving an actual skills revolution
through the private sector, and efficiently facilitating the sourcing of
job-creating know-how internationally, when and where it is required.
Secondly, we can do so by lowering business costs, targeted in partnership
with labour and business, and making employment cheaper through wage
subsidies. And, thirdly, we can do so by assuring equal access to jobs,
regardless of circumstance of birth, through affirming rather than
affirmative action.

What we do not need is a drawing of the laager; a new wave of protectionism
that will inevitably lead to advantages only for the protected, whilst
ensuring inefficiencies that will come at certain cost to the consumer and
lead to the stifling of job-creating economic growth.

The global economic uncertainties mean the benign circumstances under which
our economy used to grow are no longer there. I have therefore been reading
with amazement the grandiose dreams proposed by the ultra left with their
appetite for the expansion of state-driven schemes, which would be very
hard to fund even in the rosiest economic climate, let alone under the
adverse conditions that are predictably going to outlast the 4th
Parliament. They remind me very much of the ultra right in the country,
whose claims of rising to power stand in direct contrast to their pitiful
level of support among the voters.

Madam Speaker, I also want to highlight the disturbing increase in
incidences of collusion and price-fixing which have been exposed in some
big companies. We need ever more stringent action against this. It is
exploitation of the worst kind, particularly when rising food prices are
becoming an ever larger threat to the poor.

Terselfdertyd is dit van kardinale belang om boere, die primêre produsente
van voedsel, die belangrike middelpunt van ons grondhervormingsprojek te
maak. Kommersiële landbou is ’n industrie waarvan ek intieme kennis dra en
aan wie ek erkenning wil gee vir die ongelooflike positiewe ingesteldheid
jeens die regstelling van die verwronge grondbesitpatrone van ons land.
Hulle verstaan dat dit egter nie in landsbelang sou wees as hierdie proses
die produktiewe dravermoë van grond in die wiele ry nie.

Dis duidelik geïllustreer deur die feit dat dit tans nodig is vir ons
kommersiële boere – en ek sien dit daar in Viljoenskroon by ons graansilo’s
– om aan die voedselbehoeftes van sewe miljoen Zimbabwiërs, wat voorheen in
die broodmandjie van Afrika gewoon het, te voorsien.

Ek wil ook graag erkenning gee aan die wynbedryf en ’n glasie klink op die
350ste verjaardag wat ons sopas hier aan die suidpunt van Afrika gevier
het. Ek is, seker tot my ewige verlies, nie ’n verbruiker van dié verwerkte
produk nie ... [Gelag.] ... maar ek het geweldig waardering vir die
aanpasbaarheid, produktiwiteit en langslewendheid van die wingerdstok. Sy
was ’n Europese inkomer wat haarself hier so ingewortel het dat dit moeilik
is om haar nie as inheems te beskou nie.

Dit is vir my so ’n paslike metafoor vir die mense van Suid-Afrika wat byna
almal maar van elders gekom het om hier hul uiteindelike holte vir die voet
te vind en onafskeidbaar deel van hierdie bodem te word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[At the same time it is of vital importance to reposition farmers, as
primary food producers, as the important centre of our land reform project.
Commercial farming is an industry of which I have intimate knowledge and I
would like to give it recognition for its unbelievably positive disposition
towards rectifying the distorted land ownership patterns of our country.
They understand that it would, however, not be in the country’s interest if
this process were to thwart the productive carrying capacity of the land.

This is clearly illustrated by the fact that it is currently necessary for
our commercial farmers – and I see this up there in Viljoenskroon at our
grain silos - to provide for the food needs of seven million Zimbabweans
who previously lived in the bread basket of Africa.

I would also like to acknowledge the wine industry and raise a glass to its
350th birthday which we have just celebrated here at the southern tip of
Africa. I am, probably to my own eternal loss, not a consumer of that
processed product ... [Laughter.] ... but I have immense appreciation for
the adaptability, productivity and longevity of the vine. She was a
European arrival who has taken root to such an extent that it is difficult
not to regard her as indigenous.
I find it such a fitting metaphor for the people of South Africa, almost
all of whom actually came from elsewhere to come and settle and become an
inseparable part of this land.]

I was recently asked in a radio debate how the DA would manage to deliver
on its election promises. It was easy to answer by way of example of where
we have already successfully done so. [Interjections.] The open-opportunity
society for all is not a pipe dream. There are places where it is already
finding its way into the everyday lives of people and you can see it
operate in practice. It is being done without monetary incentive, Minister
Manuel, in municipalities such as Cape Town and in the Swartland, in
Midvaal, in Overstrand, Baviaanskloof and Mossel Bay, just to mention a
few.

Here, crime is being combated by making criminals sweat off their
transgressions in service to the community. Municipal police services are
staffed, equipped and trained to deal with drug abuse and domestic
violence. Road maintenance and construction schedules are diligently kept;
there is efficient provision of basic services; more rapid provision of
quality, integrated low-cost housing; Public Service vacancy rates as low
as 6%; and unqualified audits year after year, signalling clean government.
[Applause.]

Hierdie is die bekroonde skoon en goedbestuurde munisipaliteite wat die
voorbeeld stel vir hoe elke provinsie in die land bestuur moet word as ons
wil hê dat die ekonomie moet gedy en werksgeleenthede geskep moet word.
Hierdie is plekke in die Suid-Afrikaanse samelewing waar dié wat voorheen
uitgesluit was hul toegang nou tot die ekonomie kan vind, waar
gekompliseerde en oneffektiewe kwotas verwyder is, waar tenderprosedures
meer deursigtig gemaak is en waar die dringende morele noodsaaklikheid van
bemagtiging vir die arm meerderheid meedoënloos gedryf word. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[These are the award-winning, clean and well-run municipalities that set an
example of how each province in the country should be managed if we want
the economy to prosper and job opportunities to be created. These are
places in South African society where the formerly disadvantaged can now
gain access to the economy, where complicated and ineffective quotas have
been removed, where tender processes have been made more transparent, and
where the urgent moral need for empowerment of the poor majority is being
driven relentlessly.]

These are the types of successes that will be extended to the whole of the
Western Cape, and possibly even – I hope - to the other provinces, once the
results of the coming elections are returned. They are successes that must
be replicated in other towns, districts and cities after the 2011 local
government election. They are the successes that all of South Africa must
share in by 2014.

That will be a future where the rights of each child to quality teaching
and useable skills acquisition will not be subverted by the self-interest
of militant teacher unions. It will be a future where educators will rather
be engaged on how best to structure the schooling system so that matrics
can graduate from high school with the relevant skills to enter the working
world, assisted on entry into the job market with opportunity vouchers.
These are the affirming actions that will drive job creation and economic
growth in the future.

For these economic policies to succeed we need families to be healthy and
to remain so by an increased focus on service to the community and social-
security coverage to ensure improved child care, improved basic income for
the poor and the unemployed, and better access to grants for the aged and
the disabled.

We need to provide refuge to vulnerable women and children for all of the
365 days that they are exposed to violence. We need to respond with the
greatest urgency and every possible measure to ensure that Aids and drug
abuse do not continue to tear away at the fabric of any of our communities;
among neither the rich nor the poor; not amongst gay people or straight
people; not on the Cape Flats or in Chatsworth; not in Bloemfontein,
Sandton or Soweto.

Sadly, none of these positive steps can deliver results if crime is not
beat. Fears must be allayed and hope commanded that this will be done. We
need a bigger, decentralised and more effective and professional police
force that can focus on specific crimes and process information and
evidence efficiently. Victims of crime and those who witnessed the crimes
against them must have a better day in court and the victims of crime must
receive compensation for their suffering.

Finally, quality must once again count in our hospitals, with workable
recruitment strategies that will see to it that these are well staffed with
health professionals’ those unsung heroes who will enjoy improved working
conditions to ensure that they are retained to care for the sick and the
aged.

Madam Speaker, you will know that I believe implicitly in South Africa and
its future as a leading country in Africa and an influential player on the
world stage and I will continue to serve it, in whatever capacity, in my
usual pragmatic way and probably to my dying day.

I believe in the incomparable foundation for success that we have in South
Africa, laid by stalwarts such as Helen Suzman, supported in the DA by many
honourable people such as Joe Seremane ... [Interjections.]

I am embarrassed that you should respond like this. On your behalf, I am
embarrassed and I am truly shocked. I thought you were a greater party than
you are showing to be now. [Interjections.]

It was battled into a credible force by Tony Leon and is now being
transformed into government by Helen Zille. These are all people I have
worked with, all people of the highest integrity, unbelievable managerial
energy and patriots in every fibre of their being.

I believe in the vision they have helped to create for South Africa and how
we can achieve it, all of us together – even you - for the sake of all our
children. To them and all of you assembled here today: Salang hantle.
[Goodbye.] Ek sal julle almal verskriklik mis! [I am going to sorely miss
you all!] [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Madam Deputy Speaker, Your Excellencies our
President and Deputy President, hon Ministers and hon members, we reply to
the President’s state of the nation address in strange times and under
strange circumstances. I believe that we all like and deeply respect the
President, but he seems to be the President only in title and not in fact,
as he indicated that he was a caretaker for somebody else, who is not a
member of this House. Yet, the President tells us that when tested under
such present strange circumstances, our democratic order and our
Constitution have held and remained unharmed.

In the strange circumstances under which he delivered his address, His
Excellency the President recollected mainly the achievements of our
democracy in the past 15 years and well-known chronic challenges
confronting the government. However, he did not acknowledge problems within
our government and our society, nor could he provide leadership and
solutions for them. He put forward that this House had to complete its
mandate given in 2004 and maintain its present course, so that whatever
needs to be done will be addressed after the forthcoming elections.

He could not say more and, in fact, he did not because it’s obviously
somebody else’s role to provide the leadership which will ordinarily rest
with the Office of our President. Under these strange circumstances, we
react to the President’s speech not inasmuch as to what was said, but with
the emphasis on what was omitted.

The President portrayed a government unaltered by recent events; the
majority party maintaining its policies; and the country maintaining the
previously charted course under his leadership. The tone of his address was
that everything was - everything is - well and that everything will be
well. Yet, this begs questioning as to why our previous President was fired
before the completion of his term, an unprecedented event in the history of
postliberation Africa. Something had to have been seriously wrong to
require such a draconian measure to put right.
It is not my habit to comment on what happens within other political
parties. However, when their internal dynamics affect the highest
institutions of our Republic, leading to a sudden change in the head of
state and most of his Cabinet, the matter affects us all and ought to be
discussed. We understood that such change was brought about on the wave of
dissatisfaction with policies and leadership up to that point.

The ruling party recognised the need for change and promised change. Yet,
the President’s address suggests that no change is required and no change
will come. As we all recognise that change is, indeed, needed. The time has
come for change to be brought about, not from the ruling party but through
the contribution of other political forces represented in this House and
renewal of this House itself.

The President projected the reassuring image of our future, suggesting that
the thunderstorm now gathering worldwide will miraculously skip our shores.
It is true that during the Great Depression of 1929 South Africa remained
one of the least affected economies owing to its reliance on its precious
metals. But things have dramatically changed since. The British Prime
Minister, Mr Brown, warned at the Davos World Economic Forum that the
entire world was in a depression, or about to fall into one, and we would
be ill advised to believe that South Africa is out of this world.

I beg to differ with the President when he tells us that the state of our
nation is fine and is going to remain such. Too many South Africans have
already begun suffering and things will become much worse in the years to
come. The road ahead is harsh and hard; projecting a different hope will
undermine our country’s capacity to build up its readiness to cope with it
– excuse the pun.

The dramatic nature of the times calls for the patriotism of the people of
South Africa - all of us – which, I think, is the greatest asset our
government can mobilise. The President made reference to the inspiring
values which are indeed of paramount importance. But we cannot hide from
the fact that our Constitution has been betrayed and the people of South
Africa have, rightly, grown disillusioned with those called upon to promote
these values.

Within government, the fundamental distinction between right and wrong,
integrity and corruption, service to the people and personal enrichment,
efficiency and incompetence, hard work and laziness, and between party and
state have become compromised. But within South Africa’s civil society
there is a vast pool of hard-working, competent, efficient men and women of
integrity. We must then ask ourselves how many of them have really been
attracted to the highest echelons of government and politics.

This is the time to bind together the healthy, honest, productive and
competent segments of our nation, irrespective of political affiliations,
social and economic status, race and religion. It is time to part the good
from the evil, in other words, and empower the good.

I’m saddened that our government continues this unjustified policy of
disenfranchising our compatriots residing abroad. When I was the Minister
of Home Affairs I received documentation showing that there was no
administrative reason not to allow these compatriots to vote, especially
when we make voting facilities available to South Africans who are abroad
for travel, study or temporary work. South Africa must now count on all
citizens of integrity, whether living within its borders or beyond them.
And, I’m aware that South Africans residing abroad are unlikely to vote for
the IFP. For me, their right to vote is a matter of principle.

I’m also concerned about how the intention to accelerate affirmative
action, including broad-based black economic empowerment, will be perceived
by the various segments of our society, and the possibility that more
skilled South Africans may see a need to emigrate, as is happening. I think
a plan must be in place to prevent a further flight of skills and expertise
out of South Africa. His Excellency the President, in his capacity as
secretary-general of the ruling party, is on record expressing his concerns
some months ago over the implementation of these policies. While I see the
rationale behind them and accept them, the implementation of these policies
should be looked at again, in so far as they are perceived as
discriminatory against certain South Africans.

We ought to focus not only on the facts and figures the President gave us,
but first and foremost on the values of our democracy to which he referred.
Because of its proximity to the next elections, the nation is looking at
this debate to see who to trust and where the country ought to be led when
the impending storm hits us.

Our people do not need to dwell on facts and figures produced in
universities or government research offices aimed at explaining to them
what they experience every day. They know what is happening. They have seen
the price of groceries escalating, the real estate market crumbling,
savings held in stock markets being wiped out, job opportunities vanishing,
entire segments of our industry winding down and their businesses facing
ever-decreasing turnovers. They know that this is the beginning of a deeper
crisis in the making. They don’t need any of us to tell them this. They
need to hear from us what we are planning to do to redress this and who
they can trust to implement what has been promised.

For too long, elections have been held to reward the party with the biggest
promises. This habit shaped government policies and promises, and year
after year informed state of the nation addresses. In this sense, this
year’s state of the nation address is somehow refreshing as it promises so
little. But it marks no departure from the past in which neither the ruling
party nor the government under it did what was said or said what they did.

Job creation, perhaps, epitomises an entire attitude which must be
corrected. Under the current ruling party, our government correctly focused
on job creation but it did so in terms of promises in the guise of
objectives and policies, studies, summits, workshops and analyses. And
whenever asked to report on progress on this matter, it did so by stating
the extent to which these complex activities had been performed. Yet, all
this boils down to talking about the problem rather than doing anything
which effectively addresses it.

We now have heard again of summits, but there are no reliable figures which
tell us how many jobs were created by direct government intervention and by
indirect economic incentives. Therefore, we remain ill prepared to develop
a strategy to deal with the recessionary environment in which jobs will be
shed like leaves in autumn. We surely do not need more summits and
workshops or a class of political bureaucrats who rely on such tools and
related promises to deal with the real problem.

We cannot continue to deal with real problems by playing with figures and
hiding behind statistics and manipulating facts, or turning words around so
that with euphemisms the horror of the matter sounds better. For instance,
the President reassured us that we have proportionally the largest
programme of antiretroviral drugs in the world. This suggests that the
scourge of HIV and Aids is now under control.

To me, this echoed what our former President stated in that we were
spending as much as other nations were spending on the pandemic. In my
response I had to remind him that we could not compare ourselves to other
countries because our incidence of HIV and Aids was the highest in the
world. In this present circumstance, the President does not emphasise that
we have, proportionally, the highest incidence of HIV and Aids in the
world. In spite of his magnanimity, what is being done is still widely
insufficient as antiretroviral drugs do not reach all those who need them.

After it became necessary for the Constitutional Court to order our health
facilities to do their duty of their own volition, namely to supply
antiretroviral drugs at birth, there are still many HIV-positive mothers
who do not receive such simple, inexpensive and effective life-saving
treatment to prevent their newborn babies from becoming infected.

We cannot continue to feel reassured just because we are told that
something good is being done to deal with the gravest of our problems. We
need to ask ourselves whether what is being done is good enough and develop
the critical capacity to provide real leadership. Our country is in a
leadership crisis. I think we are all guilty in this House of being part of
this problem.
The President told us that our Constitution is holding. Yet, the purpose of
this House is not that of applauding the President, but rather of holding
him and his Cabinet accountable for failures. I ask the question: How can
we say the Constitution is holding when we are seeking political solutions
for judicial problems right now. Judicial problems should be solved through
judicial solutions. Constitutionally, this creates an obligation for each
of us not to praise the good that has been done but criticise the
government for that which is not good enough.

I dare any member of this House to stand before us and tell us in good
conscience that he or she feels that our education system, our policing,
our health care system, our economy, our poverty alleviation programmes,
our employment conditions, our housing programmes and the state of our
rural areas are good enough. Obviously, they are not.

In his address, his Excellency the President pre-empts this criticism by
harping on the fact that the long journey has but begun, echoing Lao-tzu
that a journey of a thousand miles begins with one step, and that much more
remains to be done; all of which may be good to excuse the failures of his
government, but surely does not justify the failures of this House to
constantly and incessantly point to this unfinished agenda to maintain the
momentum and set the pace.

We are constitutionally required to be leaders in this House, and yet we
have become followers. Parliament has become a tool on demand of the
President, the President’s Cabinet, the ruling party, the national
executive committee and, at times, the few people among us who set our
rules and schedules.

If our Constitution is really to hold and our democracy to flourish the way
the President hopes, we must establish the centrality of Parliament and
empower it with real leadership. For instance, under the Constitution, it
is the responsibility of this House to elect the President. The purpose of
elections is only that of electing members of this House and not that of
electing a President. Yet, many members of this House are running the
political process as if this Parliament has declined this responsibility
and that the forthcoming elections were about electing a President.

The lamentable state of this Parliament is no minor matter as it affects
the state of our nation. It pains my heart to see some of the brightest and
the most capable of our colleagues moving to greener pastures in
recognition that this grand hall of democracy has become dull, vacuous,
ineffective and possibly useless. From the benches of the ruling party, we
have seen one bright and competent leader after another leaving their seat
to take up highly remunerated positions within government, private
companies, publicly held companies and in other organs of state. Everything
else seems preferable to being at the helm of our democracy, as this
Parliament ought to be.

From the opposition benches we have seen an equal haemorrhaging. Today we
are in the lamentable state of receiving not only the farewell address of
the former Leader of the Opposition, the hon A J Leon, but also that of the
present Leader of the Opposition, the hon S Botha. This takes place after
two of their highest ranking leaders accepted other ambassadorial positions
to Thailand and Bulgaria respectively. These losses hurt not only the
important role the opposition is called upon to play, but also the strength
of democracy.

The greatest example of this weakness is perhaps embodied in the image of
our own President who, on all accounts, seems to have proven to have great
skills and abilities, begging the question why he has only recently joined
us in Parliament. Having read his conversation with John Kaelin yesterday,
one can see that the President is in fact in a cleft stick; he is in a
catch-22 situation. He would have preferred to be elsewhere than in his
position. I fear there might be truth in the answer that, until recently,
the President had better things to do. This proves the point that it is not
in this sacred hall of democracy that the real business of government is
taking place.

His Excellency the President announced that he will soon set the election
date, which will thrust all parties into frantic efforts to draft candidate
lists. I think the hon Andrew Mlangeni and I are the doyens of this House,
both of us having written matriculation exams in 1947. [Applause.] I don’t
think there are many hon members who have that record in this House. I wish
to plead with all political leaders, not leaving myself out, to bring back
a new Parliament which is rich in competent and effective people with
actual skills in the many fields where the challenges ahead lie.

The next Parliament will need to restructure our education system which, no
matter how our President puts it, has failed present challenges and is
vastly ill prepared to meet future challenges. The World Bank has published
a study suggesting that 50% of those born at this time will have to apply
for jobs which do not yet exist. This means we must train our children to
deal with information we do not yet know.

Instead, our education system has produced an entire generation educated
under the new postliberation curriculum. It has much higher-than-before
rates of matriculation failures, dropouts, disciplinary problems and across-
the-board mismanagement. I would not wish that our Minister of Education
feels this is a personal attack. I am speaking about the situation that has
developed since 1994.

While our government struggles to deliver already obsolete and substandard
textbooks, children in China, India and the United States, with whom our
children will need to compete in the global village, are being educated by
means of computers linked to the boundless knowledge and information of the
Internet. While in those countries the Internet has eliminated the divides
amongst children on account of regions of the world and socioeconomic
status, our education system is still perpetuating them. This is just not
good enough.

I could take the rest of the day to point out that which is equally not
good enough in all other functions of government, but this would not aid
the point I wish to emphasise, which is that a fundamental change of
attitude and governance is required.

All of us cannot continue to come to this House to gloat over what we have
achieved in the past, which is now subject to the law of diminishing
returns. We seem to have even reached the desperation of ranking amongst
our government achievements the extraordinary successes of our national
cricket and rugby teams while the real job of government in respect of
sport and recreation is that of making facilities available to all citizens
for their physical fitness, moral regeneration and entertainment. In this
latter respect, I am quite sure that few people of conscience would stand
up in this House to state that what we have achieved is good enough.

In conclusion, I urge members in this House to acknowledge that something
has gone wrong and conjure over our nation the spirit of change so that,
together, we may put it right. Hope for change must start from within this
House, for if we do not change we cannot expect the rest of the country to
do so. It is time to bind the nation together under one Constitution and
within one patriotic spirit which prepares us to face the imminent crisis.
To do so, we must embrace the harsh discipline of the truth. We must make
the truth our sole authority and stop taking authority for the truth.

The truth is that our Constitution is in great peril; our democracy is in
great jeopardy; and our country is sailing straight into a massive storm
for which we are ill prepared. The truth is that we can begin dealing with
all this if this House changes and lives up to the responsibilities for
which it was established and which our nation expects of it. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, His Excellency President
Kgalema Motlanthe, Her Excellency Deputy President Baleka Mbete and hon
members, in his state of the nation address, His Excellency the hon
President said something which is as relevant to Parliament as it is to
other arms of government, and I quote:

   And so, Madam Speaker and hon Chairperson, we should ask ourselves: How
   have our actions defined the path of South African society’s evolution in
   the 15 years since the birth of our democracy; and how have we advanced
   the cause of human development and human dignity since the 2004
   democratic mandate?

I would like to take this opportunity to respond to this question by
speaking about the role of Parliament within the context of the theme of
the state of the nation address, namely “Parliament entrenching people-
centred democracy in achieving developmental goals”.

Allow me to start by asking this question: What is the role of Parliament,
in practical terms, in entrenching democracy and service delivery? The
answer to this question could be drawn from the role of Parliament as
determined by the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. In line
with the Constitution, Parliament is expected to perform five functions in
its interaction with other arms of government and the general public,
including the international community. They are to pass laws, oversee and
scrutinise executive function, facilitate public participation, facilitate
co-operative governance and facilitate international participation.

What is the case in, or score of our Parliament on each of these functions?
For the past 14 years Parliament has faced the enormous task of identifying
and uprooting a litany of apartheid laws which placed some people high on
the proverbial food chain or social hierarchy and others at the bottom, in
such a way that provision of services created, according to former
President Thabo Mbeki, the first and the second economy; thus by extension,
a two-nation syndrome.

Parliament is proud to observe that His Excellency the President said, and
I quote: “There is no gainsaying that, by any measure, the progress made
since 1994 has been impressive.” For instance, it took the first Parliament
almost its entire term to amend and repeal hundreds of colonial and
apartheid laws, and to replace them with prodevelopment ones. From 1994
until 31 December 2008, just over a 1 000 Bills were adopted and became
Acts of Parliament.

What these statistics imply is that this Parliament was able to reverse, in
a single decade, what took our predecessors more than three centuries to
entrench in our society. Thus, as we change the living conditions of our
people by bringing about a state of equilibrium in a society in which every
child, from Rondebosch, Langa, Bendor Park, or Nwamitwa in the Mopani
District, gets an equal opportunity for growth and development, our efforts
are at times met with bewilderment, anger and frustration from some parts
of society; as if they are meant to take away their livelihood.

No piece of legislation exists on its own; neither does it govern itself.
The fact that it affects and involves people who are forever adapting to
changing living conditions, laws which we have crafted and enacted by
ourselves, should constantly be reviewed to move with the times.
Derived from the word “oversee”, with accountability as a direct result,
the concept of oversight can also be subdivided into a number of
independent categories, namely political, administrative, financial,
ethical and legal elements.

It is within these five paradigms that Parliament should play a decisive
role in assisting the executive and judiciary in meeting the United Nations
Millennium Development Goals of, amongst other things, the eradication of
poverty, skills development, economic development and adhering to
environment-friendly agreements such as the Kyoto Protocol which, I think,
now stands a better chance with President Barack Obama in office.

I beg your indulgence to spend some time on just two of these five points
in the oversight role. I would like to start by acknowledging a report on
parliamentary oversight and accountability compiled by scholars from the
University of Cape Town, which asserts that effective and proper oversight
of the executive requires that Members of Parliament and those of the
executive fully understand the constitutional justifications and rationale
behind accountable government and the purposes it serves.

In this term, Parliament worked hard in looking at ways and means of
improving and affirming its oversight role as required by the Constitution.
To this end, it established a task team on oversight and accountability to
study the constitutional mandates on oversight and to provide an
implementation framework and processes. The work of the task team has
resulted in a model which would, amongst other things, improve existing
tools on parliamentary oversight, streamline components of the new
oversight model and enhance Parliament’s capacity to fulfil its oversight
function in line with its new strategic direction.

The new oversight model must consist of three elements, namely the values
and principles by which Parliament conducts oversight, the mechanisms or
framework to conduct oversight, and the processes and resources required
for conducting oversight. The report on an oversight and accountability
model will be placed before this House for consideration on 17 February
2009. I would like to take this opportunity to thank members of the task
team, headed by the hon Obed Bapela, and officials of Parliament who worked
tirelessly to ensure that our oversight function is properly defined. I
would like to say “well done” to the task team and “thank you” to Mr
Bapela. [Applause.]

Where Parliament cannot reach any part of government, the Constitution
provides for the establishment of Chapter 9 institutions which can monitor
those aspects on its behalf. These institutions are then expected to report
to Parliament on a regular basis. Mr President, we are not very happy with
our interaction with these state institutions. On that point, we are
establishing a Chapter 9 Unit in the Speaker’s Office so that we can have
regular interaction with those important institutions.

In the article The Role of Parliament in the Budget Process, authors
Krafchik and Wehner declare that:

  Parliament is the appropriate place to ensure that the Budget best matches
  the nation’s needs with the available resources, an ability that is
  especially critical considering the current challenge to reprioritise
  between and within departments.


However, the authors have identified a major stumbling block in achieving
this objective. Honestly speaking, we know what the needs of the people are
but have no say in as far as what money goes into the Budget.

As part of unlocking the impasse, it is recommended that the debate on
amending powers must be linked to the broader enquiry debate on
parliamentary research and analysis capacity, including its interaction
with departments. It is further recommended that a study should be
conducted on the constitutional mandate of Parliament to deal with this
matter.

By definition, Parliament is supposed to be people-centred. To sustain the
link between the people and Parliament, and by extending service delivery
which, in the first instance, necessitated their participation in
elections, it became our constant duty to make available and remind our
people of opportunities for involvement in its processes. Some of these
opportunities are to petition Parliament on any government-related issue,
visit Parliament, contact Members of Parliament through parliamentary
constituency offices and parliamentary democratic offices and submit
comments and make representation on legislation before Parliament.

The role of the public in participating and being involved in the processes
of Parliament cannot be overemphasised. Public participation is not only a
must because of our constitutional imperatives, it is also a democratic
process that recognises and affirms human dignity. This Parliament has used
every effort and opportunity to enhance public participation and, more
importantly, to ensure that those of our people who may not be in the same
position as us have their voices heard. To this end, we have established
three parliamentary democracy offices as a pilot project in Ganyesa in the
North West, Kakamas in the Northern Cape, and Ga-Matlala-a-Thaba in
Limpopo. The objective of these offices is to extend Parliament’s access,
opportunity and space in order to be directly in touch and engage with
people who are ordinarily outside national debates in society.

We cannot forget other programmes such as “Taking Parliament to the
People”, the “People’s Assembly”, the “Women’s Parliament” and the “Youth
Parliament” which attract hundreds of participants annually. More still
needs to be done to involve every South African in parliamentary programmes
and activities.

The Constitution of the country requires co-operation between the three
spheres of government - national, provincial and local. The three spheres
must seek to promote the objectives of intergovernmental relations, in
particular looking at the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act, which
includes coherent government, effective provision, monitoring of the
implementation of policy and legislation, and realisation of national
priorities.

In this regard, the presiding officers of the national and provincial
legislatures have established a Speakers’ Forum, through which they meet
regularly to discuss comprehensive strategies and programmes on how to
build capacity and share best practices as an integrated sector of
government. Escalation of similar efforts across the three arms of
government is highly recommended. We do engage regularly with the
executive. We rarely engage with the judiciary, so that is also another
area where we need to improve. We can’t just see them at the beginning of
the year and not engage again.

Pursuant to His Excellency President Motlanthe’s statement that “we will,
as always, seek to strengthen co-operation with other countries in pursuit
of that which is good for humanity”, the Parliament of the Republic of
South Africa has raised the bar in participating in world politics by
joining the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the Southern African Development
Community Parliamentary Forum and the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association.

In January of this year, 2009, the IPU held a training seminar in
Parliament on HIV and Aids for parliamentarians in Southern and Eastern
Africa. Apart from launching a very important handbook on HIV and Aids on
this occasion, parliamentarians also discussed ways and means through which
the treatment for HIV and Aids could be delivered to the ill cheaper and
faster. This is important for sub-Saharan Africa generally and South Africa
in particular because, as President Motlanthe has indicated, which was also
mentioned this morning by Dr Buthelezi, many health facilities do not
always have the required medicines, appropriate staff levels, and constant
supply of basic services such as clean running water and electricity.

On the success of this conference, I really would like to have a big round
of applause for the Deputy Speaker who led this conference with ability and
commitment and who made South Africa tops. [Applause.] At this conference,
one of our members was elected to chair the advisory board.
[Interjections.] Thank you very much, hon member. It was the hon Bogopane.
I think the House should also give her a big hand. [Applause.]

There are, of course, other areas of Parliament’s international role such
as the signing and observance of treaties, protocols, conventions and so
forth. However, according to Prof Shadrack Gutto, we are not doing well
here in this regard. We agree with him in the sense that after ratifying a
convention, Parliament does not have anything to do with it, except to pass
the legislation to give effect to the convention.

As we put together the Chapter 9 Unit, we should also look at what can be
done in consideration of all the conventions that we have ratified and
whether they mean anything to South Africans. Where they don’t mean
anything, we could make some suggestions. I know we don’t amend those
agreements because they are not ours, but we need to make sure that we are
giving effect to them through legislation.

Fifteen years into our democracy, we have, together, achieved much in
building a new society, uniting all of our people, expanding opportunities
that the new freedom brought to our people, reducing poverty and improving
quality of life. Mr President, we agree with you: “We dare not linger, for
our long walk is not yet ended.” I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Heyi, thulani makwedini apho ngemva! [Listen here, keep
quiet, you boys at the back there!]

Madam Deputy Speaker, His Excellency the President, Deputy President, hon
members and hon Ministers, we would like to thank President Motlanthe for
making the effort to address some of the shortcomings in the government’s
performance. We also thank him for his commitment to announcing the
election date shortly.

The truth is that we have witnessed much political turbulence in the past
year. We should try and emerge from these coming elections united in our
quest to recapture the lost ground and to regain our moral standing on the
world stage. Let us talk about solutions.

On the economic front, we face our biggest challenge, namely unemployment.
People expect jobs in a growing economy. Indeed, a person’s dignity is tied
to having a decent job. Our economy, which we inherited in 1994 from the
old regime, featured a huge infrastructure disparity. In certain cities and
areas there was first-world infrastructure, whereas many townships,
neighbourhoods and rural areas had little or nothing.

When people queued in 1994 to vote, they had a legitimate expectation that
this infrastructure inequality would be addressed. However, 15 years later,
they wonder how much longer they must wait, because it has still not been
addressed.

Another problematic aspect of our economy is our dependence on imports. For
example, this country used to be an exporter of food, but today we import.
Yet we have an abundance of natural resources. For instance, in the Eastern
Cape we have 38% of the water in Southern Africa. However, there are hardly
any irrigation schemes or dams. Look at how the previous government built
irrigation schemes along the Orange River to uplift the Afrikaners and
turned that region into a major agricultural producer.

We need such interventions urgently to stimulate the economy and turn our
natural resources into wealth for all. It is a lesson that can be applied
not only to agriculture, but also in mineral beneficiation, manufacturing
and industry.

There is a need to gather in an economic indaba as a nation, the way we had
gathered for a political indaba called Codesa, with a view to finding
consensus on a macroeconomic policy. In this way we can agree on our
priorities and the extent to which the state should intervene in the
economy.

It is a pity that in the past 15 years we have spent a lot of time arguing
whether the current economic policy is right, when the majority of citizens
have been locked out of the economic mainstream.

In light of the global economic meltdown, can we still say that the
fundamentals of our current economic policy are going to sustain us for the
next 20? This is the type of question such an economic indaba would answer.

As I’ve said before, there is a tendency to label people as “leftist” when
they call for the government to do more for the people of this country.
However, when the Afrikaners were uplifted by their government, it wasn’t
called “leftist”. When the developed countries of the world subsidise their
local agriculture and industry with trillions of dollars, they are not
called “leftist”.

Just recently, the governments of the United States and Europe intervened
in their economies to the tune of hundreds of billions of dollars to rescue
private banks. They have not been labelled “leftist”.

It is ridiculous to suggest that a South African government should fold its
arms when millions of South Africans are wallowing in poverty because to
uplift them would be so-called “leftist”. When I spoke from this podium on
previous occasions about the need for government to do more, some Ministers
accused me of proposing outdated policies. I wonder what their thoughts are
now, when government intervention is becoming fashionable?

Talking about jobs, we welcome your intention to spend more on creating
jobs. On this front, we believe that we need to review the Expanded Public
Works Programme. In this country we used to have maintenance units, which
employed people to maintain buildings, roads and similar infrastructure. It
is an area that can provide thousands of jobs for unskilled people and
teach them new skills.

Furthermore, it saves government and taxpayers money because maintenance is
much more cost-effective in the long term than continuously replacing
infrastructure once it has fallen into complete disrepair.

Another area that requires our urgent attention is the threat to our
environment. For instance, desertification is marching from all corners of
the country towards Pretoria. There is a need for a greening programme,
which should involve agriculture, with a view to eliminating poverty.

It is long overdue that we place the issue of environment high on our
national agenda. For instance, members of this House and MPLs in the
legislatures should come together regularly, in a nonpartisan fashion, to
assist with the greening programmes.

The other point that we need to address is the question of crime and
corruption. Nobody can believe your government, Mr President, when it
promises to act against corruption. This is simply because we all know of
your predecessor as head of state, as well as his former Deputy President,
who could not complete their terms as the direct result of the arms deal.
It is a fact. This is only one of many corruption scandals that have
plagued this government.

Shabir Shaik went to jail, as did Tony Yengeni. But when the law-
enforcement agencies wanted to pounce on other leaders, the ruling party
attacked and destroyed independent institutions. Indeed, some people are
portrayed as victims of justice without being cleared by the courts of law.
Such things damage the image of our country and undermine our credibility
as the champion of Nepad, which is underpinned by the ethics of good
governance.

Indeed, can we trust this government when their ruling party’s leaders are
dodging their day in court? Crime, especially violent crime, continues to
be a scourge. We take note of the successes and failures of the law-
enforcement agencies, particularly in terms of intelligence-gathering and
detective work. It is necessary to focus on these weaknesses.

A skills audit is required to identify where we need additional skills.
Part of this process must include the appointment of highly trained and
skilled people to head our law-enforcement agencies – people who understand
crime-fighting and who will command the respect of the people they lead and
not those who are selling drugs.

It is this leadership which must produce a suitable doctrine to inform our
law-enforcement agencies on how they should operate within a democratic
constitutional dispensation.

The question of education remains a high priority. The department needs to
train and employ more teachers. There is no uniformity in school buildings
and teaching materials. In cities you find that a school has laboratories,
computers and many teachers. Yet in townships and rural areas you will find
nothing even remotely like that. We need quality, if we are serious about
improving education. There should be minimum basic standards for the
facilities and materials when a school is built, and there should be
maintenance. Far too many schools look dilapidated.

In conclusion, allow me to turn to the quality of service delivery,
especially at local government level. We dole out billions to
municipalities, but this is the place where service delivery is at its
worst. We see in many municipalities a complete lack of skills and
capacity. They have vacancies in critical posts, such as engineers,
architects and the like. As a result, they become the target of
unscrupulous consultants who charge a fortune, yet produce nothing. It is
time for government to deploy skilled people to local government and to
ensure that all vacancies are filled.

Finally, we wish to bid farewell to the leader of the DA, Mama Botha, as
well as its former leader, hon Tony Leon. We also bid farewell to several
Ministers and other MPs who might not make it or come back, or who might
cross to other parties. We enjoyed engaging with you over the past five
years in this House. May this culture of robust engagement continue in the
future in order to strengthen democracy.

Sanukungxola, ngoba nini aba bafuna ukusizisela umntu omakaphathe eli
lizwe, kodwa unedokethi lamapolisa. Zange yenzeke loo nto ... [Please be
quiet, because it is you who want to bring us someone who has a criminal
docket from the Police to be head of this country. That has never happened
before ...]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Yiva ke, nanko endithulisa naye! [Listen to that; there, she is shutting me
up!]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Isikhathi sakho sesiphelile. [Ihlombe.] [Your time has
expired. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, His Excellency
the President, the Deputy President, hon members, I would also like to bid
farewell to the hon Holomisa who does not deserve to be a member of this
House, a person who does not understand the presumption of innocence. South
Africans cannot take him seriously. If we are just making promises, could
it be that the IFP did not have enough promises? Maybe that is why it lost
KwaZulu-Natal - it did not have a plan. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The manifesto of our glorious army uMkhonto weSizwe declares:

   The time comes in the life of any nation when there remain only two
   choices: submit or fight. That time has now come to South Africa. We
   shall not submit and we have no choice but to hit back by all means
   within our power in defence of our people, our future and our freedom.

[Applause.]

This will be forever relevant and applicable as long as the strategic
objectives of our national democratic revolution have not yet been met. We
shall not submit to those who want to improperly appropriate for themselves
our heritage of the liberation movement. The Freedom Charter is part of our
heritage and values. Underlying the Freedom Charter is what defines our
transformation agenda.

To illustrate this point, let me go back in history. The 42nd conference of
the ANC in 1953 in Queenstown resolved as follows:

  Conference instructs the National Executive Committee to make immediate
  preparations for the organisation of a “CONGRESS OF THE PEOPLE OF S.A.”
  whose task shall be to work out a “FREEDOM CHARTER” for all ... groups in
  the country. To this end, Conference urges the ... National Executive
  Committee to call a meeting of the National Executives of the South
  African Indian Congress, the Coloured People’s organisation and the South
  African Congress of Democrats or any other democratic organisation for
  the purpose of placing before them the plan of Congress and obtain their
  co-operation in creating a truly representative “CONVENTION” of the
  peoples of South Africa.

These are the values that make the ANC. We always rally people behind the
correct agenda, because we believe that people are their own liberators. We
are people-driven and people-centred. The same principle of uniting people
to be their own liberators guided us when we formed the United Democratic
Front in 1983, the Patriotic Front during negotiations and the
Constitutional Assembly after the first democratic elections. This is the
principle that guides us in our international work to believe in
multilateralism and not unilateralism.

We were guided by the same principle when we drafted our manifesto through
my vision, my future and my ANC. We mobilised the views of the people. This
is a people’s manifesto. Our policies are not written by the elite for the
people. These are the main forces that drive ANC policies in government -
the blacks in general and Africans in particular; the rural poor; the
working class; the black middle class; women; the youth and all the people
of South Africa who want to create a better life for all. Our policies are
to serve all classes and strata, but we have a special bias towards the
working class and the poor.

When we make policies and when we undertake evaluations of our policies, we
ask ourselves this question: What type of society do we want to create or
build? Our answer is that we want to create a nonracial and nonsexist
democratic society, and we call these the strategic objectives of our
national democratic revolution.

How do we measure, both qualitatively and quantitatively, the progress we
are making in achieving these strategic objectives? We use the three
components of the national democratic revolution as our tools.

The national components have three aspects. The first national aspect of
the struggle refers to the struggle to overcome the legacy of racial or
national oppression of the black majority in general and Africans in
particular.

The second national aspect refers to the task of nation-building, the
forging of actual material conditions for a united nation in all its
diversity, overcoming the huge inequalities in infrastructural development
between urban and rural areas, between formerly white and black urban
areas. It means forging a unifying national system of governance whose
character reflects the principle of the clauses in the Freedom Charter.

The third national aspect is the struggle for effective national
sovereignty. This is a struggle to ensure that South Africa is able to
pursue its own independent social, economic and developmental agenda.

The democratic component of the national democratic revolution refers to
the democratisation of all spheres of society, including the economy. It
also refers to the development of different kinds of democratic
involvement: representative democracy - voting for public representatives -
and various forms of participatory democracy that directly involve
constituencies in decisions that impact upon their daily lives and in the
building of organs of people’s power in communities and at places of work.

The democratic component of the national democratic revolution relates to
the democratisation of gender relations. Colonialism in South Africa made
use of the subordination of women by distorting it and greatly intensifying
the oppression of women.

The unpaid labour of rural African women, in particular, reproduced cheap,
male migrant labour that fuelled the entire industrialisation of the South
African economy. There is no national democratic transformation that does
not take women’s emancipation into account.
The struggle for national democratic transformation is a revolutionary
struggle. This is a profound process of change in which power relations are
radically transformed.

The revolution in the national democratic revolution distinguishes the ANC
from its opponents, like the hon Holomisa. Whilst the liberal democrats lay
claim to all sorts of historic events and titles and try to build an image
for themselves, which they neither possess nor have earned in struggle, the
ANC follows radical transformation and democratisation of power and
society. The liberal democrats seek to deracialise society for the new
elite without dealing with the massive inequalities of the same society.

The revolutionary component of the national democratic revolution relates
to how the ANC, as a liberation movement and as a political party, carries
forward the democratisation of the state and its administration, the
judiciary and legislature. It refers to the manner in which we build a
nations’ state with all its diversity.
Our commitment to the democratic values and good governance is illustrated
below.

In 1991, before we came to government, we drafted constitutional
principles, which declared the following: We should have a Bill of Rights
that guarantees rights to personal freedom and political expression. That
has been achieved. We have the Bill of Rights as Chapter 2 of the
Constitution.
The ANC also resolved in 1991 that a Constitutional Court that enjoys the
respect of all South Africans and draws on the experience and talents of
the whole population, that is independent and accountable only to the
principles of the Constitution, should be established. That was
established. We further resolved that a Human Rights Commission should be
established to ensure that violations of human rights are investigated and
appropriate remedies found and examined, including patterns of
discrimination, and that proposals are made for their elimination. That has
been achieved.

In 1991 the ANC resolved that the post of Public Protector should be
created to deal with questions of abusive, arbitrary, capricious,
discourteous and corrupt exercise of office by officials. That has been
achieved. We have the office of the Public Protector that deals with abuse
of power by officials.

At our 49th conference in Bloemfontein, we resolved as follows: that an
independent central office of the prosecuting authority should be
established. That has also been achieved. We have a single prosecuting
authority under the central office of the national Director of Public
Prosecutions.

At our 50th conference in Mafikeng, we resolved as follows: that a High
Court should be rationalised and that there must be a high court in each
province. This process is under way. The department is in the process of
building courts in Mpumalanga and Limpopo.
As early as 1943, we had an African Claims Charter, which was the precursor
to the Bill of Rights we have. This indicates that we are no Johnny-come-
lately when it comes to the freedom of our people. All these things have
happened because the ANC is in power and the ANC is implementing the
people’s programme.

We further call on all our people to take to heart the manifesto of our
glorious army, uMkhonto weSizwe, and not submit to any threat to their hard-
fought-for freedom. We call on our people to hit back by all means
permissible in law against poverty, unemployment and woman and child abuse.

Together, we have achieved so much; together we can do more. What do you
have, opposition? Nothing! Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, could I just appeal to you to show respect
to members on the podium. There is too much noise coming from the left.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President,
the ID welcomes your honesty on the challenges that we face as a nation.
The ID agrees that progress has been made in the transformation of our
society over the past 15 years. However, during this period we’ve also seen
a dangerous erosion of the very values that informed us during our struggle
for freedom and equality. This is especially evident in the increasing
inequalities in our society, where millions of our people are living in
poverty, are hungry, suffer from disease, have poor education and no
services while others live lives of luxury, wealth and comfort.

We need to adopt innovative solutions and strategies for poverty
alleviation and job creation. We are pleased that you prioritised the
challenges posed by the global economic meltdown and outlined some of
government’s plan to deal with this. The ID certainly supports some of the
elements of the economic stimulus package you announced in your address.
However, the numbers of people that do not receive any assistance from
government is increasing as a result of the massive retrenchments we are
currently witnessing. We urgently need to extend the social security net
through the implementation of a minimum income grant.

The ID would also like to see the immediate extension of the Child Support
Grant to all children under 18, which we have called for consistently for
the past five years. This extension would also help reduce the school
dropout rate in the 14 to 18-year-old category. Government needs to get
serious about tackling youth unemployment, which currently stands at 70%,
by providing wage subsidies to youth between the ages 18 and 25. This would
have the effect of giving business a real incentive to hire first-time
workseekers.

Now is certainly the time for government to invest in our economy, as
global demand for our commodities is dropping off rapidly. This will not
only create jobs, but also position us for when the next global commodities
booms hits, at which time we must have an infrastructure that can
capitalise on it to the fullest extent.

Mr President, I would like to draw your attention to the import intensity
of our current infrastructure build, as outlined in the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, because this creates very few local jobs. We, the
ID, would like to stress the importance of ensuring that all public
investment is done with the intention of creating jobs for our people. The
global economic crisis presents us with an exciting opportunity for massive
investment and renewable energy, which will not only create hundreds of
thousands of jobs, but also provide sustainable energy for our people and
position us as a world leader in combating climate change.

There is no reason why South Africa cannot be one of the world leaders in
terms of renewable energy. This would enable us to develop skills in terms
of which hundreds of thousands of our people would be able to become
plumbers, electricians, solar power installers and wind turbine
technicians. In only 10 to 15 years, in Germany, renewable energy created a
quarter of a million jobs. This requires more than just a sentence in your
speech, Mr President; it requires leadership, political will and budgetary
resources.

Mr President, setting a target of a million solar water heaters in three
years, but installing only 800 in the first year means that government is
not serious. We call on government to suspend all spending on projects like
the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, and the conventional nuclear and arms
industries which create very few jobs and waste billions of rands on
foreign companies.

Government must also ensure that our competition policy is more proactive
in ensuring free economic activity. We need to come down hard on any
company or individual that is found guilty of defrauding the poor through
price-fixing. In addition, we need to open up key sectors, such as
telecommunications to competition. The ID believes that it is not
privatisation that is needed, but competition, in order to secure
efficiency and lower prices.

Mr President, I was surprised to hear you say that stamping out corruption
is a core focus of this government. This is because we believe that
government has weakened our fight against crime by stamping out the
Scorpions, instead of delivering on the ANC’s 2004 election manifesto which
promised that the Scorpions would be strengthened. This, and your refusal,
Mr President, to institute a judicial commission of inquiry into the arms
deal corruption are proof that the ANC government does not agree that
corruption steals from the poor and that we are all equal before the law.

Mr President, we would like also to bring to your attention the fact that
all the plans in the world are nothing without implementation. The question
is whether we have the skills and the political will within government and
the Public Service to implement these plans.

While we understand the historical context for our shortage of skills, the
ID is deeply concerned by the lack of skills and competence by far too many
in our Public Service. We also agree that it is necessary to expand the
Public Service in certain key areas, but we need to be wary of a bloated,
incompetent Public Service. We need to professionalise the Public Service
and ensure that it becomes the frontline of patriotism and service to our
people and finally deliver a developmental state.

Mr President, the ID maintains that to overcome the challenges we face,
South Africa requires more than just effort from our people. We require
innovative solutions, the will to implement them and bold leadership. The
ID is not yet convinced that all of these requirements are being met by
government. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Madam Deputy Speaker, Your Excellency the
President of the Republic, Your Excellency the Deputy President of the
Republic, hon members, comrades, addressing the Organisation of African
Unity in 1994, former President Nelson Mandela said, and I quote:

   If freedom was the crown which the fighters of liberation sought to place
   on the head of mother Africa, let the upliftment, the happiness,
   prosperity and comfort of her children be the jewel of the crown.


   There can be no dispute amongst us that we must bend every effort to
   rebuild the African economies.

I am honoured to address this august Chamber on the question of a better
Africa. All of us gathered here today are unequivocally desirous of a
peaceful and stable Africa, where in every city, town and village, in every
community, people live in peace and harmony, have all the basic necessities
of life - an Africa in which all our people have access to shelter,
education and health care, decent employment and equal opportunities to
advance and improve their lives, lifting themselves out of abject poverty.
We must unwaveringly strive for this dream; a dream for which we should be
champions, advocate and eventually achieve. Central to the vision of a
better Africa is greater regional and continental political and economic
integration, as indicated by our forebears in their call for unity.

In this era of regional integration, which has moved the world towards
economic blocs and stronger multilateral diplomacy, most economies on the
continent remain small and fragile. It is imperative that we also
consolidate and deepen our political cohesion and economic integration as
we move towards a united continent. The financial crisis and economic
depression serve to emphasise that economic, regional and continental
integration is no longer optional but a must.

If we seek to build a better Africa through continental integration, as we
must, the development of shared values becomes critical. It would be
difficult to envision this continental economic, social and political
integration if we did not agree on a set of common shared values.

South Africa must and shall, therefore, continue to promote the importance
of democracy, good governance, the rule of law, the protection of human
rights, nonracialism and gender equality.  Particular attention should also
be given to building the capacity of sustainable democratic institutions
and deepening the culture of democracy amongst our people in Africa. The
African Peer Review Mechanism and the Pan-African Parliament should play a
critical role in nurturing these common values.

As stated in the ANC manifesto, government will continue to work together
with the people of our continent and its diaspora for the cohesion, unity,
democracy and prosperity of the Southern African Development Community and
the African Union and in terms of strengthening our capabilities to respond
to the challenges we face. And, of course, guided by the Freedom Charter,
South Africa shall strive to maintain world peace and to settle all
international disputes through negotiation, not war.
As we continue to work towards the realisation of an African Union
government, which must necessarily, amongst other things, contribute to the
reduction of some of the destructive conflicts that we have been
experiencing. A united Africa, speaking with a single voice, would also be
more influential in global affairs. Furthermore, the benefits of political
and economic integration are evident when we look at the experience of
other regions of the world.

The history of the continent itself shows that we have indeed continued to
build incrementally towards the goals of continental unity. The Abuja
Treaty, the formation of the African Union and its institutions, the
adoption and implementation of Nepad, which South Africa and the former
President were at the forefront of promoting, have all been important
stages in this regard.

There can be no doubt that a better Africa requires that we accelerate
investments in some critical sectors like energy, infrastructure such as
roads, ports and telecommunications, facilitating easier intra and
interregional trade, especially because Africa has to most landlocked
countries. And of course, we have to accelerate the free movement of people
and goods.

If we are to achieve a better Africa, like the Warrior of the Light in
Paulo Coelho’s book with this title, we must not be paralysed by the fact
that other countries have more opportunities than we do, because a warrior
tries to make the most of his or her virtues. I quote:

   He knows that the gazelle’s power lies in its legs. The power of the
   seagull lies in the accuracy with which it can spear a fish. He has
   learnt that the reason the tiger does not fear the hyena is because he is
   aware of his own strength. We have to define for ourselves our own
   strength and what we can truly rely on.

In our view, we should rely on our human resources. The regions and the
countries that show sustainable growth and human development have all paid
very special attention to education, skills development and health. We must
prioritise these on the continent, as we do nationally.

We should also rely on our fertile African land. We can develop a very good
agricultural programme to feed the whole of the continent and, indeed, to
export to other continents. We should also rely on our abundant natural
resources. But it’s very important how we manage these resources – how we
manage these will determine how quickly we can reach the African dream.
Squander and plunder for the benefit of the few will defer this African
dream.

We should preserve the environment as part of a global effort so as to
bequeath future generations with a liveable planet. Of course, we should
also preserve our rich cultural heritage. And, it’s not only government
that should be involved in this, but most importantly the private sector on
the continent has to be a catalyst for these developments. Each and every
one of us has a role to play.

As in Paulo Coelho’s book, we must ask ourselves how our actions affect the
fifth generation of my descendants, because everything a person does has
enduring consequences and he needs to understand what kind of world he is
leaving behind for the fifth generation.

A better Africa will also have to assume its share of global
responsibilities. In this context, South Africa was honoured to serve on
the United Nations Security Council between 2007 and 2008. In this role, we
did our part in advancing the goals of a better Africa. We promoted the
importance of co-operation between the UN and the African Union. Indeed, as
we seek to build a better Africa, I believe that we have a duty to look
forward to the day when African conflict situations will no longer be the
predominant agenda of the United Nations Security Council. We owe this to
future generations.

Mr President, you mentioned that our country stands ready to walk the next
steps with the people of Zimbabwe as they embark on the difficult path of
economic recovery. Accordingly, we appeal to the goodwill of the
international community which, of course, has to be matched by the
political will of the people of Zimbabwe, to take up the challenges of the
reconstruction, reconciliation and development of that country.

We have just come from an African Union summit in Addis Ababa. There, a
number of decisions were taken; amongst them was the transformation of the
African Union Commission into an African Union Authority in an effort to
strengthen the commission. I want to allay your fears: this authority will
really have to be a strengthened commission. It’s not necessarily an
instant continental government.

I also want to say that this Parliament and many other structures will be
involved in the discussions of how this authority should be constructed.
These discussions are still going to take place. The details are going to
be worked out, not only by those governments, but by all of us. So, I hope
that you will be ready to participate in those discussions.

As part of creating a better Africa, we have appointed our own sons and
daughters of our country to various positions both in the continental
structures and international organisations. In this regard, we have taken
the decision to advance the candidature of Ambassador Abdul Samad Minty for
the position of Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency.


We believe he has the capacity to truly contribute to humanity’s balanced
approach, characterised by a burning desire for a peaceful world.  We
should continue to identify other suitably qualified South Africans for
deployment to such organisations in pursuit of a better Africa and a better
world.

But, of course, for Africa to achieve its goals, it cannot work in
isolation. It needs partnerships, and partnerships with all other
continents. We look forward to working very well with President Barack
Obama’s new administration, with the EU, with countries that have emerging
and re-emerging economies, like Russia, China, India, Brazil and, of
course, the rest of Asia.

We are building partnerships with Caribbean and South American countries
because we understand very well that we cannot build a better Africa
completely on our own. Although we have to rely mainly on ourselves and our
resources, we also need to have partnerships.

I hope that all of us - on all sides of the House - believe in a better
Africa, and we are all going to work very hard for the African dream. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A J LEON: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, Deputy President, hon
colleagues, firstly, may I thank the hon Sandra Botha and Bantu Holomisa
for their warm remarks. Perhaps I could mention that this is my final
address to the Parliament of South Africa. Perhaps on this occasion, and in
deference to Mr Hogarth, and in particular the Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs, I may be permitted to tell an old Jewish joke. The difference
between Jews and Gentiles is that Gentiles leave without saying goodbye,
while Jews say goodbye and never leave. [Laughter.]

This is the last of many farewells for me: as Leader of the Opposition, as
Leader of the DA and now finally as a Member of Parliament. I end as I
began: a rank-and-file member of the loyal opposition, as determined to
bring about change in South Africa as I was when I was first elected here
20 short years ago. As to the future, allow me to quote the great British
parliamentarian, and fellow socialist of some of you, Tony Benn, who said
on his retirement: “I am leaving parliament to devote more time to
politics.” I too look forward to a post-partisan life of engaged citizenry.


When I first arrived in Parliament in 1989, the tricameral system still
stood as a barrier to liberty for the majority of South Africans. Abroad
the Berlin Wall still remained the dividing line between East and West and
between communism and freedom. Within a few short months both of those
citadels had crumbled; abandoned by leaders who realised they could no
longer resist the human impulse to freedom.

From these benches I witnessed the last white President turning his back on
the convictions of a lifetime and inaugurating from this very podium an era
of negotiation and democracy. From these benches I heard the first black
President renounce the racial nationalism of the past and reach out to the
minority whose government has harassed and imprisoned him for more than one
third of this life.

From these benches I battled with his successor who sought to revive racial
resentment, even at the cost of hundreds of thousands of lives and who used
his unprecedented power to amass even greater power. From these benches I
witnessed the same President dismiss his Deputy President in an act of
selective justice that in the end forced his own resignation and has led
South Africa to the precarious political precipice we now face.

From these benches I have been privileged to lead the opposition to
participate in South Africa’s national renewal through the writing of our
new Constitution and to support the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
that was our imperfect but necessary memory against forgetting.

From these benches I have been proud to help grow a small party of seven
MPs into an ever stronger political force that carries the hopes of our
democratic future on its shoulders. How successful or futile any of these
efforts or contributions has been is best left to the judgment of my fellow
South Africans and of history. But I believe I have passed the test
prescribed by Winston Churchill, who said: “I have always felt that a
politician is to be judged by the animosities he excites among his
opponents.” [Laughter.]
So, to the President, the Deputy President, the Cabinet and members of the
majority party: Thank you very much for all the excitement.

We often disagreed, sometimes in vehement and heated ways, but whatever the
divisions in this House, I believe that we all do believe in the unity of
our nation.

To my own party: Thank you very much for all the support through 13
tumultuous years of leadership and nearly 20 years of collegiality and
friendship. You continue to protect freedom and provide, I believe, a
better way forward for all South Africans. It has been an honour to serve
among you.

Outside my party there are senior statesmen in the opposition, such as
Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, whose counsel and friendship in often
difficult times I will always cherish and remember. In this, my final and
farewell speech to this House, it is not my desire to make new enemies but
to reflect on the recent past and the future with honesty and candour.

Democracy’s advent in South Africa coincided with the greatest period of
economic prosperity enjoyed by the world and by the continent of Africa
since the end of the Second World War. When President Thabo Mbeki described
his nine-year presidency as the Age of Hope, he did so for good reason. But
it was also a decade of lost opportunity. We failed to attract the high
levels of foreign investment that we needed to grow our economy at a rate
that could roll back unemployment. We created laws and regulations that
shut down job creation and chased key skills out of government departments.
In so doing, we created a serious crisis in policing, in health, in
education and energy; hurting those in greatest need.

We now have an unsustainable situation in which 25% of our population
receives a welfare payment, while only about 10% of the population pays
personal income tax. Unless we reverse those ratios and start to create
real jobs in the formal economy, we will find ourselves, over time, in a
fiscally unstable and socially dangerous situation. We must now create
those jobs in the worst global economic circumstances since the 1970s and
perhaps since the Great Depression itself. We need the courage to admit
this truth that much of the growth we congratulated ourselves on in Budgets
past was illusionary; that we spent more than we earned; that we imported
more than we exported and that we have borrowed to make up the difference.

To change our economic prospects, we are going to have to change our
habits, both government and citizens alike. That is the message that we
must deliver to the nation from whichever party we come from. As deep as
the worldwide recession is and may yet become, as profound as the
challenges of poverty and inequality in our country continue to be, we are
gravely mistaken if we believe that economic freedom is the problem rather
than the solution and if we see government as the only answer.

There is, for example, rare agreement among all parties that among the many
failing sectors of state, the National Treasury and Sars shine forth as
beacons of excellence. You recall early on in our first Parliament, we
removed Sars from the public sector and let it employ its own staff outside
the restrictions that apply elsewhere in government. We did that for our
tax revenue collection but we never did it for other areas of service
delivery.

And the reasons for this were the same here as elsewhere in the developing
world and was so well summed up by Paul Collier in his groundbreaking work
The Bottom Billion when he said:

  Governments were prepared to leave basic service delivery unreformed
  because the governing elite got its services elsewhere.


That is why South Africa has seen a better life for a few but not for all
the people.

The world and South Africa’s greatest challenge today is not a deficit of
money, but actually a deficit of trust. Trust is the key ingredient for
both economic markets and for durable democracy and at the core of the
current global financial crisis is a failure of credit markets and the root
of the word “credit” is “credo”, the Latin for “I believe”. The same is
true of our democracy.

As public representatives we asked people, and we will ask them shortly
again, to believe in us to trust the commitments we offer as a
consideration for a seat in this noble Assembly. But we destroy the trust
in which our Constitution was forged when we weaken every independent
institution intended to support it. When we use the basic rights of the
lowest criminal accused, innocent until proven guilty, as the standard of
accountability for the highest office.

When the lawmakers become the lawbreakers, we offer them exceptional
excuses instead of exemplary punishments. We have passed thousands of laws
in this Parliament, from the sound and the socially necessary to the
constitutionally dubious and the economically dangerous.

Too often we have confused, in my opinion, real and necessary change, which
is always good and desirable, and will always be supported from all sides
of the House, with a muddled agenda of transformation that more often than
not served as a mask for greed.

We must remember the first law of a free people: That all are equal before
the law, regardless of party or of station. We should remember, with
deference to the hon Minister of Foreign Affairs, who spoke before me, the
words of the great African and international statesman Kofi Annan, who
reminded us as recently as the 2007 Nelson Mandela Lecture, that:

   Africans must guard against a pernicious, self-destructive form of racism
   - that unites citizens to rise up and expel tyrannical rulers who are
   white, but to excuse tyrannical rulers who are black.

In my opinion, if we do not practise at home and abroad what we preach in
our Constitution, then one day it may be said of us that we had the chance
to build a new nation and to forge a new and a more just and humane
international order but that we destroyed better than we knew. I believe we
can succeed. We have defied the odds before. We must recover the spirit of
hope that guided us in 1994 and reunite it with the constitutional
principles that established the foundation for our future which we
celebrate today.

We ought not to flee from the challenges that face us, nor give up in the
fashion of people like Kevin Pietersen, simply because circumstances are
not to our liking. As Graeme Smith and the Proteas recently showed us in
Australia, no injury is too grave to overcome; no task is too great to
overwhelm the South African spirit. It endures and can lead to victory,
even in the most hostile of terrains.

Though I have only served South Africa from the benches of the
constitutional opposition, I find myself in rare agreement with the radical
communist and internationalist Rosa Luxemburg, who wrote of the Bolshevik
Revolution in 1917:

  Freedom only for the supporters of government, only for the members of one
  party - however numerous they may be - is no freedom at all.

It is, I believe, the high duty of both government and opposition, and the
media and civil society to protect and extend the freedoms to everyone
around us. No rainbow is monochromatic. Big majorities do not confer a
monopoly of either wisdom or patriotism. When we encourage dissent and
welcome a debate among competing alternatives, we allow ourselves and the
nation we serve, the widest of all choices and a true test of competing
ideas If we condemn ideas simply because of where they originate then we
deny ourselves the highest good that a democratic republic provides for its
citizens.

Too often this Parliament has served to revive the old battles of the past
and abdicated its responsibility to hold the present administration to
account. There are indeed some signs of recent change and we must hope and
pray that the next Parliament, the next government and the next opposition
follows the wisdom of Thomas Jefferson, the third president of the United
States who said: “I like the dreams of the future better than the history
of the past.”

Above all, the next Parliament should remember that it serves the people,
not itself. That was a promise I made to the voters of Houghton, 20 years
ago, when they sent a 32-year-old city councillor to be their voice in
tumultuous times. That is the promise I tried to renew to the South African
people when they thrice returned me to a democratic Parliament,
representative of all the people in all our diversity.

I celebrate today the fact of South Africa’s exceptionalism. We are the
only large, ethnically diverse and resource-rich African country to retain
and to remain a free democracy. We should acknowledge that achievement, not
with a glow of self-congratulation, but with an urgent and determined
desire to repair the breaches in our democratic path and to expand our
lessons of democracy and freedom throughout the continent and the wider
world.

As I step down from this podium for the last time, and as I leave this
Parliament I have served for two decades, I will leave behind the two
letters “MP” that I have carried by my name as my honour and my charge.
Henceforth, freed from that great and noble obligation, I will be honoured
to carry a title that means far more than the ones I am leaving behind:
Citizen of the Republic of South Africa. Long live South Africa in freedom!
[Applause.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOKUPHEPHA NOKUVIKELEKA KOMPHAKATHI: Somlomo, Sekela
Somlomo, Mongameli Ohloniphekile wezwe lakithi, Sekela Mongameli,
oNgqongqoshe bakahulumeni, maSekela oNgqongqoshe, Malungu esiShayamthetho,
uMphakathi kanye naMaqabane ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, Deputy Speaker, hon
President of our country, Deputy President, Cabinet Ministers, Deputy
Ministers, hon Members of Parliament, members of the community as well as
comrades ...]

Madam Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition expressed surprise to
the reaction from the benches when she mentioned Ntate Seremane and how
important he is. [Interjections.] It’s not disgust; in fact, you surprised
all of us. If he was so important, why didn’t you give him the position of
leader at the time? [Applause.] You missed an opportunity.

Siqala ngokwethulela ukubonga kwethu ezinkulungwaneni zabantu bakithi
ngeqhaza abalibamba nsuku zonke ukwakha impilo eyimpumelelo. Ngokubamba
kwabo iqhaza kulo mshikashika, bahambisa nesiqubulo sikaHulumeni waKwaZulu-
Natal esithi “Masisukume sakhe”.

Nsuku zonke lezi zinkulungwane zisebenzela intando yeningi eyaqalwa umbutho
wenkululeko. Lezi zinkulungwane zabantu bakithi zivikela ubunye nobumbano
esizweni, zilwela ukucwasana ngokobulili, ngokobuzwe, zisebenzela
ubulungiswa ezweni lakithi. Namuhla sikubeka ngembaba ukuthi ikusasa
ngelethu sonke, futhi liqhakazile. Lokhu sikushiso yizinto esikwazile
ukuzenza sibambisene eminyakeni eyishumi nanhlanu nje vo.

Ethula inkulumo yakhe esizweni uMongameli wezwe ukhulume ngesigayigayi
somzabalazo uSolomon Kalushi Mahlangu. Lenkulumo ingikhumbuze inkondlo
yembongi uMzwakhe Mbuli uma ethi “uma senibusa, nikhululekile, nibokhumbula
labo abafela inkululeko.” (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[We want to start by paying tribute to the multitudes of our people for
their daily contribution in building a prosperous life. By being involved
in these efforts, they are in line with the motto of the KwaZulu-Natal
government which is “Masisukume sakhe - Let us Rise Up and Build.”

Every day these multitudes work for the democracy which was started by the
freedom movement. These multitudes of our people protect unity; they fight
against gender and racial discrimination, and they also work towards
realising justice in our country. And today we equivocally proclaim that
the future is ours and that it is very bright. We say this because of the
things that we have been able to achieve together in only 15 years.

When the President addressed the country, he talked about the freedom
fighter Solomon Kalushi Mahlangu. This address reminded me of the poem by
Mzwakhe Mbuli which goes: “When you rule, when you are free, you must
remember those who died for freedom.”]

We thank the President on presenting a well-balanced evaluation of the
state of our nation and for pointing the way forward in the long journey
towards the realisation of the goal of a better life for all. Building on
the achievements we have already scored, the ANC remains firmly committed
to working together with the people of our land to improve the quality of
life of all South Africans, cognisant of the stubborn legacy of colonialism
and apartheid and fully appreciative of the scientific reality that the
road to social progress is always under construction. However, we are
convinced that we will realise the kind of society enshrined in our
Constitution and in the Freedom Charter.

The improved quality of life we talk about must also find expression in the
improved conditions of safety and security of the people in their homes and
in their communities. They must be safe in their places of work, cinemas,
stadia, parks and other places of extramural activity.

This past festive season saw a concerted multidisciplinary approach to the
fight against crime. During that short period we achieved good results on
the part of crime prevention and combating. This demonstrates that, working
together, we can indeed do more. We should acknowledge, though, that the
reasons and extent of these successes still require further analysis.

Our peace and stability machinery has ensured the success of many
significant events. By now we have held numerous elections. Our country has
hosted many important international events. Our courts have been and still
remain an important platform in the process of defining the content of our
rights and obligations in a constitutional state.

For a young democracy like ours, these and many others are no minor
successes. In the light of this we can only assume that those who claim
that we make undertakings but never deliver are people who spend their time
in Slumberland.

The important contribution of our armed forces in the provision and
preservation of special and priority skills can never be overemphasised.
Our ground army forces, our air force and the navy have won the confidence
of the people through their capacity to protect the sovereignty of the
Republic. These successes demonstrate the time-tested truth that together
we can do more.

These successes we have scored do not in any way de-emphasise the
fundamental necessity to transform the entire judicial system. We have
visible evidence of progress made. However, that progress has itself
brought about new challenges. All South Africans share the President’s deep
concern about crime. The ANC and the government of our country are
committed to the establishment of a new, modernized, efficient and
transformed criminal justice system.

This initiative will reduce drastically the levels of crime and ensure the
stamping out of corruption. The review entails the scrutiny of our
performance along the whole value chain, including the functioning of the
police, the judiciary and correctional services with the aim of achieving
enhanced levels of integration and co-ordination.

We are paying focused attention to the fight against serious and violent
crime. We are also acting with added vigour against organised syndicates.
Recent events around Durban in particular attest to our commitment in this
regard. We will increase the capacity of the South African Police Service
through recruitment, rigorous training and working for better remuneration.

Steps are being taken better to equip and increase the capacity of
detective services, forensics, prosecution and judicial services. In this
regard, training is earmarked to commence in earnest this year. The people
of our land can be assured that we are going to act with speed in the
process of establishing the Directorate of Priority Crime Investigation,
otherwise known as DPCI.

The architecture of this unit is such that it takes on board the positive
aspects of previous units while shedding their weaknesses. In essence, we
are applying the law of negation; of negation in our approach to building
the Directorate of Priority Crime Investigation by taking the best and
shedding the worst.

There are many who skirt the truth on this matter. We should reiterate some
of what we have said before, that is, that the Directorate of Special
Operations was a new and innovative development initiated by the ANC
government to strengthen the fight against organised crime. It included
prosecutors, detectives and intelligence operatives in one unit. This was
indeed a powerful combination which nevertheless created its own problems.
All policy units are monitored by the Independent Complaints Directorate.
However, the DSO was under the National Prosecuting Authority and could not
be investigated by the Independent Complaints Directorate.

Even as we speak, we are faced with the issue of approximately     R100
million rand in funds which are unaccounted for by the DSO. The
intelligence-gathering capacity of our agencies is monitored by the
Inspector-General of Intelligence. However, the DSO was not covered by this
framework. Within the context of the review these and many other issues had
arisen in practice and had to be given serious consideration in the process
of evolving our crime-fighting polices, strategies, entities arsenal and
programmes.

Strangely enough, none among our critics seems to appreciate the gravity of
these and other challenges. They appear even less interested in finding
solutions to the problems. This leads one to suspect that the clamour about
the DSO is less about the quality of its work but more about the usability
of such work in the furtherance of political aspirations of those who
directly or indirectly benefited from the racist dispensation of the past.
To these Doubting Thomases, this Chinese proverb applies:

  The one who says it cannot be done ...


... like you -

  ... should not interrupt the one doing it.

[Applause.]

We are going to pay added attention to attacks on members of the South
African Police Service. As part of this work legislative measures will be
introduced to protect law-enforcement agencies. We shall ensure that
unarmed and defenceless people are protected against any possible abuse.
However, for the scoundrels who are nothing but beasts with human faces,
the “izinswelaboya” [people without humanity]; we will have no mercy.

The scourge of violence against women and vulnerable members of our society
remains a blemish on our democratic order. Aspects of our legislative
regime that unintentionally protect perpetrators will be changed this year
in order to drive the point home that 16 days of activism is in fact 365
days.

This makes it unlikely that our programmes and operations, including
intelligence, would have been targeted to families, relatives and friends.
There is a need for our communities to participate in preventing and
combating crime. We shall therefore work consistently to build an enduring
people’s contract which will find expression in our unity of purpose and
action, with each sector contributing to the common objective of
eliminating crime in our country.

Since 1994 the transformation of the judiciary has undergone marked
improvement. As hon members will know, the first democratic government
inherited a judiciary that was dominated by white males whose prior
contribution to the system had been to enforce and implement apartheid
rules.

Through the efforts of the ANC-led government programmes were put in place
to commence a transformation agenda within the judiciary. This was done
through the Magistrates Commission, an independent body responsible for
processing the appointment and discipline of magistrates.

Recently we have heard a cacophony of voices purporting to protect the
judiciary from the so-called attacks on the important institution of our
democracy. From where we stand, these modern-day defenders of our democracy
have offered nothing new, neither better nor wiser, than the late Chief
Justice Ishmael Mohammed when he said:

  A viable and credible constitutional culture evolves most effectively
  within the crucible of vigorous intellectual combat and even moral
  examination.

Nevertheless, those who seek to shut down this debate consistently ignore
this wise counsel by the late Chief Justice. In this instance we shall
resort to Aristotle who, when faced with similar circumstances said that
such people had better take to heart what Hesiod says:


   That man is best who sees the truth himself; Good too is he who listens
   to wise counsel.
   But who is neither wise himself nor willing
   To ponder wisdom is not worth a straw.

A line in Tanya Jovanovski’s booklet says: “Introduce any negative person
who crosses your path to someone else.” Surely our political detractors
deserve to be introduced to bats.

Together we will face crime squarely in the eyes and destroy it. We will
rid our society of rapists. There shall be no place to hide for those who
abuse women and children.

The introduction to Parliament of amendments to the Criminal Procedure Act
necessitating among others the examination of issues relating to forensics
and DNA databases is a positive step forward in the context of revamping
the criminal justice system.

Fellow citizens: Rest assured we shall not only be knocking on the doors of
the bad. We shall also knock on the doors of the good to urge each and
every one of us to be part of the great wave against crime. Because they
love peace, security and comfort we are certain that the greater majority
of people of our land, continent and the world will heed our clarion call
to join hands and make life difficult for criminals inside and outside of
our borders.

Regional integration and co-operation is a guarantee that in their pursuit
for a just world order revolutionaries cannot be confined by national
borders. Jean Toomer said: “We learn the ropes in life by untying the
knots.” Together we disentangled the riddle of apartheid; together we can
and will defeat crime. As the Chinese proverb goes: “Let the one who says
it cannot be done not interrupt the one doing it.” Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr M R SONTO: Chairperson, I gladly follow on the Minister. President of
the Republic of South Africa, Deputy President, Ministers present here, hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, since the advent of democracy in 1994 South
Africans have continued to discover the best in one another.

Common citizenship and equal rights became a reality as the dignity of
every individual was restored. We must remember that in 1996 we adopted a
Constitution that has since served as a compass in our transition to
democracy. At that point South Africans of all political persuasions stood
united and determined to strive together to meet and overcome whatever
challenges on the way.

The state of the nation address was succinct and adequate in identifying
hope and resilience as the main ingredients for the current imagined period
of continuing reconstruction and development. We have come across many
obstacles in our path to creating a stable nation, yet we’ve never lost the
capacity, but continued to demonstrate that we are able to work together to
build a safer, more peaceful and stable society.

The discourse in point was located within a vision to transform the Police
in a manner that saw crime prevention and combating being a joint project
between the Police and the community for the first time in the history of
South African policing thanks to the stewardship of the ANC-led government.

The spirit of determination we have as a governing party did not come by
accident, but was derived from objectives we pursued during our struggle to
defeat evil. The ANC government programmes enhance processes of a better
life for a safer nation and give meaning to our transformation agenda. We
have always believed that defeating crime is in the interest of a national
democratic revolution.

Chairperson, crime and violence have always sought to strike at the very
core of our efforts to create a stable society as a nation. The reason for
this is that this area of social ill was never a priority for the white
minority apartheid government of the past. Our understanding as the ANC is
that to defeat crime and violence is not to descend into fear, but to
harness the determination to overcome.

Lessons from the past have taught us what is best for and about us. As we
continue in our drive to eradicate the legacy of our apartheid past, we are
making sure that efforts we employ are not undermined by violence and
criminality. We have vowed never to allow our democratic gains to be eroded
by violent crime.

The ANC-led government has managed to get our society to work together to
accelerate and realise change. We have learnt that it can take time for us
to succeed in building a safe South Africa if we leave that responsibility
to government alone. That is the reason we are partners in shouldering the
responsibility.

Olu tshintsho kambe lwenze namathol’omthonyama, abantwana bomgquba, baziva
benelunda. Bayeka ukuba zizigculelo zokujongelwa phantsi ngumbuso
owawuphethwe ngabeLungu. Zaqala iint’ ezinkulu ukuphuthuma ibuyambo, kuba
kwasiko nasithethe bezitshajisiwe.

Izimilo oonyana bebeziphethe ngezandla. Owenza okubi kwabakubo ebeliqhayiya
neqhawe kwabasemzini; into embi iyebukwayo neqhwatyelw’izandla. Bemka
ubuntu ebantwini.

Kowu! Amadlagusha asibulel’ isizwe ngokunyoluka nomona! Kodwa, xa kungoku,
isizwe siqamele ngoxwebhu lokubuyisa amalungelo, uMgaqo-siseko weli lizwe.
Bath’ubukhosi bemvelo babuyelwa sisidima! Zatshikiz’iintokazi, wayiyizela
umzalisikazi kuba kaloku namakhosikazi abuyelwe bubuntu. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Ewe, sikwenzile okuninzi. Kambe ke kusekude ngaphambili! Masixhabashe ke
ngoko, nto zakuthi, sisazi nje ukuba oyibethileyo akakayoji; noseyojile
akakayityi. Yivumeni ingqanga yemibutho, uKhongolose, xa ikhomb ’indlela
kumqulu wayo wonyulo isithi: “Ngentsebenziswano, singenza lukhulu!”
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[This change has made indigenous people, the children of the soil, very
proud. Now, they are no longer the objects of scorn of the government of
the whites. They have claimed their heritage, because history and culture
were destroyed.
There was degeneration in the behaviour of our sons. One who committed evil
against his/her own became the pride and hero of outsiders; an evil deed
was applauded. The spirit of ubuntu disappeared amongst our people.

Oh! How the whites have killed the nation with their greed and jealousy!
However, today the nation has reclaimed its rights through the Constitution
of this country. The dignity of our traditional leadership is back! The
African women ululated and danced in happiness as the women’s dignity was
restored. [Applause.]

Yes, we have managed to do a lot. However, there is still a long way to go!
Let us beef up our pace in working, knowing that one swallow does not make
a summer. We should applaud the governing party, the ANC, when it says in
its election manifesto: “Working together, we can do more!”]

As part of our national anticrime campaign, the ANC government has had
several engagements with sector stakeholders such as community policing
forums, CPFs, faith-based organisations, organised labour, business, NGOs
and community-based organizations, CBOs. These are structures that made it
possible to mobilise citizens to practically contribute to the fight
against crime by joining community forums as reservists and starting
neighbourhood watches and street committees. That arrangement lends
credence to the ANC manifesto that says: Working together, we can do more!
Other partnership initiatives in the fight against crime are currently
under way with stakeholders such as the Anti-Crime Leadership Forum,
Business Against Crime, Take Charge, Active Citizen campaign and Sanco.

Government and big business have developed a cordial partnership in the
fight against crime, with very clear objectives, including the review of
the criminal justice system. This, in particular, is a leading project of
the justice, crime prevention and security cluster of government. It is
intended to define a process of seamless interconnection between
investigations and arrests, prosecution and adjudication, detention and
rehabilitation.

As a result, some specific crimes have been on the decrease during 2007-08.
These involve murder, which has come down to 38,6%; common robbery is down
by 8,7%; robbery with aggravating circumstances is down by 6,5%; cash-in-
transit robberies show a decrease of 15,4% and motor vehicle theft is down
by 7%.

This is one of the struggles we are engaged in and the one we must win. The
above statistics suggest that more needs to be done to eradicate crime, and
as the ANC, we are determined to facilitate processes in which our society
can take charge of their lives.

The resolution taken by the ANC at Polokwane to strengthen street
committees is one effective approach that will assist in combating crime.
This will go hand in hand with a capacitated SA Police Service. What is
bad, immoral and un-African is the reality that violent crime happens to
people who know one another and in some cases are related to each other, or
are family friends. That is the reason more training needs to be provided.

In this regard, revival of family values and moral regeneration become very
necessary in our society. Religious institutions can play a role in this
regard.

An increase in attacks by youth against other youth and sometimes teachers
is unacceptable; it cannot be condoned. We need to deal with it. In dealing
with these challenges, political parties must avoid the temptation of
political point-scoring when it comes to crime fighting. You must
understand that criminals do not care whether you are an ANC, IFP or FF
Plus member, they rob you! If you say that you are a politician, the better
for them. They will say: “You know the reason I am robbing you.” For that
reason, therefore, we must work together to find solutions to this scourge.


I’m inviting all the naysayers to stop complaining, folding their hands,
but to come and join the ANC in its efforts. Come, let’s join hands and
fight the scourge! Working together, we can do more to intensify the fight
against crime. I thank you. [Applause.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WOHULUMENI BEZIFUNDAZWE NABASEMAKHAYA: Sihlalo, Mongameli
wezwe, Sekela Mongameli, kanye nozakwethu, sizokhumbula ukuthi uma sibuka
umlando wezwe kusukela ngesikhathi sobandlululo ukufika ku-1994 ngaphambi
kokhetho ukuthi ohulumeni abandlule, ukusuka ku-Louis Botha ukuya ku-
Verwoerd, Vorster, P W Botha kanye no-De Klerk, bonke laba bantu bebefana.
Umbuzo-ke ukuthi bebefana ngani na? Ukufana kwabo bekuhamba lapha ekutheni
bebengalaleli iningi labantu bezwe.

Bekungabantu abayisikhwili phambana nobhoko, bengontamolukhuni. Laba
kwakungabantu abangafuni ukusebenzisana nabantu. Kodwa ukusukela
ngesikhathi uKhongolose ethatha izintambo ngo1994, kwaguquka lokho. Kwaba
khona isimo lapho uhulumeni elalela abantu. Kwaba nguhulumeni ohambisana
nabantu, othatha uluvo lwabantu. Kwaba uhulumeni obuka izinhlaka
ngezinhlaka, obuka izigaba nezigaba kanye nama-strata. Kwaba uhulumeni
okwazi ukuphendula uma ngabe ebhalelwe ngabantu angathathi isikhathi kodwa
aphendule ngaleso sikhathi.

Ngaleyo ndlela-ke sibonile ukuthi lo hulumeni ukwazile ukwakha izinhlaka
ezinesizinda, zazika ohlelweni lokuthi abantu babe yingxenye yenkululeko.
Ngikhuluma ngamakomidi amawadi, izisebenzi zabantu ezibizwa phecelezi,
ngama-CDWs. Ngikhuluma khona lapho ngamakomidi omphakathi esitiladini,
ngithi lezi yizakhiwo eziqonde ukuthi abantu baleli lizwe babe yingxenye
kahulumeni.

Ngaleyo ndlela-ke thina singuKhongolose sithi lo hulumeni unguhulumeni
wabantu. Uhulumeni uyinto esebenzisana nabantu, sithi noh ulumeni
wasemakhaya naye makagxile ekuthuthukiseni kanye nasekushintsheni isimo.
Indlela esibona ngayo thina sithi masakhe amakomidi amawadi aqinile.
Masakhe amakomidi aqinile ezitiladini, sakhe amakomidi aqinile asemakhaya
ama-village committees. Masenze ukuthi amakhansela abengamakhansela
azishovushovu, masenze ukuthi kube khona ukusebenzisana phakathi
komphakathi nabantu. Ngaleyo ndlela-ke masiqinise esikwenzayo.

Esingakusho-ke uma sibuka ukuthi kuleli lizwe lakithi kwenzakalani ukuthi
kunesinye nje isifundazwe esiye saphathwa yiqembu elithile lezombusazwe.
Kuleso sifundazwe amakomidi awazange asebenze ngendlela efanele futhi nje
awaka ze abekhona. Namanje kunohulumeni weMetro ophethwe yiqembu elithile
lawa makomidi abantu awekho kahle futhi awasebenzi ngendlela efanele. Kules
i simo uyabona ukuthi laba bantu abayithandi intando yeningi, yinto
abayenza nje uma bekhuluma kodwa uthole ukuthi isenzo sabo asifani
nabakushoyo.

Ngaleyo ndlela-ke singuhulumeni kaKhongolose sithi yithi esikhokhelayo,
singabaholi, yithi esikwaziyo ukuthi sibukele intando yeningi. Yithi esithi
abantu yibona abayonquma bakwazi ukuthi senzenjani. Kuleli sonto elendlule
nje isiGungu esikhulu sezwe sithathe isinqumo sokuthi samukele isincomo
sokuthi kube khona isimo lapho siza khona nomgomo othi, angeke kube khona
ilungu le komidi lewadi elizokhokhelwa imali ebibekelwe ukusiza ekutheni
yenze izinsiza zikahulumeni engaphansi kwenkulungwane.

Lowo mgomo usathunyelwe ebantwini ukuthi bayowudingida. Siyethemba ukuthi
uma ngabe kungena unyaka omusha kuhulumeni wasekhaya ngomhlaka 1 Julayi
2009, lo mthetho uzobe ukwazi ukusebenza ngendlela efanele, ukwenzela
ukuthi amakomidi omphakathi abe yizinto ezisebenza ngendlela efanele.
Sibukile nokuthi kuningi okufuneka kwenziwe kulo mkhakha, okunye kwakho
ukuthi amakomidi amawadi awanawo amahhovisi. Amakomidi amawadi indlela
asebenza ngayo isafuna ukuqiniswa, lokho-ke sizokubuka sikulungise.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, President
of the country, Deputy President, and colleagues, you will recall that when
we look at the history of our country during apartheid up to the 1994
elections, the past governments, right from General Louis Botha, Verwoerd,
Vorster, P W Botha to De Klerk were all just the same. The question
therefore is: How? The similarity was that none of them listened to the
majority of the people of this country.

They just went against the norms and they were right-wingers. These are the
people who did not want to work with the people. But ever since the ANC
took over the reigns of government in 1994 that has changed. The government
then started listening to the people; a government that works with the
people and listens to the people’s views. And this is the government that
considers all structures, sections and strata at all levels. This is the
government that does not delay in responding to the concerns raised by the
public through their letters.

That way then, we have seen that this government has managed to form firm
structures, ones with foundation, that are entrenched in programmes which
are meant to make people part of democracy. Here I am talking about ward
committees, the servants of the people known as community development
workers, the CDWs. I am talking about the street committees, and I am
saying these are the structures which are meant for the people of this
country so as to be part of government.

That is therefore why we as the ANC say that this government is the
government of the people. A government is the structure that is working
with the people. We are therefore saying local government must also be firm
in developing and improving the situation. And we feel that we need to form
strong committees. Let us form strong ward, street and village committees.
Let us ensure that councillors become activists and ensure that they work
with the communities. In that way we need to strengthen everything we do.

What we can therefore say in response to what is happening in our country
is that there was a particular province which was governed by a certain
party. The committees in that province did not function in a proper way; in
fact they did not exist. Yet again, there is a certain metropolitan council
which is run by a certain political party where these committees actually
do not exist and where they do, they do not function properly. That is the
situation. One can see that these political parties do not like democracy,
and where democracy is concerned, their talk is cheap, because they do not
practise what they preach.

Therefore, as the ANC-led government, we are saying that it is we who are
leading. We are the leaders. It is we who see to it that democracy
prevails. We are saying it is the people who decide what they want us to
do. Just last week Cabinet decided that we come up with legislation that
stipulates that no ward committee member would be paid even as little as a
thousand rand from the funds which were meant for service delivery.

That legislation has been forwarded to the public for scrutiny. We believe
that in the new municipal financial year, on 1 July 2009, this legislation
would come into effect to ensure that committees in the communities
function properly. We have also noted that there is still much to be done
at this level, as, for example, ward committees do not have offices, and
that we need to strengthen the way ward committees function. We will then
look at that and rectify it.]

The relationship between ward committees, ward councillors, community
development workers, traditional headmen and headwomen needs to be
strengthened.

A community development worker must know all the residents within his or
her area in the neighbourhood. A CDW must be a crime reporter, a social
grant application adviser, a voter education teacher, a government services
adviser and so on. We believe that the record of the ANC in building organs
of people’s power speaks for itself. This differentiates us from other
parties which are not committed to building democracy in this country.

Let’s look at the record of the party called the UDM. Mr Bantu Holomisa,
the general, in his history - unfortunately he is not here – has ruled only
one municipality in this country. It was the King Sabata Dalindyebo
Municipality. That municipality, in its history, was the capital city of
the former Transkei homeland. It is a municipality that was the regional
economic centre of the former Transkei; it is a municipality that was
thriving - it was very strong. It was taken over by the UDM in 2000. Since
the day it was taken over, it became dysfunctional. There were lots of
problems in that municipality, so much so that the provincial government
had to intervene and take over the running of it. Even today the legacies
of UDM-rule still loom large in that municipality.

Clearly, he can’t sit in a glass house and throw stones at other people. He
has demonstrated in his rule that they can’t rule. If they fail to lead one
municipality, what about the country? What about the province? After that,
they went to the elections, where they were wiped out in each and every
ward because the people were tired of UDM rule.

Therefore, people must not speak as if they are running things. That
municipality was run as if they were running a spaza shop. Of the other
parties that are claiming to be exercising good governance, we are
monitoring and checking what is happening, but I must tell you that the
picture doesn’t look good. [Laughter.]

Where the ANC rules, it is able to speak candidly about the challenges it
experiences. As I speak now, we are entering some municipalities where we
are supporting provincial governments, where they are applying section 139.
At the Mnquma Municipality in the Eastern Cape and at four other
municipalities these measures are being contemplated. They’re the
municipalities of Kou-Kamma, the Ukhahlamba District Municipality, the
Amahlathi Municipality and the Mbashe Municipality. The ANC-led government
came forward to say that we are experiencing challenges, we need help. It
can’t be said of other parties that they did the same. However, in terms of
our responsibilities and our tasks, we are able to move into those areas
and we ensure that these issues are addressed.

The integrated development plans are our very important instruments for
planning in this country, and we must ensure that no development project or
investment programme is implemented if it is not in terms of the IDP. The
IDP should be like the Bible to Christians, the Torah to Jews and the Koran
to Muslims. It is the plan that should be used by all municipalities to
guide their activities.

I call upon all government departments from all spheres in senior positions
to participate in the development of IDPs as these IDPs will be credible.
This call includes state-owned enterprises. People should be given the
power to monitor and evaluate infrastructure projects and programmes and
ensure that they have a say in the services delivered in their areas.

We maintain that before a service provider is paid a retainer fee, the
people, through their organs, must be able to sign off the project. Whether
you are building a school, a clinic, a road or any type of infrastructure,
people must be able to say what they think of the quality of the project
before the service provider gets the retainer fee. In that way the power
will have been given to the people in a real sense. The people, then, will
be able to monitor and evaluate what is delivered to them.

With regard to skills development, a lot has been done, a lot is being done
and a lot is still going to be done. There is a lot of good will in the
private sector out there. In the past three months the department has
managed to crisscross the length and breadth of the country where people
are willing and saying that they want to contribute more.

What is disturbing is that I have not seen political parties on my left
coming forward to say they want to make a contribution, but here they are
able to raise issues and speak. Where they live, they don’t make any
contributions whatsoever in terms of taking local government to the next
level.

In that way, we believe that together we will be able to ensure that we
move forward. We will continue to strive for the national democratic
society in which we all want to live. This society should be heaven on
earth and not earth in heaven. We should completely build a different South
Africa from that which we found prior to the 1994 breakthrough.

There is, currently, no party in South Africa which seeks to build a
national democratic South Africa except the ANC. Thank you very much,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms N R MOKOTO: Chairperson, hon President and Deputy President, hon
Minister ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, I’m sorry to interrupt
you. There is excessive excitement to my left. Could we please temper that?

Ms N R MOKOTO: That will be appreciated.

Prior to the democratisation of South Africa and during the 1990s youth
development occurred in the context of political, social, cultural,
economic and racial oppression. This situation contributed to the many
current dilemmas young women and men now find themselves in.

The apartheid regime did not address the developmental needs of both young
women and men as a specific category. These needs were, in particular,
either ignored or not considered important. In short, government had no
intention, if not the capacity, to devise focused and long-term youth
policies or programmes to intervene on matters affecting young people. To
date, we are still obliged to commend the nongovernmental sector for the
instrumental role they played in paving the way for sustainable youth
development.

After 1994, the ANC-led government recommitted itself to addressing
specific needs for young women and men. The level of importance accorded to
youth and the gradual institutionalisation of these matters into various
government systems and structures resonated with the assertion made in the
early 1980s by the former President of the ANC, Comrade O R Tambo, who
strongly highlighted that a nation, a people, a country, a movement that
does not respect its young does not deserve its future.

This epoch-making speech by our forebear continues to inspire many of us in
the liberation movement, and it has been a strong guiding force for the
government of the ANC in its endeavours to secure a meaningful life full of
opportunities, hope and security for South Africa’s youth.

The establishment of the National Youth Development Agency now, like the
creation of the National Youth Commission then, represents a major shift in
the direction of youth development in South Africa, an unequalled feat in
the life of our democracy.

It has further cemented the government’s way forward in addressing the
needs of this sector. This could be assessed in the manner it dealt with
issues of youth development, placing them high on the agenda for broader
nation-building and transformation and, as a result of their seriousness,
requiring a comprehensive response.

Parliament has also pronounced on the significance of youth development by
actively promoting the development of South African youth. In that regard
it has passed several enabling pieces of legislation to ensure that the
challenge of youth development does not only remain a pipe dream, but that
more emphasis is placed on government to deliver quality education, skills
and training, housing, health care, jobs, and to reduce poverty and lack of
information.

Melao e e latelang e leka ka bojotlhe go fitlhelela maitlhomo a puso go
siamisa le go sireletsa ditshwanelo tsa batho ba ba welang mo karolwaneng
e, ya dikarolo tse di tlhophilweng [targeted sectors] e leng bomme, digole,
baša le bana ... (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[The following pieces of legislation are the efforts of government in its
attempt to redress and protect the rights of the people who fall in this
category, which includes women, the disabled, youth and children ...]

... namely the Employment Equity Act of 1998, the National Youth Commission
Act of 1996, the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair
Discrimination Act of 2000, the Children’s Act of 2008 and the National
Youth Development Agency Act of 2008. Within the various units in
government there exist various policies, provisions and regulations whose
main attempt is to attend to issues of target groups, of which youth is the
core feature. These are the Constitution of South Africa, the White Paper
on Local Government published in 1998, the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child, the National Youth Development Policy Framework of
2002-07, the National Youth Commission Act of 1996 and the White Paper on
National Higher Education.

We are aware that at provincial and national levels, the inclusion of youth
development has not been a major obstacle. However, there has been a lot of
difference in terms of the various approaches adopted by various provinces
towards implementation of youth development. At times this points to the
shortcomings in co-ordination and to the lack of clear mandates in
different spheres of government. Youth development mandates are currently
scattered, which often makes it difficult to co-ordinate and effectively
assess their impact on youth. The question that still arises is how
sustainable these programmes are to effectively address ... dikgwetlho le
mathata a a lebaganeng baša. [... the challenges and problems facing the
youth.]

Whilst we understand that government has to play a major role in youth
development, we cannot leave this responsibility to the youth or even
government alone.

There is a strong call for increased effort and participation of the
private sector in the overall programme of youth development as the private
sector ultimately reaps the fruits and becomes the beneficiaries of this
noble effort by government. This involvement can best be achieved at the
level of implementation of learnerships, internships and various areas in
which funding is required to make this programme a living reality.

As Parliament, we are very aware of the challenges facing young people,
especially with learnership where private companies choose to engage in
learnerships programmes for the wrong reasons, to get tax breaks and other
reasons, especially government departments that choose to abuse the system
by allocating inappropriate tasks to young graduates, resulting in their
acquiring the wrong experience. We call on all perpetrators to backtrack in
their bad behaviour because of the negative consequences for unsuspecting
and vulnerable young minds. We call on stakeholders in government and the
private sector to acquaint themselves with youth development matters before
they start such programmes.

At the level of local government, we are aware that local government is
strategically placed to deliver on youth policies and youth work. Whilst it
shares many national and provincial roles as part of co-operative
governance, local government’s importance matters because this is where the
action is all the time. It therefore becomes imperative that local
municipalities pay strict attention to and prioritise the implementation of
the national youth development strategy within their communities.

We, as the ANC-led government, are convinced that it is only through local
government that policies and programmes on youth development can be
effectively and practically translated into reality. It therefore becomes a
necessity for local government to fully translate and extend all programmes
to localities for effective implementation.

In acknowledging that the participation of youth in the political, social
and economic life of our country was key to strengthening and enhancing a
culture of democracy, the ANC took resolutions at its 52nd national
congress in Polokwane in 2007 that will have a far-reaching impact on the
lives of young people in South Africa. In doing that, the ANC was very
emphatic when it stated that more and urgent attention must be paid to the
implementation of youth programmes and the monitoring thereof.

These congress resolutions came as a further call on government to
intensify its programme to push back the frontiers of poverty experienced
by youth in particular and society at large. Among these resolutions was
the following: the establishment of the National Youth Development Agency
that will ensure seamless integration, sustainability and responsiveness to
the demands and aspirations of South African youth. This represents a long-
held view within youth quarters that the impact of youth development can
only be felt when it is sustainable, well-resourced, co-ordinated and comes
from one centre.

In terms of implementing this National Youth Development Act and its
strategy, the new government will have to ensure that it prioritises the
setting up of the National Youth Development Agency. It will also have to
ensure that the National Youth Development Agency remains at the centre of
all youth development programmes. Furthermore, government must ensure that
the agency is well-resourced financially ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, please start wrapping
up.

Ms N R MOKOTO: At this juncture, the ANC is more than convinced that the
youth in this country are impressed that the ANC is an organisation that
takes them seriously. This was the case long before it came to power in
1994. With the high turnout of voter registration amongst young people, we
are more than convinced that young people’s confidence has been boosted.
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms M J J MATSOMELA: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, since the beginning of the democratic
dispensation in South Africa in 1994, the postapartheid, ANC-led government
has prioritised women’s empowerment.

In addition to the obligations imposed by the South African Constitution,
the Southern African Development Community Declaration on Gender and
Development, the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action all call for gender balance and women’s participation in political
and decision-making structures.

The government strategy that speaks to the economic empowerment of women is
located in various government departments and forms part of a co-ordinated
approach of the South Africa government. Central to this is the work of the
Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Labour.

The dti has developed the draft strategic framework on gender and women’s
economic empowerment, which highlights six focus areas of enterprise
development and these include the provision of business information,
entrepreneurial education and training, financing, international trade
development support, research and statistics on women’s entrepreneurship,
and science and technology.

This department has made some strides in mainstreaming women in business by
establishing such programmes as Technology for Women in Business and SA
Women Entrepreneurs’ Network.

Current anchor programmes of the department include targeted financial
schemes offered by Khula Finance, the Development Bank of Southern Africa,
the Industrial Development Corporation and the Technology for Women in
Business programme.
As part of Asgisa and the 2006 gender strategy, the DTI is to launch a
number of programmes, including a targeted women’s economic fund, a
procurement directory for women entrepreneurs, skills training programmes
for women though the empowerment programme and a retail facility for
products produced by women.

Khula targets small, medium and micro enterprises by providing financial
support. Ntsika, on the other hand, provides nonfinancial support like
training, tender advice, training and business development programmes. The
Khula Start-up Fund provides finance specifically to rural women.

The Department of Labour has played an important role in initiating
legislation and providing an environment that is conducive to the
development of women within both the public and private sectors. Four key
pieces of labour legislation have been enacted since 1995, and I would like
to specifically highlight the Skills Development Act.

The Act provides, inter alia, an incentive system to increase investment by
firms in skills development and to ensure that funds are available for
national skills priorities. This is of critical importance as it speaks
directly to the need to increase the levels of women in industries that
require specialised skills.

Various pieces of legislation that promote gender equality have been passed
by the South African government since the fall of apartheid. These include
legislation that deals with discrimination and equality, domestic violence,
the reproductive health of women, women and education, women and access to
land, as well as women and employment equity.

The Commission for Gender Equality on the other hand, which is an
independent statutory body established under Chapter 9 of the Constitution,
has a mandate to research, monitor and analyse the legislation passed by
Parliament to ensure that it is gender sensitive.

Some of the achievements made by this commission include the gender
barometer project that involves research relating to the maintenance and
evaluation of the implementation of gender transformation in South African
institutions, focusing on the public sector, and the development of an
electronic system for regular monitoring and evaluation of gender
transformation. The gender barometer helps to identify priorities for
interventions to accelerate the eradication of gender inequality.

The Parliament of the Republic of South Africa is committed to public
participation and debate, and has created within the Parliament arena the
Women’s Parliament.

The Women’s Parliament is hosted during Women’s Month, August, in which the
sacrifices of women struggling against apartheid are commemorated, and the
crucial role that women still have to play in the reconstruction and
development of the country is highlighted. The event draws together a
gathering of women from civil society and Parliament across the national
spectrum to share and reflect on their common and distinctive experiences,
as well as to identify and debate silent matters which are affecting the
status and quality of life of women.

This ANC-led government has moved to insert the proposed 50/50 draft Bill
which seeks to achieve equal representation and participation by 2015. The
main object of the draft Bill is to ensure the equal representation and
participation of women in decision-making positions. The Bill also focuses
on the important role that women have to play in effecting social justice
and improving the lives of vulnerable disadvantaged persons, the majority
of which are women.

The 50/50 draft Bill is, however, about more than just numbers; it is about
women making a difference. Women and gender mainstreaming is not merely
about getting and promoting women to high positions, but it is also about
women bringing a powerful package to institutions and organisations that
are unique and important to deepening transformation.

Society consists of people who are nurtured by women in families, which are
the building blocks of society. Women are therefore the glue of the family,
village, town, city, region, province and, of course, the country.

I agree with His Excellency the President, in his state of the nation
address, when he said that as government we are proud that we have changed
the demographic composition of the public sector though we have not yet met
the target of parity that we had set ourselves. However, it is important to
note that the representation of women in South African legislatures is high
in comparison to world standards.

I must also say that South Africa has been an example in the sense that
other countries, like the DRC, Burundi and Rwanda, have followed in our
footsteps. At the executive level, women hold 43% of Cabinet posts, with
Parliament standing at 30% of women Members of Parliament, whereas at the
local government level women represent 40% of elected officials – and I am
sure we will see an increase in these ratios after the coming elections.

The ANC-led government is indeed proud to say yes, South African women are
benefiting from advances made in terms of their economic empowerment and
indeed with the prospect of meaningful corrective action.

The major challenges, however, are to ensure effective budget allocations
to strengthen mechanisms of enforcement and implementation, ensuring that
women, especially those that are in the rural areas, are well informed so
as to take advantage of the rights accorded to them in the legislation and
able to access opportunities to develop their knowledge and skills and,
finally, that patriotic South African women and strong men – I repeat
strong men - take concerted action to translate these advances into
reality. The ANC is the strongest women-centred political party, and
patriotic women should influence their families and their neighbours to go
out in huge numbers to make the right choice for an even better tomorrow,
not only for women but for the whole of South Africa. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, Mr President, Madam Deputy President and hon
members, you have been listening to five speakers, all from the ANC, for
the past 55 minutes, but at least you’ll have some variety now!

The President of the Republic delivered an address which has been
characterised in many ways, but we in the UCDP are mindful that he’s merely
holding the fort and should therefore not rock the boat unduly. We wish to
place on record that the President, within a month in office, invited our
party leadership for eyeball-to-eyeball deliberations on matters of
national concern. This is unprecedented in the ANC’s 15 years in
government.
Mindful that this was his maiden and also valedictory state of the nation
address, we say, “Hello, Mr President, and goodbye!” [Laughter.]

Ke kopilwe gore ke go leboge Motlotlegimogolo, gore fa go ka bo go sa
diragala gore o se kokomale se se maratswana, go na le pelaelo ya gore puo
ya ga lowe e kabo e sa utlwala mo Ntlong e. Bakgatla, Bakwena le Bataung ba
re o ntse pulamadibogo. Le fa o ka se tswelele jaaka tlhogo ya naga, ba
wetse matswalo. Ba ne ba lala ba letse ka Labotlhano, ba ikutlwa e le
batho. A pula e go nele, Kgabo! (Translation of Setswana paragraph
follows.)

[I have been asked to compliment you, Your Excellency, because there is no
doubt that had you not assumed the highest Office in the land, our language
would never have been heard in this House. The Bakgatla, the Bakwena and
the Bataung clans say you are a trendsetter. Even if you do not continue as
the President of the country, they are pleased. They felt very content on
Friday. Be blessed, Kgabo!]

In the short space of time the President must have realised that people,
even those who urged him on to take the poisoned chalice of head of state
of the Republic of South Africa, can be fastidious. He has been accused of
being too presidential, while, if he had behaved otherwise he would have
been accused of being timid and insecure.

These people tend to forget that the President of the country is President
of all of us and not just the party he comes from. Perhaps this calls again
for the direct election of the President of the country.

The fight against corruption is almost hackneyed in this House. We know of
whistleblowers who have paid the price with their lives when reporting
corruption. The likes of Jimmy Mohlala, may his soul rest in peace, comes
to mind. Folks such as Modise spent an inordinate period of time locked up
because he dared to ask about money stuffed into a black plastic bag. With
such incidents it will be difficult to win the battle against corruption.
During the short tenure of this Presidency we saw heads of department being
swapped as there were fears that they might scream too loudly.

While we look forward with great expectation to what will come out of the
much talked-about successful mediation and negotiations by our country in
Zimbabwe, the government has to explain to South Africans why the
R300 million was sent before the conclusion of the deal and why it is
benefiting members of Zanu-PF only. And this, Mr President, happened in
spite of the unsolicited assurances by government and the Presidency that
the money was meant to alleviate problems facing all people in that country
regardless of political affiliation.

It is most unfortunate that the tenure of this Presidency will go down in
the annals of the nation as the shortest to date and yet as the most
controversial, taking into account the dismissal of the National Director
of Public Prosecutions and the scrapping of the Scorpions. This has been a
hot potato and the current Presidency was made to dish out the bitter pill.
We know that this House has yet to deliberate on these matters.

The ascendance to the highest office in the land as a consequence of the
unfortunate recall of the former President has not made it easier for the
current incumbent despite his assertion that “our nation is in a good
state”.

As we head for the general election, we look forward to peaceful
electioneering and no political party should feel and place itself above
all others – we are running the same race, though we come from different
perspectives.

It is important that all parties observe clause 5 of the Electoral Code of
Conduct, which states that:

   Every registered party, and every candidate must liaise with other
   parties contesting an election and endeavour to ensure that they do not
   call a public meeting, march, demonstration, rally or any other political
   event at the same time and place as that called by another party
   contesting the election.
If parties were to live up to this, with the ruling party leading the way,
we would not have had the situations that played themselves out in Port
Elizabeth, Eastern Cape; Nongoma, KwaZulu-Natal and Gannalaagte, North
West. In the words of the President, the robustness of our political
engagement during this period of electoral contest should be dignified and
peaceful and we expect the ruling party to lead by example.

When we from the opposition benches complain about poor service delivery in
members’ statements and even point out where it is lacking a dismissive
attitude is usually taken by the executive, but the Automobile Association
has vindicated us by pointing out that the condition of roads in the
country leaves much to be desired.

When we said there were problems around potable water we were disregarded,
but now cholera holds sway and it has become clear that there has been very
little co-ordination, or co-operation, if you like, among the affected
departments. The Department of Health cries foul about the Departments of
Water Affairs and Forestry and Provincial and Local Government.

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has to ensure that there is
safe drinking water while Local Government has to provide water to the
public and Health has to ensure that the nation is healthy.

We have to admit that before 1994 cholera was almost unheard of in this
country, but in recent times we have had it in Delmas and Stilfontein,
Orkney, and in the Eastern Cape, and of late it is threatening to spread
across the whole country.

Finger-pointing and vilification of past governments have to stop and
government should act in the present. Let us hope that the envisaged
reconfiguration of government departments that we read so much about will
address the needs of the people and not raise bureaucracy as people jockey
to be appointed senior Ministers.

Ineptitude we should eschew if we mean to run the country well is that up
to a month and two weeks after the release of the Grade 12 results there
was still uncertainty about the results of some candidates, and
investigations have had to be mounted and reports filed with the Minister.
The morale of the affected young people should be raised and those
officials who blew it should feel it, because they did not hear, therefore
they need to feel.

Finally, the amalgamation of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National
Youth Commission into one body, the National Youth Development Agency, does
give credence to what we said as the opposition that there were problems
within Umsobomvu because it was, according to us, unproductive and
misplaced.

We hope that young people will henceforth be able to be accommodated and
get more employment as soon as they qualify for it. We hope therefore that
the new body will live up to expectations and serve the youth of this
country. I thank you.

Business suspended at 12:32 and resumed at 14:02.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Deputy Speaker, belated
congratulations to you. Hon President of the Republic of South Africa,
President Kgalema Motlanthe, hon Deputy President Ms Baleka Mbete and hon
members of the House, we have a proud and rich history of struggle for
freedom and inclusivity. We have every right to evoke it in our noble quest
to champion a better life for all. Furthermore, it is an objective,
documented and well researched history.

Frieda Bokwe Matthews, the first black girl to pass the Junior Certificate
exams in South Africa, who later became one of the few black women to
graduate as a teacher from the then College of Fort Hare, recalls in her
simple and profound prose:

   Well, do I remember the day my husband and sons, with us concurring,
   first mooted the idea of a congress of all the people of South Africa,
   regardless of colour or race or party politics, coming together to
   discuss the possibilities of a nonracial constitution, one which would
   recognise that South Africa is multiracial, that all its peoples have
   contributed to its development.

Gratefully, today we have a Constitution that is second to none in the
world. We owe our forebears and unsung heroines of our struggle, such as
Frieda Bokwe Matthews, gratitude for their vision and invaluable
sacrifices. The prophetic and fascinating imagination of MaMatthews shines
through in her memoirs entitled Remembrances. According to the introduction
by Janet Hermans, she started writing this during a lonely and stressful
period of her life, when both her husband, Z K Matthews, and her son
Gaobakwe Joseph Matthews were detained during the Treason Trial in the late
1950s.

MaMatthews reminisces about her vision of a convention of the people that
would chart a peaceful, prosperous, nonracial and democratic South Africa
from the ruins of apartheid. She writes, and I quote:

   The thousands would camp out and make it truly South African by using our
   wide open spaces. Where better than in Thaba Nchu? I put my views to the
   family and the girls thought them exciting. The menfolk had reservations.
   We were going too fast, they said. It was innocently conceived as that
   and yet there is no doubt that the Nationalists saw a deep-laid communist
   plot, inspired, I have no doubt, by communists in America and brought to
   South Africa by my husband.

Her mere mortal fault is that the congress of the people that she and
others in the congress movement envisaged and conceptualised in 1953
eventually took place in Kliptown in 1955, but not in Thaba Nchu.

Thankfully, today we have the Freedom Charter as our immortal policy
lodestar, which exhorts us all to uphold democracy. The Charter further
proclaims: “The people shall share in the wealth of the country.” We dare
not abandon the poor. They are most vulnerable, through no fault of theirs.

The current global financial crisis and the resultant economic meltdown
pose a serious threat to the world economy, including ours, as we are a
significant part of the world economy. Ours is the biggest economy on the
continent of Africa and, moreover, South Africa is not an island insulated
from the capricious vagaries of market forces. As a responsive and
democratic government, sensitive to the plight of the private sector and
businesses that remain the engine and drivers of our economy, together with
our key stakeholders, our government has already stepped up to the plate.

The role of the state in the economy is no longer a matter for debate.
However, the state is not going to parachute in solutions to a global
crisis and a societal problem. In his state of the nation address, the hon
President Kgalema Motlanthe made bold to say:
   ... I am happy to report that in the interactions between the Presidency
   and leaders of various social partners, we agreed jointly to devise
   interventions that would minimise the impact of this crisis on our
   society.

The task team dealing with these matters is still hard at work.

The proactive measures outlined by our President in steering our economy
through the turmoil and turbulence of these challenging times deserve our
unqualified and all-round support. Clearly, our government is well-poised
and ready to exercise leadership in these trying times.

As a responsive and democratic government steeped in the traditions of our
forebears and alive to the frailties and vulnerabilities of the poor, our
strategic intervention in mitigating the looming havoc and hardship
portended by the global financial crisis cannot be questioned.

I am neither going to dwell much nor elaborate on the announcement made by
the President, save to expatiate on the implications of the present crisis
for the minerals and energy sectors of our economy and our government’s
leadership in mobilising an inclusive and commensurate response thereto. I
will be the first to concede that our response is neither definitive nor
exhaustive, but rather work in progress.
At the first whiff of the sudden implosion of the global financial crisis
at the end of the third quarter of 2008, it became apparent that the
ramifications thereof would be severe. Mining operations were in jeopardy
as mining companies fell under financial distress, with resultant
retrenchment of mineworkers. Government took the lead in instituting a task
team comprised of the triumvirate of the Department of Minerals and Energy
representing government, labour and the private sector represented by the
Chamber of Mines.

The task team was entrusted with the responsibility to fashion an
intervention to mitigate the severity of the crisis in the mining industry
and to develop recommendations that will ensure optimal development of the
mining industry after this crisis.

Our unwavering commitment as a democratic and responsive government, as
clearly articulated in our policies, is not merely confined to promoting
economic growth, but also extends to creating sustainable jobs to combat
poverty and reduce inequalities in our society. Already, the task team
released an interim report on the 18 December 2008, highlighting a number
of consensual short-term recommendations intended to minimise job losses
and propose alternatives to retrenchments in the mining sector, amongst
many others.

Our mantra still remains freedom and inclusivity. It is crystal clear that
the role of the state has to go beyond the regulatory function and extend
to playing a strategic role in exercising leadership and facilitating a
developmental trajectory for our economy. Our industrial development agenda
demands no less, the latter being the topic I have to explore today. The
foundation in terms of policy and legislation has been laid for us to
pursue this industrial development programme.

It is worth mentioning that our macroeconomic policy priorities have
evolved to the extent of placing the state at the centre of development. We
are not apologetic about that, as evidenced by our massive public sector
investment in the public infrastructure, expanded public works, larger and
reformed social security system and many other things.

In advancing our industrial development agenda, the role of minerals
beneficiation cannot be overlooked. Our strategy will not only advance the
objectives of Asgisa, that is the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative
for SA, the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act, the Precious
Metals Act and Diamonds Amendment Act, but they will also be in compliance
with the Kyoto Protocol. The implementation of this strategy will create
hundreds of thousands of jobs and contribute to economic growth.

Energy poverty is a reality to many of our people who are still trapped in
poverty. We have to ensure that we accelerate this programme to the
poorest. In any stimulus package that will come with us in South Africa,
renewable energy will be key. But most importantly, the technology for
renewable energy must be manufactured in South Africa. That would create
the necessary industrial capacity that this economy needs, as Davos
suggested.

In the light of the energy challenges that confront us, government has
devised and put together a response plan that makes mandatory provision for
incentives and support programmes that are aimed at increasing energy
efficiency. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mna M M SWATHE: Motlatša-Sepikara, re le ba DA re leboga polelo ya
Mopresidente ya go bula Palamente ngwageng wa 2009. Re leboga le go amogela
diphetogo tša motheo tšeo temokrasi e di tlišitšego nageng ya Afrika-Borwa.
Re amogela tšohle tše botse tšeo mmušo o di phethilego mo mengwageng ye
lesometlhlano ya go feta. Le ge go le bjalo, re sa dutše re lla ka tšeo
mmušo o paletšwego ke go di phetha.

Tšhelete ya setšhaba ya dipeakanyo e ya tšwa ngwaga-ka-ngwaga, efela ga e
šome mošomo wa yona. Mmušo o paletšwe ke go fediša dintlwana tša boithomelo
tša dipakete tšeo o tshepišitšego go di fediša ka ngwaga wa 2007. Go
hlokega ga meetse a go hlweka dinageng-magae ke hlobaboroko. Setšhaba sa
dinageng-magae se sa nwa meetse a dinoka le diphoofolo. Go phulega ga
bolwetši bja kholera dinageng-magae go swana le Ga-Sekhukhune, Ga-Mapuru le
Vhembe kua Musina ke hlobaboroko. Go ya ka dipego, go hlokofeše batho ba 55
ka kholera gomme go lwala ba 8971.

Ditsela magaeng ke mangope, ga di sepelege. Ga go ditirelo tšeo di abiwago
dinageng-magae. Mananeo a mmušo a phuhlame, gomme setšhaba se tsietsing. Re
lla ka baswa bao ba hlokago mešomo gomme ba feletše ba tsene bosenying le
diokobatšing. Re lla ka bomenetša mmušong. Setšhaba se lla ka bodiidi le
hlokego ya mešomo le ge mmušo o tshepišitše mananeo a go swana le Expanded
Public Works Programme go fa batho mešomo. Yeo ke mešomo ya nakwana, gape e
lefela megolo ya tlase. Barutwana ba lla ka go lefela dithuto dikolong tše
phagamego gomme ba sa hwetše thušo.

Re le ba DA re lla ka tsela yeo mmušo o thwalago batho ka yona mešomong le
go abiweng ga dithentara. Batho ba a thwalwa le go fiwa dithentara go ya ka
go tsebega, setswalle le mekgatlo e sego go ya ka bokgoni le thuto. Re le
ba DA re re batho ka moka a ba fiwe menyetla go mešomo le go dithentara go
ya ka bokgoni, thuto le tsebo. Re re dibaka ga di bulelwe batho ka moka
gomme go se be le kgethologanyo.

Re rata go bona Afrika-Borwa yeo e bulegilego, yeo e akaretšago batho
bohle. Re rata go bona Afrika-Borwa yeo e fago batho tshepo le kholofelo go
bokamoso. Re re mmušo ke wa batho bohle, re sa lebelele gore ke mokgatlo
ofe wo o thopilego dikgetho. Re rata go bona Moporesidente a šomela batho
bohle.

Re ka fenya taba ya hlokego ya bokgoni ge re ka šoma mmogo ra bulela batho
bohle dibaka tša mešomo. Re le ba DA re rata go tšweletša Afrika-Borwa ya
setšhaba se tee le ya bokamoso bjo bo swanago. Re rata go bona maatla a
bušetšwa setšhabeng . Re re setšhaba se swanetše go fiwa maatla a go tšea
dipheto tša motheo. Re re setšhaba se swanetše go hlomphiwa ka go phethelwa
ditshepišo tšeo di dirilwego.

Re rata go bona le go tseba gore ke ka lebaka la eng seemo sa bophelo se
theogela fase mola setšhaba se emetše kaonafalo ya seemo sa maphelo? Re
rata go botšiša gore naa Mopresidente o tla kgona go phethagatša tšeo a di
boletšego? Re rata go bona Afrika-Borwa e tšwelapele e tliša mananeo a
tlhabologo e sego go bolela kudu ka tšeo di fetilego. Re ithutile ka
diphošo tša go feta, bjale ke nako ya go bolela ka bokamoso.

Go tloga ka ngwaga wa 1994 go fihla ka ngwaga wa 2009, setšhaba sa Afrika-
Borwa se sa hloka tekatekano. Setšhaba sa dinageng-magae se phela maemong a
go hlobaetša. Ditšhaba tša Greater Groblersdal, Elias Motswaledi kua
Tafelkop, Sterkfontein, Luckau, Mogaung le Ramogwerane di hloka meetse.
Taba ya go tshwenya ke gore ba Kgoro ya Meetse le Dithokgwa le ba mmasepala
ga ba dire selo. Ditšhaba tša Ga-Sekhukhune, Waterberg, Capricorn le Vhembe
di phela gare ga bodiidi. [Tseno-ganong.] Ke a leboga. [Nako e fedile.]
[Legoswi.] (Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr M M SWATHE: Deputy Speaker, as the DA we are thankful for the 2009
state of the nation address. We are grateful for and also acknowledge the
basic changes brought about by democracy in South Africa. We acknowledge
all the good things the government has done over the past 15 years.
Nonetheless, we are still not happy with those things the government could
not do.

There are public funds allocated for each of the services, but they are not
used for the work they are intended for. The government could not eradicate
the bucket system by 2007, as promised. Lack of clean, running water in
rural areas is a challenge. The communities in rural areas are still
sharing water from the rivers with animals. The outbreak of cholera in
rural areas like Ga-Sekhukhune, Ga-Mapuru and Vhembe in Musina is a
challenge. According to reports, 55 people died from cholera and 8 971 are
ill.

Roads in the rural areas are full of potholes and it is really difficult
for one to drive on those roads. There is no service delivery in the rural
areas. Government programmes have collapsed and the nation is in trouble.
We are concerned about the unemployed youth who end up committing crimes
and abusing drugs. We are concerned about crime in the government. The
nation is concerned about poverty and the lack of employment although the
government introduced programmes like the Expanded Public Works Programme
to provide citizens with employment. Those are temporary jobs with meagre
salaries. Students complain about paying tertiary education fees without
getting assistance.

As the DA, we are concerned about the manner in which government employs
citizens and the manner in which they award tenders. People are employed
and awarded tenders on the basis of being popular, or having friendships
and political party affiliations but not according to skill and education.
As the DA, we say that people must be provided with job opportunities and
awarded tenders according to capacity, education and knowledge. We say that
opportunities must be created for everybody and there should not be
segregation.

We want to see an open South Africa which is inclusive. We would like to
see a South Africa which provides people with trust and hope for the
future. We say the government belongs to all, regardless of the party that
won the elections. We would like to see the President working for everyone.

If we can work together, we can create job opportunities and overcome the
scarce skills challenge. As the DA, we would like to produce one South
African nation with the same future. We would like to see power being
brought back to the people. We say people must participate in decision-
making. We say the nation should be shown respect by having access to those
services which were promised to them.

We would like to know why living conditions are deteriorating, while the
people are expecting a better life? We would like to ask whether the
President would be able to deliver what he said he would? We would like to
see South Africa progressing by bringing developmental programmes and not
by dwelling on the past too much. We have learned from the mistakes we made
in the past, so now is the time to debate about the future.

From 1994 to 2009 South Africans have not had access to equal
opportunities. Our people in the rural areas are living in unfavourable
conditions. People in the Greater Groblersdal, Elias Motswaledi in
Tafelkop, Sterkfontein, Luckau, Mogaung and Ramogwerane areas do not have
water. The problem is that the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and
the municipality do nothing about this. People in Sekhukhune, Waterberg,
Capricorn and Vhembe areas are living in abject poverty. [Interjections.]
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mnu A J NYAMBI: Make Somlomo, Mengameli welive, Make Sekela Mengameli,
boNgcongcoshe labahloniphekile, neMalunga ePhalamende, ngime embi kwenu
ngekutitfoba nangenhlonipho ngalelitfuba lengilitfolile lekukhuluma
ngenkhulumo yaMengameli, njengoba siphikelele kuPhalamende yesine
yentsandvo yelinyenti.

Make Sekela Somlomo, emva kwenkhulumo yesive leyetfulwe nguMengameli
nangemuva kwekucocisana nebantfu ngemphelasontfo, kungente ngabona kutsi
ingcikitsi yekucocisana nemphikiswano yaMengameli, bantfu labanyenti
batfokotiswe yintfo yinye. Kumele ngikubeke kucace kutsi ekukhulumisaneni
nasekuphikisaneni kwetfu namuhla, kumayelana nendzaba yekuphakelwa
kwetinsita.

Nakubukwa inchubekela embili netinselele, singatsi kuyini kuphakelwa
kwetinsita? Kuphakelwa kwetinsita kona ngekwako kufaka ekhatsi tintfo
letimbili, lekungukutsi: Tinsita neluphakelo. Tinsita tisidzingo semmango
lesentelwe kuphumelelisa sidzingo lesitsite, singetulu kwaloko lokudzingako
kepha sisidzingo lesingenta imphilo ingachubekeli embili uma leso sidzingo
singakafezeki. Kantsi–ke intfo loyifunako itsintsa kakhulu imiva
nekutiphakamisa. Hulumende ukhona kutsi agcwalise tidzingo lebantfu
nemmango bangeke bakhone kutigcwalisa ngekwabo. Kulapho–ke kungena khona
luphakelo. Ematiko ahulumende anemsebenti wekugcwalisa leto tidzingo bantfu
labangeke bafinyelele kuto nalengeke bakwati kuphila ngaphandle kwato.
Kwehluleka kufeza lesidzingo semmango lesibaluleke kangaka, kusho kutsi,
kwehlulekisa  bantfu betfu; bantfu labasikhetsa. Ngako–ke akufanele
sehluleke. (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A J NYAMBI: Madam Speaker, President of the country, Madam Deputy
President, hon Ministers and members of Parliament, I stand here before you
with honour and humility for the opportunity afforded me to participate in
the debate on the state of the nation address, as we are about to usher in
our fourth democratic Parliament.
Madam Deputy Speaker, after the state of the nation address, and after the
weekend’s discussions with the people, I realised what is at the core of
the discussions and the debate of the President, and that is that a lot of
people are interested in one thing. I must put it clearly that at the
centre of all the discussions, and even today’s debate, service delivery is
the issue.

When we look at progress made and the challenges, what can we say is
service delivery? Service delivery in itself includes two things, which are
“service” and “delivery”. Service is a social requirement meant to fulfill
a particular need, which is more than a felt need but a real need which can
make a normal life come to a standstill if that need is not fulfilled. And
also, a felt need touches your emotions and your pride. Government exists
to fulfill the needs that people and communities cannot fulfill on their
own. Government departments have the duty to fulfill the needs that people
cannot fulfill on their own and which they cannot live without. Failure to
fulfill this important social need means we fail our own people, people who
voted us into power. Therefore, we dare not fail.]

It stands to reason that the President, in his state of the nation address,
highlighted a number of issues when he said, and I quote:

   In reality, a country that does not ensure the involvement of all its
   population at all levels of economic activity is certainly going to
   perform well below its actual potential.
The issue of land and its wealth has been a question that has formed the
cornerstone of the struggle for emancipation of the people of South Africa.
The wars of resistance against colonialism and the struggle for South
African freedom have been anchored around control for land. It is for this
reason that the Freedom Charter acknowledged the importance of a resolution
to the land question in the definition of South African freedom. It is no
surprise that it became one of the hotly contested areas during the process
of the Congress for a Democratic South Africa, Codesa. No wonder it had to
appear in the Constitution the way it does.

The ANC has identified five priority areas for the next five years. One of
these five is rural development, food security and land reform. The
statement of 8 January 2009 clearly indicated that rural development and
agrarian reform were integral to the struggle to create a better life for
all. The rural situation in South Africa is still characterised by
division. There are well-developed areas, but in some deep rural areas
people, especially rural women, continue to live in conditions of poverty.

The declaration of the 52nd national conference of the ANC says:

   Our work is far from complete. We are only at the beginning of a long
   journey to a truly united, democratic and prosperous society, based on
   the principles contained in the Freedom Charter. Yet we are confident
   that the strategy and policies we have adopted will take us further
   towards the goal of a better life for all.

At its 52nd national conference in Polokwane, the ANC deliberated about a
whole range of issues. It was resolved that the ANC should strive to do the
following, among other things: implement large-scale programmes to
establish new smallholders and improve the productivity of existing small-
scale and subsistence farmers; to integrate smallholders into formal value
chains and link them with markets.

Further, it was resolved that there was a need to build dedicated state and
private institutions that were accountable to the users for the effective
and direct support to land reform beneficiaries in general, and smallholder
agriculture and family farms in particular; including through financial
support, research and extension, the provision of tools and equipment, and
the facilitation of market access and co-operation.

The ANC through the 2009 election manifesto emphasised that land, agrarian
reform, food security and rural development occupied a significant place in
the economic transformation of South Africa. This is the same conviction
that emerged through the 52nd national conference resolution. Indeed,
President, the engagement with the people confirm your being correct in
acknowledging that the land redistribution programme as well as
postsettlement support could have been handled faster and better.

Despite significant progress made over the past 15 years, people living in
rural areas continue to face the harshest conditions of poverty, lack of
access to land and basic services. The ANC is committed to a comprehensive
and clear rural development strategy linked to land and agrarian reform, to
improving the conditions of farmworkers and farm dwellers, and to building
the potential for sustainable livelihoods.

The ANC will adopt lot of things at the fourth democratic Parliament. To
mention a few: intensify the land reform programme to ensure that more land
is placed in the hands of the rural poor, and provide them with technical
skills and financial resources to productively use the land to create
sustainable livelihoods and decent work in rural areas; ensure a much
stronger link between the land and agrarian reform programmes and water-
resource allocation, and ensure that the best quality water reaches all
people, especially the poor; work together with the farming community to
improve the living conditions of farm dwellers, including the provision of
subsidised houses and other basic services.

The state of the nation address, as presented by the President, is very
encouraging and inspiring. It is inspiring because the account of the
conclusion of the popular mandate is being done in an honest way that lays
the foundation for the future. So, the fourth democratic Parliament will
hit the ground running, with a well-oiled machine in making sure that a
better life for all is achieved.

All this cannot and will never be one man’s job; this is something that can
be achieved by people, hence to echo the theme of the ANC: “Working
together, we can do more.” The ANC has made a direct and practical response
to the United Nations-generated criteria on the right to development, as
follows: the conditions of living for most people, and equality of access
to resources.

Allow me to echo Prof Sangweni, the Chairperson of the Public Service
Commission, when he said:

   Much more needs to be done, and the quality and speed of service delivery
   has to be accelerated. It is through such acceleration that the current
   government can consolidate its service delivery as it prepares to hand
   over the baton and usher in a new term of office.

In conclusion, allow me to refer to the Chinese credo, devised by James Yen
in 1920, which guided the rural development movement. It says:

   Go to the people
   live among them
   learn from them

Plan with the people -


   ... start with what they know
   build on what they have
   teach by showing
   learn by doing
   not a showcase but a pattern
   not odds and ends but a system ...

   not a piecemeal, but an integrated approach ...


   Not relief but release.

Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, there are too many conversations going on
in the House and I would like to appeal to all members to respect this
House. If you need time to have a conversation, please arrange with your
Whip to do so outside, but not in the House.

Mme L L MABE: Ke a leboga Mme Motlatsa-Mmusakgotla le maloko a Ntlo e kgolo
eno. Moporesitente Kgalema, ke go lebogela puo ya gago e ntle go setšhaba
sa rona. Ngwaga o o fetileng, ka yona kgwedi e, setšhaba sa rona se ne se
etsaetsega, se sa itse gore bokamoso jwa sepolotiki jwa naga e, bo tla nna
jang. Gompieno o totobaditse fa puso ya ANC e gata ka mosito mo tseleng ya
go netefatsa gore ga re boele kwa Egepeta. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[Ms L L MABE: Madam Deputy Speaker and members of this colossal House, I
would like to thank President Kgalema for his remarkable speech, the state
of the nation address. During this month last year, our nation was
confused, not knowing what the future of the politics of this country would
be. Today you made it very clear that the ANC government still continues on
its way to ensure that we do not return to Egypt.]

The focus of my speech will be on the role of development finance
institutions in poverty eradication and job creation. These are the
institutions that must act as drivers of economic development intended to
make the majority of the people participate actively in the economy. Their
focus must also be in creating more jobs and reducing poverty. Therefore
these institutions must have a developmental agenda and not a neoliberal
agenda as their guiding principle.

A neoliberal agenda views government as part of the problems in the economy
and not the solution. According to the neoliberals the private sector must
guide government in the direction it should take.

As the ANC we believe that the state must drive a developmental agenda that
would liberate the majority of South Africans from economic hardships.
Hence the state must use developmental finance institutions to drive
economic development, to direct the private sector in the direction of
liberating the majority who are poor, in this case to better livelihoods.

Although a lot has been achieved by this government, the income gap has
widened post-1994 and more black people are getting poorer – a reality that
the ANC government cannot ignore! It’s therefore vital for these
institutions of development to lead investment in underdeveloped areas and
guide private sector investment in those areas. The private sector is
always risk averse and wants to invest where they have made profits in the
past. That is why we need state intervention in underdeveloped areas, where
the private sector does not want to venture.

Former President Thabo Mbeki said in June 2008:

   The immediate reality is that all of us know that the poor are knocking
   at the gate. If this gate does not open, because we who have the key are
   otherwise involved, the masses will break down the gate.

Ke ka moo khonferense ya ANC kwa Polokwane e e ntseng pulamadibogo mo
matshelong a batlhoki. [That is how the ANC’s Polokwane conference became a
blessing in the lives of the poor.]

It was a turning point in our history and democracy, because “the masses”
who are poor “opened the gate” for themselves.

Maaforika Borwa ga a tshwanela go kgobega marapo fa go tla mo go direleng
malapa a bona. Se ke moano wa ANC o o reng: “ANC ya rona, ponelopele ya
rona, bokamoso jwa rona!” [South Africans should not be despondent when it
comes to providing for their families. This is the ANC’s slogan, which goes
“our ANC, our vision, our future”.]

My ANC, my vision, my future! My colleague Prof Turok, in his book From the
Freedom Charter to Polokwane: the Evolution of ANC Economic Policy says
this about the Polokwane conference:

   For the first time in Africa, change was introduced electorally - by the
   voting out of the top echelon of the ruling party - not by a coup, nor by
   assassination and neither by the substitution of that party by another
   party.

But by the masses. Together with these masses, the private sector and the
developmental state, we can do more.

During the past 15 years government created many development finance
institutions and agencies at national, provincial and local level in
addition to the ones we inherited in 1994. These institutions do not have a
common governance model. They have overlapping mandates and are not well co-
ordinated towards a common developmental agenda.

Despite this situation the development finance institutions, DFIs, have
assisted the formerly disadvantaged people of this country to have access
to financial support and with the establishment of small and medium
enterprises. But as the ANC, we believe that our lessons of the past
fifteen years should guide us in the next five years and beyond to improve
the lives of the majority of the poor.

Lumkile Mondi in his input at the Developmental State Seminar in 2007 said:

   The DFIs have a crucial role in increasing investment rates, through
   lending where private sector institutions will not. We urge government to
   improve co-ordination of its agencies and DFIs towards a successful
   developmental state in this century.

At the October 2008 alliance summit the ANC election manifesto stated that
over the next five years the DFIs must play a critical role in state-led
industrial development and economic transformation, and we are not doubtful
about this. A review of these institutions has already been done and they
will have to be centrally co-ordinated to have a common mandate and
approach.

They must lead investment in public infrastructure in underdeveloped areas
and assist with the creation of jobs. The DFIs must play a major role in
the endorsement of the Freedom Charter principle that “the people shall
share the wealth of this country”, not that the few shall share the wealth.
They must open the gates for the poor to participate in the economy.
Together we can do more.

Re ka dira mmogo go le gontsintsi. [Working together, we can do a lot
more.]

Yes, President, I fully agree with you:

   Of critical importance is the question: What in fact should economic
   growth be about? Wealth is created in order to improve people’s quality
   of life.

But I further endorse, Comrade President, your statement that-

   ... the question whether growth is equitably shared should form a central
   pillar of all our economic considerations.

Our vision as the ANC over the next five years is not a populist agenda
like some selected individuals always say, but a manifesto with a vision to
address the issues of the masses who are knocking at the gate.

As the ANC, we are on the correct path, as stated in our strategy and
tactics, that we must ensure that the benefits of growth are shared by all,
that there will be a focus on creating decent jobs and ensuring an
improvement in the quality of life of workers. We know that things will not
be easy during this global economic crisis, which will automatically impact
on our economy.

Fela ke ANC e le nosi, e e nang le leano la go dira gore moruo wa rona o se
repetlane. [But it is only the ANC that has a plan to ensure that our
economy does not slide into recession.]

We expect that transformation of development finance institutions and
agencies will be speeded up, because our people are eager to participate in
creating wealth in their economy. The alliance summit has agreed that these
DFIs should focus on industrial development, agricultural development,
housing development, SME finance, microfinance and targeted groups.

Therefore I want to conclude, Comrade President, by saying that development
finance institutions should be central to the development of our economy to
ensure that the majority who are poor will benefit. The wealth of this
country must be shared by all who live in it. I thank you. Ke a leboga.
[Thank you.]
Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, hon President, for five years we, as 400
Members of Parliament, have debated with each other like this. My question
is: Do we understand each other better after five years? Are the problems
of the country fewer or more after five years?

In education, it is estimated that every year 1,1 million children start
Grade 1. Last year only half of them wrote matric. What happened to the
other half of these children?

When it comes to crime, only about 10% of all crimes committed in a year
lead to a conviction. This means that 90% of all criminals walk free among
us. Regarding the justice system, on average only six cases are completed
monthly in every court in South Africa. Regional courts sit, on average,
only three and a half hours daily. Are problems of the country after five
years fewer or more? There are more problems. And I have not even mentioned
service delivery, corruption, water pollution, Zimbabwe, cholera, etc.

Do we understand each other better after five years? I am not sure, and I
don’t think so. The Mbeki years had high points but many low points. Some
of the low points included the continued political attacks here on specific
whites, attacks which blame the whites for all government’s mistakes,
attacks which typified whites as disloyal, attacks which described whites
as unpatriotic because they dared to differ from government.

What is important? What do whites hear when the ANC, in their newsletter
and the state of the nation address, talks of accelerated implementation of
affirmative action and black economic empowerment? They hear that for a
long time still to come they will be discriminated against on the basis of
their race - that is what they hear. They hear that their skills and
contribution towards the development of this country are not needed.

I asked last year why South Africa was the economic giant of Africa. Is it
because we have so many minerals? No. Angola and the Democratic Republic of
Congo have more minerals than South Africa. Are we the economic giant of
Africa because we can produce oil from Sasol or from coal? No. Sasol’s
little oil is a mere drop in the ocean in comparison with Nigeria’s huge
amounts of oil. Are we the economic giant because we have such good
agricultural circumstances in South Africa? No. All climate studies show
that South Africa is a semidry desert country with few agricultural
opportunities. Countries such as Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Malawi, with
ample fertile land and consistent rainfall, have much better agricultural
potential than South Africa. When it comes to Nigeria with its oil and
Egypt with its tourism – are their economies not stronger than South
Africa’s? No.

South Africa is economically twice as strong as Nigeria and nearly three
times as strong as Egypt. South Africa’s economy is 80 times stronger than
the average African country. In addition to that, we have the best roads,
power and telephone networks in Africa. Nearly half of all tarred roads in
Africa are found in South Africa.

If South Africa does not have the wealthiest minerals, the most oil or the
best agricultural circumstances in Africa, why are we the economic giant in
Africa? This is because over many years, blacks and whites have each made
their own unique contribution to South Africa. In so doing, they developed
South Africa. I am proud of this achievement and of the Afrikaners’
contribution to this. Whites did not do it all on their own, but neither
did blacks.

Have you recently been to Dubai? The leaders of Dubai realise that oil will
not forevermore bring wealth to the country. That is why they decided to
make Dubai one of the best tourist destinations and investment markets in
the world. They have built an indoor skiing slope in the Dubai desert, with
fresh snow supplied daily. They have created a palm-tree-shaped artificial
island to broaden the number of beachside properties for development. They
have created water worlds and the world’s tallest building. Arabian leaders
do not have the skills for all these developments, but they do have the
money. They use Arabian money, European architects, Malaysian engineers,
Indian workers and Chinese building contractors to develop Dubai.

In South Africa, the government is so caught up in political ideologies of
affirmative action, black economic empowerment and all the restrictive
labour legislation that it is impossible to copy Dubai. As a result of
this, we are busy losing our position as the economic giant of Africa.

Let me give you one example. South African farmers have always produced so
much food that we were a food-exporting country. Last year, due to the
government’s land and agricultural policy, South Africa became a food-
importing country for the first time, with nearly 20 000 commercial farmers
that stopped farming because of these policies. Unlike Dubai, the
government is forcing skilled people out of the country through its
political statements. The Congo and other African countries are now
recruiting these farmers.

Let me give you another example. A couple of years ago I told President
Mbeki in this debate of a young Afrikaner who had completed his doctorate
in clinical psychology and his community year in the Defence Force. When
Minister Lekota asked that whites join the Defence Force, he applied to be
appointed on a permanent basis in his position. His application was refused
as it would have skewed the Defence Force’s affirmative action quotas. His
post is, as far as I can establish, after several years still not filled.
He had no choice but to look for work somewhere else.

In Britain, where he is currently working, they scooped him up. He is
planning to return to South Africa and therefore wishes to participate in
this year’s election. There is a voting poll in London at the embassy. But
what message did the government send him? This government first sent him a
message that they could do without his skills. Now the government is
sending him a further message by fighting the court application – a message
that they will do everything within their power to also take his right to
vote away from him.

When prisoners fought for their right to vote, this government did not
oppose it. Now that South Africans living overseas want to vote, the
government is opposing it. What message does this send to all South
Africans overseas? Against this injustice, the FF Plus will now fight in
the Constitutional Court. I am happy to announce that the FF Plus this
morning, in the Pretoria High Court, won their case about the right of
overseas South African citizens to vote abroad.

Meneer, soos hierdie hofsaak bewys, is dit in Suid-Afrika se belang dat die
ANC se 70% magspolitiek, magsmonopolie en arrogansie en die feit dat hulle
dink hulle kan hul wil op almal afdwing, verminder moet word. Met hierdie
verkiesing is dit moontlik. Verantwoordelike samewerking tussen
opposisiepartye na die verkiesing kan voorkom dat die ANC in al nege
provinsies regeer.

Die DA sit plakkate op met die slagspreuk “Stem om te wen”. Die DA voorspel
dan dat hulle in hierdie verkiesing die ANC in sekere provinsies alleen kan
wen en dat hulle die verkiesing van 2014 op hul eie kan wen. Dit is onsin
en hulle weet dit. Geen opposisieparty gaan alleen kan wen nie.
Sulke voorspellings ontnugter kiesers en maak hulle uiteindelik apaties as
dit na die verkiesing as verkeerd bewys word. Wat wel waar is, is dat die
samewerkingsmodel wat ons voorstel, waar elke party deelneem onder sy eie
naam en maksimum steun kry, kan werk. Na die verkiesing werk sulke partye
dan verantwoordelik saam sonder dat een party deur die ander ingesluk word.
Dit kan wel werk. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Sir, as this court case proves, it is in the interest of South Africa that
the ANC’s 70% power politics, power monopoly and arrogance and the fact
that they think that they can bend everyone to their will, must be reduced.
With this election, it is possible. Responsible co-operation between
opposition parties after the election can prevent the ANC governing in all
nine provinces.

The DA is putting up posters with the slogan “Vote to win”. The DA is
predicting that they can single-handedly defeat the ANC in certain
provinces and that they can win the 2014 election on their own. That is
nonsense and they know that. No opposition party can win on their own.

Such predictions cause voters to become disillusioned and ultimately cause
that they become apathetic if it is proven wrong after the election. What
is true is that the model of co-operation that we are suggesting, in which
each party participates under its own name and obtains maximum support, can
work. After the election such parties can co-operate responsibly without
the one party absorbing the other. That can work.]

I clearly remember the picture on television in 2004 when President Mbeki
and Mr Zuma triumphantly announced the ANC’s 70% election victory. Their
hands were interlaced and raised above their heads. Mr Lekota, as number
three in the ANC, appeared on TV with them. No political commentator could
have foreseen how the situation between these three top ANC leaders would
change so drastically by 2009 - a mere five years later. If it could change
so much in five years, how much can South Africa change politically in
another five years? So, this is not a farewell speech. After the election,
the FF Plus will be back with more members continuing this debate. Thank
you.

Mr M V NGEMA: Chairperson, the hon President, the Deputy President, hon
Members of Parliament, fellow beloved South Africans, on behalf of the
President and members of Nadeco, I take this opportunity to address you
with the pride of who we are, the people of South Africa, both as
individuals and as a nation. I do so full of hope in who God in his grace,
mercy and wisdom intended us to be as he mapped out our destiny in the
future of this great country and among the nations of the world.

Nadeco thanks you, Mr President, for the courage you demonstrated and the
confidence you showed when you accepted this unique opportunity to lead
this great nation as we go through these turbulent times in our history,
both as a nation and global community.

In your speech, Mr President, you focused your mind and attention on so
many challenges facing us. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, just a moment. Hon members,
please can we just tone it down. The President is responding tomorrow; I am
sure he wants to hear what we are saying. Please, you are not allowed to
speak because the noise is too loud now. Can you please continue, hon
member.

Mr M V NGEMA: Mr President, you were able to offer certain solutions to
some of the problems, but unfortunately you are limited by the vision of
your party, beyond which you dare not step outside without inviting Julius
Malema, Nzimande or Vavi to blow their ever-ready whistles indicating your
time of recall or redeployment. [Laughter.] You could not come up with the
kind of change South Africa is waiting for at this particular time in our
history operating in this set of circumstances.

Nadeco’s position is that the change we need in this country is one that
focuses more on seeking quality for our homes, on more quality for our
education system - quality that produces excellence in all aspects of our
lives.

For 15 years this nation has been waiting for a better life for all. Our
children and future generations are waiting for a new life that will define
who we are, what we can do naturally or what we cannot do simply by virtue
of who we are. Our future is calling for a life in which our schools lack
for nothing, a life of fullness in our health system and security in our
homes and communities. Surely, life like this has no poverty, no crime and
is a life in which everyone contributes meaningfully and benefits from the
economy.

In the famous words of the man who is the visible fulfilment of the dream
Martin Luther King had, the current USA President: “Yes, we can” be a great
nation.

We have had 15 years of majority rule in our country. Nadeco wishes to
admonish the ANC in that it must stop speaking about the problems that our
country faces as though they’ve just arrived, as though this is 1994. They
must own up to the fact that the state they’re talking about – “The state
should do this; the state should do that” – is the state that the ANC is
running and has been running for 15 years.

Nadeco says we have made the rich richer, and we have made the poor of our
land more impoverished. Members should understand that I am saying “we”,
because through our votes we are responsible for the kind of life we are
living. We have a compromised education system and a severely challenged
health system. This has led you, Mr President, focusing the new government
in the direction of increased social spending, which in the long run is
unsustainable.

Nadeco appreciates that there is a task team to work out a stimulus package
to protect our economy. We must guard against a stimulus package that will
only assist the rich and leave the masses of our people in perpetual
impoverishment.

Nadeco wants to see an economy whose growth translates into viable jobs for
the majority of our people; an education system that produces highly
skilled and marketable individuals; a health system that actively
challenges and firmly deals with HIV and Aids and other diseases like
cholera in order to contribute to a sustainable livelihood for all South
Africans, without distinction between urban and rural communities.

The chasm between the rich and poor is growing at an unprecedented pace as
the global economic meltdown bites the indigent at the bottom. The
government should not focus on pleasing the select few while the poor
majority grapples with bread-and-butter issues - literally so, as economic
disparities are the order of the day. The rich cannot and should not
benefit at the expense of the poor people of our country. More emphasis
needs to be put on our ailing education, health and security systems.

Our failure to deal decisively with the issue of Zimbabwe has landed us in
a health quagmire in that the cholera scourge in that country has spilled
over into our country. This country went through a dark period when some of
its people were treated like second-class citizens and not afforded equal
rights.

As the people of Zimbabwe have continued to suffer, why has our government
stood by and watched? It does not take a rocket scientist to see that quiet
diplomacy has failed dismally. Drastic steps and action are needed to turn
the situation around. I thank you. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, Mr
President, Deputy President and hon members, in the novel Hard Times,
Charles Dickens wrote of a teacher who placed great emphasis on facts, who
said:

  Now what I want is facts. Teach these boys and girls nothing but facts.
  Facts alone are wanted in life. Stick to facts, sir.

As we debate the state of the nation address today, it is imperative to
note some facts about the ANC government’s record of service delivery,
which is a guarantee for human dignity. This is a fact.

The people of South Africa have since witnessed that the ANC government has
sought to create a better life for all the people through the delivery of
basic and advanced services for all. One of the success stories of factual
evidence of service delivery is in the area of comprehensive social
security protection, which reflects the ANC government’s move to further
advance our struggle for service delivery as marked in the words of former
President Mandela in his first state of the nation address, when he said
the following:

   My government’s commitment to create a people-centred society of liberty
   binds us to the pursuit of the goals of freedom from want, freedom from
   hunger, freedom from deprivation, freedom from ignorance, freedom from
   suppression and freedom from fear.

   These freedoms are fundamental to the guarantee of human dignity. They
   will therefore constitute part of the centrepiece of what this government
   will seek to achieve ...

Since then, we have pursued the goal of freedom from poverty with
accelerated speed. We have developed policies to promote human dignity. It
is a fact that a decade and half ago the Parliament of South Africa adopted
the Reconstruction and Development Programme as the pre-eminent vision of
the new and democratic South Africa.

At the time many considered our bold vision unattainable. They argued that
our plans were unworkable, but 15 years later we have made substantial
progress towards the attainment of these goals. It is a fact.

Fifteen years after those words of Nelson Mandela, we have created a social
safety net for those in society who are in great need. Whereas in 1996 only
3 million people had access to social grants, today 12,5 million people
receive social grants. In 1996 only 34 000 children had access to social
grants, but today nearly 8 million children younger than 14 years receive
social grants. It is a fact.

The 15-year Review conducted last year concluded that the lives of many
poor people have been improved through well-targeted programmes broadening
access to services and social grants. This is a fact.

There is overwhelming evidence that social grants reduce the poverty gap
and promote desired social behaviour, like school attendance, improvement
in nutrition and access to health care.

Hi ri ANC na tiko ra Afrika Dzonga hinkwaro hi lemuka leswaku ku hakeriwa
ka timali ta tigrant a hi le makumu ya makungu ya hina ya ku lwisa vusweti.
Ko va ntsena leswaku loko hi ri karhi hi tiyisa ikhonomi ku kota ku nyika
vanhu mintirho hi na vutihlamuleri eka vutomi bya vanhu leswaku va kota ku
hanya eka nkarhinyana loko ha ha yisa emahlweni leswaku mani na mani a
titirhela, a tihlayisa na ku tikumela hinkwaswo.

Ku hakeriwa ka tigrant i ku pfuna ka nkarhinyana handle ka grant ya mudende
leyi nga ya nkarhi wo leha hikuva loko yi kumiwa hiloko vanhu va kurile.
Nkoka wa tigrant wu kurile ku tlula mpimo tanihilaha hi vonaka leswaku miti
yo tala yi hanya hi yona mali ya tigrant hikwalaho ka vusiwana. Hikwalaho
ke, hi amukelaka xiviko xa wena Nkul Presidente Motlanthe leswaku tigrant
ta vana ti ta tlakusiwa ti katsa na vana va malembe ya 18. Naleswaku
vavanuna va ta sungula ku kuma mali ya grant ya mudende va ri na malembe ya
60. Ha khensa Presidente.

Leswi swi ta engetela nhlayo ya vanhu lava fikelelaka mudende yi tlakuka
xikan’we na ku hunguta nhlayo ya vanhu lava hlaseriwaka hi vusiwana ku ri
hava na xivhiko. Hi swi tiva kahle leswaku na loko hi vulavula hi ku
vuyeriwa eka pfhumba ra swipfuno swo fana na tigrant va kona vakanganyisi.
Valava va tirhisa tindlela to ka ti nga basanga ku fikelela swipfuno leswi.
Van’wana va nghenisa na vukungundzwana endzeni. Hi karhi ku kokisana na
vona hi ndlela ya tihanyi hikuva mfumo wa hina wa ANC a wu fambelani na
vukungundzwana. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[As the ANC and the whole of South Africa, we realise that the payment of
social grants is not the end of our fight against poverty. But this is to
ensure that, while we are still busy strengthening our economy, we do not
neglect our responsibility of ensuring a sustainable livelihood for the
poor as we strive to provide them with jobs so that they can work and take
care of themselves.

Social grants should be seen as a short-term remedy, with the exception of
the old age grant which is, conversely, a long-term grant for senior
citizens. These social grants are very important since we see that, owing
to poverty, many households are dependent on them. We, therefore, welcome
the report by hon President Motlanthe that the child support grant should
be extended to cover children up to 18 years of age. We also welcome the
report that men will qualify for their old age grant at the age of 60.
Thank you, Mr President.

This will increase the number of people eligible for the old age grant and,
on the contrary, decrease the number of people who are impoverished and
defenceless. We are well aware that, even though these grants are of great
benefit to the people, there are cheaters. These are the people who use
underhand tactics to access these benefits. Some of them use corrupt
methods to gain access. We are dealing with these people in the harshest
manner because the ANC government does not associate itself with
corruption.]

Since the dawn of our freedom, we have implemented programmes to address
asset poverty. The immediate issue to be mentioned in this regard is the
provision of housing. Through the housing programme, the ANC government has
restored the dignity of homeless people and of those who had homes but no
houses, with the provision of more than 2,6 million subsidised houses.
Going forward we have allocated R12 billion, R15 billion and R17 billion
for housing over the next three years respectively.

In addition, during this financial year to 2010, we have budgeted R120
million for the pilot Zanemvula project and R400 million for the N2 Gateway
project.

Yin’wana ndlela yo lwisa vusweti byo pfumala switirhisiwa hi yi vonile loko
mfumo wu vuyisela vun’wini bya misava eka vini va yona leyi a yi phangiwile
hikwalaho ka maendlelo ya mfumo wa xihlawuhlawu. Namuntlha hi vona vantima
va ka hina va tiba swifuva hikuva mfumo wa ANC wu endlile leswaku leswi swi
nga swa vona a swi yiviwile hi mfumo wa apartheid [xihlawuhlawu] swi
tlheriseriwa eka vona. Lexi xi tsakisaka eka matirhele ya ANC hi leswaku
timhaka leti ta ku tlherisela misava eka vini va yona ti endliwa hi ndlela
yaku rhula. Hi tirhisa nawu. A hi vutlelani.

Ha amukela leswaku hambiloko va nga yi kumanga hi tindlela to basa valungu
lava va nga nyikiwa misava hi mfumo wa xihlawuhlawu va yi antswisile misava
leyi. Va fanerile ku rilisiwa hi mali loko va fanela va lahlekeriwa hi
vu’wini bya yona. Hikwalaho hi lemuka leswaku ANC yi tekela enhlokweni
vanhu va Afrika Dzonga ku ringana. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs
follows.)

[We have witnessed one way of fighting infrastructure shortage when the
government restored landownership which was taken by the apartheid
government to its rightful owners. Today, black people are proud because
the ANC has returned what the apartheid government had stolen from them.
What we like about this land restitution process is that the ANC is doing
it in a peaceful manner. We follow the law. We do not just grab the land.

We accept that although the white people who were land beneficiaries of the
apartheid government did not receive the land in a proper manner they
developed it. They deserve to be compensated financially for the loss of
ownership. As a result, we realise that the ANC recognises that all South
Africans are equal.]

We have expanded access to basic services as part of comprehensive social
protection. We have made an effort as the ANC government to provide basic
services, like water and electricity, to all through the adoption of a
rights-based approach to service delivery. We have also developed
interventions for the indigent through policies to mitigate the effect of
the cost of accessing basic services.

Hi ri karhi hi swi tiva leswaku ku yisa vukorhokeri bya vanhu eka vona swi
pfa swi koxa mintsengo yo vonaka ya timali. Hi simekile mapfhumba yo
pfuneta vaaki-tiko lava hlaseriweke swinene hi vusweti leswaku va swi kota
ku fikela mphakelo wo fana na mati na gezi. I mhaka yaleyo.
Lexi hi nga xi vulaka hi nga kanakani hileswaku ku humelela ka hina tanihi
mfumo wa ANC ku va kona hi ku tirhisana na vaaki. Hi ri i tsima. Un’wana na
u’nwana u na ya yena ndzima naswona un’wana na un’wana u na vutihlamuleri
byo kwetsimisa xivandla xa yena.

Na ku suka kwala hi ya emahlweni leswi ndzima ya ha riki kona yo korhokela
tiko hi vula tano hi ri ANC leswaku hi ku tirhisana a xi kona xi nga ta hi
hlula. Hi rhamba van ’wamabindzu leswaku hi tirha kun’we. Ku nga si hundza
n’hweti ya Khotavuxika hi ta susumeta tindzawulo ta mfumo leti kongomaneke
na mgingiriko ya ku fambisa vukorhokeri bya vanhu leswaku va rhamba xivijo
xa vukorhokeri bya tiko leswaku hi ta huma eka xona hi ri nyandza yin’we
eka vukorhokeri bya tiko.

Leswi swi ta hunguta ku tirha hi ku kokelana na ku xavisana. Ku fana na
maveriveri lawa hi pfaka hi hlangana na wona ya leswaku swiyenge swin’wana
swa vukorhokeri laha tikweni swi xavisela vanhu vukorhokeri hi ndlela leyi
nga riki na vutihlamuleri. Swi ri karhi swi thyakisa mavito ya vamasipala,
ya tikhanselara na mfumo hinkwawo. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs
follows.)

[We are aware of the fact that providing people with basic services costs
considerable amounts of money. However, we are implementing projects which
will help poverty-stricken households to gain access to water and
electricity. That’s a fact.

We can say without a doubt that our success is as a result of our co-
operation with the citizens. It’s a Letsema. Everyone has a role to play
and a responsibility to brighten their corner.

Moving forward, the road to service delivery is still long and we say, as
the ANC, that with co-operation nothing is impossible. We invite
businesspeople to work in partnership with us. Before the end of June, we
will push government departments which are responsible for social service
delivery to call a national service delivery indaba which will inform the
way forward for national service delivery.

This will reduce conflicts and the prospects of selling each other out. It
will do away, for example, with the rumour which we sometimes come across,
that some parts of the Public Service sector are selling services in an
irresponsible manner. They are tarnishing the image of municipalities,
councillors and the whole government.]

Of course, we need a developmental Public Service to provide a seamless
process of providing services to the people in a propoor and prodevelopment
manner. We have gone a long way to perfect our Public Service in terms of
professionalism, capacity, work culture and accountability. More still
remains to be done and this will be our priority for the next five years.

We need to have a Public Service that has the following features in order
for us to accelerate service delivery: breaks new ground; inspires success;
is able to raise the standard; is strategic for continued service delivery;
is able to make a difference; takes collective responsibility and teamwork
on board, and international activism.

It is a fact that the ANC’s comprehensive social protection policy has
alleviated the plight of millions living in poverty. The ANC government
will continue to expand the social security net in fulfilling our
commitment to creating a better life for all.

Working together, we can do more. Each and every one in the Public Service
and across civil society must brighten their corners through social
partnerships to create a better life for all and to make South Africa a
brighter place. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N C MFEKETO: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, hon members,
distinguished guests, we are all aware by now that increased quantities of
greenhouse gases in our atmosphere, generated by human activities like the
burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, industrialisation, inefficient road
transportation and intensive methods of agricultural production, are
causing global temperatures to rise and to continue rising significantly.

There is now general agreement that the world is rapidly moving to a point
at which rising temperatures will result in dramatic and irreversible
climate-related impacts with severe effects on human society and on our
natural environment. The highest temperatures in recorded history have been
measured in the past decade, as have the most intense storms, the most
destructive floods and the longest-lasting droughts.

These unusual and unpredictable weather events are the beginning of changes
in climatic patterns which will affect human settlements, livelihoods and
infrastructure, particularly in low-lying coastal areas. Poor communities,
unfortunately, will bear the brunt of the eventual cost of climate change
directly inverse to their contribution to this phenomenon of global
warming.

Scientific research predicts that the African continent is likely to be one
of the most seriously affected parts of the world while, in South Africa,
the impacts of climate change are predicted to include reduced rainfall and
increased droughts on the western side of the country. This will worsen the
already scarce water supply and have a potentially devastating effect on
agricultural production, on the survival of the Cape floral kingdom and on
priceless biodiversity.

Climate change can, and most likely will, have an impact on our tourism
industry and many new industries developing around the use of natural
products, affecting as a result the employment and livelihood opportunities
for the poor.

For many years the ANC has held the view that all citizens of South Africa,
present and future, have a right to a safe and healthy environment, a
departure from the apartheid policies where the vast majority of our people
were located in areas with the most polluting industries and where they
were unable to defend themselves against these harmful activities.

The ANC’s vision has sought to embrace a transformative environment based
on the principles of sustainable development and the interconnection of
environmental, social and economic justice.

Acting together with other progressive forces, the ANC ensured that
environmental rights and the protection of the environment were firmly
entrenched in our Constitution. This provides a powerful safeguard in
shaping future economic and social development by stating that:

   Everyone has the right –


     (a)    to an environment that is not harmful to their health or
         wellbeing ...

The National Environmental Management Act gives effect to exactly those
environmental rights in the Constitution. It emphasises the need to ensure
that environmental management places our people and their needs at the
forefront.

The ANC-led government recognises climate change as a threat that imposes
an enormous burden upon South Africa and Africa as a whole and has been
playing a leading role in shaping global debates on environmental justice
through, amongst other things, our participation in the Rio Earth Summit,
followed by South Africa’s hosting of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development in 2002.

At these historic forums this government has consistently championed a
progressive response to the environmental dimensions of development
challenges facing Africa and the countries of the south.

While the world has been debating unchecked carbon emissions and the threat
posed by global warming, South Africa commanded widespread respect at one
of the most complicated multilateral treaty negotiations of the 21st
century, particularly as a bridge-builder between the north and the south
in talks aimed at bringing developing nations, such as India, China and
Brazil, on board and inducing them to reduce their carbon footprint.

It is critically important that this government - and future ANC-led
governments - continues to provide leadership on climate change and
environmental issues to ensure that matters concerning the environment
continue to receive the prominence they deserve.

In this regard, Cabinet has, for example, approved an ambitious national
climate change framework that will see the country stabilise its carbon
emissions by 2020 and then gradually reduce them.

The framework is obviously motivated by climate-change concerns, but, very
importantly, also by our energy access, energy security, and sustainable
development and poverty eradication imperatives. Specific legislation has
already been put in place in order to monitor and control air pollution.
The penalties for this are already in existence.

The ANC government will support the meeting of the targets for the
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions as part of its responsibility to
protect the environment and promote sustainable development by, amongst
other things, promoting energy efficiency, diversifying energy sources away
from coal, allocating significant additional resources for research,
exploring and developing carbon capture and storage methods. We will also
be promoting affordable public transport, expanding rail logistics and
reversing the apartheid spatial legacy.

This government realises that South Africa has huge untapped potential for
renewable energy and that a shift towards exploiting those sources will
reduce our emissions and hold substantial sustainable development benefits.
We will therefore escalate our national efforts towards the realisation of
a greater contribution to renewable energy sources, including solar and
wind power and the hydroelectric potential of the SADC region as part of an
ambitious renewable energy target.

This government is bringing together three areas into a coherent vision,
namely technology, investment and policy. State-led regulation will play a
key role in this, complemented by the right economic incentive and
investment structure and by increasing long-term research.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms N C MFEKETO: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Mr President, perhaps our
people would like to know more about how we monitor the implementation of
the good legislation we have. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, our hon President of the Republic of South
Africa, our Deputy President, the Speaker of the National Assembly, our hon
Ministers and Deputy Ministers and our friends and colleagues, I kindly
extend greetings and good wishes from the leader of the MF, Mr A Rajbansi,
on this most auspicious occasion and period in South African history.

Hon President, the MF congratulates you on the wonderful manner in which
you have performed your duties in high office in such a short time. Our
country has proven that it has a stable foundation and we have survived the
economic meltdown.

The MF will have an election media launch on various points of turnaround
strategy on key issues such as the economy, crime, job creation, good
governance, social welfare, poverty, growing democracy, the protection of
existing jobs, and on seriously refocusing on education.

Key to this are the promotion of small, medium and micro enterprises and
the informal sector and making South Africa the heartland of Africa, and
the revival of industries such as the leather and garment industries, which
took a heavy knock from the failure to protect our workers against the
influx of foreign goods. We must not make the mistake the United States and
Europe made, to let vacancies and unemployment rise, because we do not have
South Africans skilled for the job market.

The MF is glad that you, Mr President, emphasised sport very strongly. In
KwaZulu-Natal we are proud of the turnaround strategy in sport by MEC A
Rajbansi, who has been named the best sport Minister in the whole country
by the national Minister, Rev Dr M Stofile. The answer lies in the
allocation of funds in that this government must not treat sport like a
stepchild, as it does now.

A bold decision has to be taken about our nursery talent, talent
identification and talent retention. KwaZulu-Natal is now flourishing in
every sports code even in the rural heartland. We must allocate more money
to sport.

Mr President, you might not be aware that the father of football in our
country was the late Nkosi Albert Luthuli, who was posthumously given the
Premier Sports Award. The MF leader worked with Nkosi Albert Luthuli from
the age of 12 and even attended football matches in Currie’s Fountain with
him.

It is indeed an honour and a privilege to be here responding to the last
state of the nation address. It has been both a fruitful and eventful
journey. I strongly agree with the hon President that our democracy has
progressed, maybe not at the rate we would have appreciated in all centres,
but it has.

Hon President, the state of the nation address pointed out a number of
factors that we may be proud of and also to many that hinder our systems. I
am pleased that the issue of corruption has been highlighted. We feel that
in a democracy that inculcates transparency, the media has a pivotal role
to play in exposing corruption and deterring its frequency. However, our
greatest concerns are poverty and the shaky ground of the global economy.
Certainly, this has had its repercussions on our many poverty-stricken
families.

We strongly agree that we need to extend our market beyond mining and
agriculture. The endeavours of the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa need to be strengthened and opportunities need
to be developed at a greater level for small and medium-sized enterprises,
with a special look at empowering more women and those with physical
disabilities.

In view of unemployment, the hon President has pointed out our good
statistics on employment, but it is common knowledge that many of these
jobs lack the security of long-term contracts and benefits. We need to look
at legislation on contracts not being less than two years at a time, that
has to utilise benefits, and that strengthens our economy and the South
African lifestyle.

I am extremely pleased that we are not turning a blind eye to the fact that
such inequality still exists and that many still live in poverty. Although
we acknowledge that we have many policies, programmes and legislation,
especially the national Constitution, that insists that the means are
utilised to correct past inequalities, it is certain that the road to
attaining this is difficult. However, a constant system of oversight and
checks and balances needs to be intensified to achieve better results.

The levels of poverty have, however, been alleviated by the large number of
persons benefiting from social grants. The MF, however, continues to plead
that the pension be made at least R1 500 to enable our elderly people to
survive the frightening inflation and cost of living.

Basic services, on the other hand, have been delivered and many more
Africans now have access to electricity, potable water and adequate
sanitation. However, Eskom’s continued hike in electricity charges is a
great setback for South Africans. We are financially burdened. We certainly
hope that the government will devise a form of relief in this regard.

The hon President has praised our health care system and indeed our hon
Minister of Health is feverishly trying to deliver the best health care to
our people. But the MF remains concerned about the reduction in the number
of beds at many of our hospitals and the long wait in casualty wards at our
state hospitals. We are also concerned about the cholera situation.

We have gained some control over awareness of HIV and Aids. We have the
largest antiretroviral programme in the world, but look at the amount of
children orphaned by this disease. I don’t think that we are ready to pat
ourselves on the back yet. We desperately have to persevere at fighting HIV
and Aids.

The MF expresses concern over education and the large dropout rate of
students at secondary and tertiary levels. We need to investigate the
reasons for this dropout rate. The MF insists that the department look at
extending the nutritional programme to secondary schools and ensure that no-
fee schools are accessible throughout the country.

We need to invest in educators to ensure that the quality of  education
does not suffer, as there is a great need to have all educators trained in
dealing with children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, as
studies show that one in three children may be affected by it.

We are proud that housing has progressed in delivery, but we express much
concern over the alarmingly slow rate of addressing issues of land
redistribution. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rre T G ANTHONY: Motlotlegi Modulasetulo, Moporesitente Kgalema Motlanthe,
Motlatsamoporesitente Baleka Mbete, Ditona, Batlatsaditona, Maloko a
Palamente a a tlotlegang, bomme le borre, ke motlotlo thata go bona sebaka
sa go tsaya karolo mo ngangisanong eno go tswa go Puo ya Pulo ya Palamente
e e diragetseng ka Labotlhano. Puo ya me e ikaegile thata ka dintlhakgolo
tse di lebisitseng mo mametlelelong ya mokgatlho wa ANC, ka 2007, go tswa
kwa khonferenseng ya kwa Polokwane.

Fa ke reetsa sentle dibui tsotlhe go tswa mo makokong a kganetso, go lebega
mafoko a a tswang mo Puong ya Pulo ya Palamente e le mafoko a mantle ka
gonne puo ya tsone e lemosa fa di dumalana le dintlha tse ANC e di bayang
mo ntlong e.

Re le mokgatlho wa ANC re ithutile go le gontsi thata mo nakong e re
nnileng le dikgaogo tsa maatla a motlakase go ralala naga ya Aforika Borwa,
e bile re dumela gore dikgaogo tse di bakile maemo a go sa iketlang mo
pusong le mo malapeng a baagi, mo ditheong tse difarologaneng, dikgwebo tse
dipotlana le tse dikgolo. Dikgaogo di ikutlwaletswe segolo ke meepo ya rona
gonne ikonomi ya rona e ikaegile thata go tswa mo meepong. Dingwe tsa
dikgwebo di ne tsa tshwanelwa ke go tswalwa, le go bulwa moragonyana. Se se
bakile kwelotlase ya dikuno, tatlhegelo ya lotseno go batho ba rona ba ba
dikobo di magetleng, mme bogolo dikgwebo di latlhegetswe ke madi a le
mantsi.

Re le mokgatlho re ntse re tsweletse go ela maemo tlhoko go thibela
tatlhegelo e kgolo ya maatla a motlakase. Ke maikaelelo a mokgatlho wa ANC
gore lelapa lengwe le lengwe mo nageng le bone phepelo ya maatla a
motlakase o o phepa. Re ikaeletse go dirisa mekgwa e mentsi e e leng teng
ya boitseanape go aga ditheo tse di farologaneng go tsamaisa maatla a
motlakase mo nageng. Ga re tlhabiwe ke ditlhong go ema fa pele ga setšhaba
re le mokgatlho wa ANC, go bega maikutlo a rona mo nakong eo re
itemogetseng dikgaogo le ditatlhegelo tsa maatla a motlakase tseo di neng
di sa solofelwa.

Re tla gakologelwa gore re ile ra gokagana le setšhaba ka molomo wa puso le
setheo sa Eskom, e le go bega seo se bakileng bothata jwa maatla a
motlakase mo nageng. Re kopile setšhaba go somarela le go tlhokomela tiriso
ya motlakase mo nakong eo. Re tsweletse go gwetlha dingangisano mo ntlong e
re leng mo go yona e ya Palamen te, magareng ga dikemedi tsa makoko a a
farologaneng, e le go batla tharabololo ya kgwetlho e re lebaneng le yona.
Tsela eno e re thusitse go nna le maitemogelo a go bona tharabololo ya
tlhaelo ya motlakase mo nageng, mme re netefaletsa setšhaba gore re
tsweletse go tlisa maemo a a kwa godimo a thebolo ya motlakase.

Mo dingwageng tse tlhano tse di latelang, maitlhomo a ANC a a
mametleletsweng mo maikaelelong (manifesto) a rona, ke go netefatsa thebolo
ya motlakase ka didiriswa tse di rebolang motlakase kwa ntle ga go koafatsa
matshelo a setšhaba. Ke ka moo re gwetlhang setšhaba go dira mmogo le
mokgatlho wa ANC e le go oketsa tse re di fitlheletseng mo dingwageng tse
di fetileng. Fa re dira mmogo, re ka kgona, re ka dira go tlala diatla.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T G ANTHONY: Hon Chairperson, President Kgalema Motlanthe, Deputy
President Baleka Mbete, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, Members of Parliament,
ladies and gentlemen, I feel very honoured to take part in this debate on
the state of the nation address that took place on Friday. My speech is
based on the main issues relating to the ANC resolution arising from the
conference in Polokwane in 2007.

I listened carefully to all speakers from the opposition parties, and it is
clear that the state of the nation address was fairly good because their
speeches focus on all the matters that the ANC has put forward in this
House.

As the ANC, we have learnt a lot during the time when we were experiencing
load shedding across South Africa, and we believe that this has caused
instability in the government and in the homes of the people, various
enterprises, as well as in small and big businesses. Load shedding has
taken its toll on our mines because our economy is largely reliant on
mining. Some of the businesses had to be closed, and opened only after a
while. This has also caused the scaling down of products, loss of income by
our people who are poverty-stricken, but it is mostly businesses that lost
a lot of revenue.

As the ANC, we continue to keep an eye on the situation in order to prevent
losing a great deal of the electricity supply. It is our objective as the
ANC that every household in the country should have electricity. We intend
using a lot of relevant expertise to build different institutions that will
distribute electricity in the country. The ANC is very proud to stand
before the nation, and make a pronouncement on our experience of the
unexpected load shedding.

We also need to remember that we communicated with the nation through
government and Eskom, and explained what caused load shedding in the
country. At that time, we asked the people to save and be careful in their
use of electricity. We have also called for debates amongst representatives
of different political parties in this House in an effort to look for a
solution to the challenge we are facing. This technique has helped us to
gain experience in solving the problem of inadequate supply of electricity
in the country, as well as reassuring the nation that we will continue to
improve the electricity supply.

In the next five years, the mission and vision of the ANC, which has been
included in our manifesto, will strive to ensure that the supply of
electricity with the use of energy resources will not have negative
repercussions in the lives of people. That is why we plead with the people
to work together with the ANC so as to consolidate what we have already
achieved in previous years. In working together, we can do more.]

I want to re-emphasise the capacity of the ANC, the people’s organisation,
to govern this country as a national liberation movement which brings
together all our people behind a common programme of transformation of
society in advancing the principle of a developmental state. The ANC has
earned this leadership capacity through decades of struggle, the
superiority of its ideals and, policies, and through its practice of
working together with various sectors of our society. Hence, we will
continue to express our commitment to walking together with our fellow
South Africans, to do more than we have done in the past five years.

Given our track record, we will continue to advance a transformative
environmentalism based upon the idea of sustainable development, which is
built upon the interconnection of environmental, social and economic
justice. As a liberation movement, we have high respect for the
Constitution of the country, and endeavour to abide by all its
requirements.

The Constitution requires that government establishes a national energy
policy to ensure that energy resources are adequately tapped and delivered
to cater for the needs of the nation. Adequate production and distribution
of energy should be sustainable and must lead to an improvement in the
standard of life of citizens.

Due to the dangers of climate change and global warming, the ANC has argued
that there is a need for South Africa to reduce its emission levels. This
could be achieved through the use of renewable energy sources, as mentioned
by the previous speaker. In this regard, we are aware of a huge untapped
potential - this has been mentioned already - the potential of renewable
energy. A shift towards renewable energy will reduce emissions, and holds
substantial sustainable development benefits, including the development of
sustainable livelihoods, small businesses and job creation opportunities.

As the ANC, we have committed ourselves to working within a set of
parameters in that any sources of energy explored by the government should
always ensure that people’s wellbeing and health are not compromised. As
such, sources of energy for a developmental state must take into account
issues related to ill health that could arise as a result of a particular
choice of energy source.

We therefore call for the diversification of energy sources away from coal,
as mentioned, including nuclear energy renewables, especially energy like
solar and wind power. In addition, we need to ensure that significant
resources are allocated to the development of clean and low-carbon
technologies.

The aforementioned statement reflects our policy vision, which seeks to
consider the hydroelectric potential of our neighbouring countries. We will
take full advantage of the economic potential offered by renewable sources
of energy. This will put us in a better position to advance an efficient
economic drive, which should take due regard of the imperative to create
jobs through the provision of incentives for investment in energy
infrastructure as well as human resources to ensure that institutions and
companies are ready to take advantage of renewable energy opportunities.

In order to achieve our intended objective, we will launch a green jobs
campaign, alongside government programmes, to raise awareness about
renewable energy sources as sources of sustainable energy for a
developmental state.

In conclusion, the government, led by the ANC, will ensure that for the
coming five years human capacity-building programmes are continued and
strengthened, both at formal and informal levels. Our energy development
policy seeks to support the development of training centres with the
objective of enhancing human resource development and thus promoting
socioeconomic development.

The ANC will advance its campaigns beyond limits in support of the
launching of integrated energy centres that will bring technologies and
energy services as well as information on the awareness of renewable
energies closer to disadvantaged communities. Comrade President, together
we will walk a long way, but we will address all these challenges. Walking
together, we can do more. The ANC lives. The ANC leads. Long live the ANC!
[Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Thank you, Chairperson. Comrades and hon members, Comrade
President, the APC congratulates you on your state of the nation address on
6 February 2009. We also would like to applaud you, the government and
especially former President Thabo Mbeki as well as the Southern African
Development Community for the efforts that facilitated the peaceful
resolution of the political stalemate in Zimbabwe. We, however, remain
dismayed as the world continues to approach the plight of the Palestinians
without alacrity. Our government and people must remain firmly on the side
of the oppressed Palestinians.

Whilst we recognise and appreciate that on issues you raised in your
address, Comrade President, you were balanced, even-handed without being
triumphalist, there are a few areas of concern. The highlights and
lowlights outlined by the President as a review of the previous year did
not align with the 24 Apex Priority Areas that were set as the main agenda
at the beginning of 2008. Yet, when you took over as President, you pledged
continuity and the acceleration of the implementation of existing
programmes.

If reviews do not talk to a set agenda, they unfortunately suggest the lack
of a bigger picture or a long-term set agenda. An example here is the
promised eradication of the bucket system. This 2007 promise has not been
fulfilled and is no longer spoken to.

Whereas we talk of rural economic development, it is a fact that this
cannot be fully realised without the active participation of traditional
leaders. The APC believes that the neglect and marginalisation of
traditional leaders must be urgently addressed, especially the plight of
the underclass of that institution: headmen and headwomen.

The APC believes that a separate Ministry for traditional affairs is
necessary, that the Commission on Traditional Leadership Disputes and
Claims should be revamped because for the almost five years of its
existence it has not fulfilled its mandate. So far there is no finality on
any of the 906 cases lodged with that commission and yet its mandate ends
in October this year, 2009.

Comrade President, we believe that it is urgent that, as the case against
government brought by some headmen and headwomen in Limpopo has been
adjudicated, you confer with the provincial Premiers and the Moseneke
commission to implement paragraphs 52 and 53 of that judgment, which is
that the salaries of headmen and headwomen should be urgently determined in
accordance with the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Act of 1998.

The APC is also of the view that the taxi recapitalisation programme has
been implemented without the full understanding and consideration of inputs
of the affected constituencies. Whatever the rationale of the programme,
its effects have been to push the poor out of the industry, saddle them
with huge debts, heighten maintenance costs and exacerbate unemployment.

The APC is also dismayed that the 2010 World Cup Bus Rapid Transit system
does not seek to utilise existing capacity in the industry, but rather to
further marginalise the taxi industry. The APC advocates the development of
a proper developmental strategy for the industry that seeks to protect
existing jobs and enhance the role of the taxi industry in our economy.

The capacity constraint that was singled out by the President as a main
contributing factor to the ineffective implementation of state policies
arises in part because of the implementation of the deployment policy. This
practice, which has led to delays in filling vacancies, has depleted
operational and managerial capacity within the state.

The APC advocates the policy of a government of all talents, that is
recognition that the development of our country is the responsibility of
all patriots, that we should eschew sectarianism in public administration.

The APC believes that a government of all the talents will bring about
agility in government. An agile government is a government that is always
prepared, constantly scanning and researching its environment for
opportunities and threats. It is aware of its weaknesses and thrives on
pitting its strengths against the environment. We believe this is
antithetical to the status quo.

The outbreak of cholera, especially in Bushbuckridge, needs an urgent and
prompt response from government. The President did not allay the fears of
the people and did not present a solution that will quickly eradicate and
stop the spread of cholera.

The President did not address the shambles that characterised the
announcement of the matric results. The issue of outstanding results,
especially in Mpumalanga, is outrageous, unacceptable and intolerable.

The APC had expected you, Comrade President, to have given strong
leadership in condemning the shameful acts of political violence in the
recent past. A strong message needed to go out that it is unacceptable to
harass, harm or kill in order for your party to have seats in Parliament.
As the APC we believe politics is a competition of ideas.

Finally, as the APC, we hope that the core of the electoral contestation
will be issues, policies and not personalities, money or the usual slyness
of bourgeois politics. We are confident that beyond these elections the APC
will play an ever-increasing role in consolidating and advancing our
democracy for the benefit of all our people. The struggle continues. Thank
you.

Ms T V TOBIAS: Hon Chairperson, His Excellency the President of the
Republic of South Africa, Madam Deputy President, hon members, you can’t
call the developmental state a bourgeois state, hon Godi. It cannot be.
It’s totally impossible. This government has moved from a capitalistic
state before apartheid to a state that cares for the needs of ordinary
people.

As we celebrate the 65th anniversary of the ANC Youth League and the 30th
anniversary of Solomon Kalushi Mahlangu, we bow our heads to the heroines
and heroes of our struggle and abide by the principles of the Freedom
Charter, particularly that “The people shall govern.” The ANC has always
implemented the Freedom Charter to the point that its government will
continue to implement the clauses that are dictated to us by the charter,
particularly the clause that goes: “There shall be work and security.”

We inherited a legacy of jobs and skills reservation from the apartheid
state, hence the challenge of high unemployment and limited skills in
especially the high-occupation sectors, such as engineering, architecture
and so forth. That system produced policemen and policewomen and soldiers
to shoot at liberation fighters, nurses to attend to their wounds, and
teachers to teach them domestic science and gardening. That is why this
market is saturated.

One might ask oneself what is a decent job in the context of a sustainable
livelihood. This phenomenon sparks debate in different sectors of society
and some will interpret it differently, depending on which sector they come
from. My own interpretation of decent work within the context of the
economic meltdown and how this is affecting South Africa - it is my
considered view - is that there is a thin line between the massification of
jobs to address poverty, high unemployment and the creation of decent jobs
with a labour force that has skills limitations and growing the economy to
address the latter. And, as these are competing needs in a country with a
capitalist economic history that was not growing until the ANC took over
government and as there is the current challenge of globalisation, decent
jobs mean that people should be able to put a decent plate of food on the
table, to school their children and have a roof above their heads and still
manage to save for a rainy day. One asks oneself whether this will not take
longer having gone through so many years of hardship during apartheid.

Sustainable livelihoods also relate to both urban and rural development
and, as much as the state needs to intervene in the job market to maintain
the latter, people, equally, need to have creative ways of self-sustenance
as part of the contract entered into by the ANC government and South
African people that translates into “Together we can do more.”

The President of the ANC, at the 8 January 2009 rally, and the election
manifesto relate adequately to the creation of decent jobs. The President
said:


  The rural areas remain divided. There are well-developed commercial
  farming areas and impoverished former homelands and other deep rural
  areas. Land and agrarian reforms have not produced all the desired
  results.

The developmental state has created jobs through many departments, but I
will focus on the role of the Department of Public Works in creating jobs
under the year in review. Hon Swathe, I think this will be of interest to
you. Government has identified the Expanded Public Works Programme as a
flagship for job creation, poverty alleviation and service delivery. Would
it be true and fair to claim that the ANC government has failed whereas the
targets that were set were achieved before the target dates?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

Ms T V TOBIAS: We promised one million jobs by 2014 and we delivered one
million jobs before 2014. The question should be whether this is enough or
not, and this I will demonstrate when I state further facts. There are
people who are allergic to figures, and figures are, in my own opinion,
scientific proof that we have indeed delivered on our mandate, whilst
acknowledging that we still need to do more because the scourge of
apartheid left deep scars in our society.

An additional budget of R4,1 billion has been allocated for furthering the
EPWP programme. These are facts and people can check the Estimates of
National Expenditure to quantify this. This allocation will create long-
term jobs and more projects will be unleashed to allow women and youth to
participate in eradicating the economic exclusion these sectors have
experienced over time. Part of the infrastructural programmes that will be
implemented are the building of dams, the eradication of mud schools and
ensuring energy efficiency.

There are also other state institutions that have a responsibility to
create jobs, for example state-owned enterprises and the development
finance institutions. The state-owned enterprises are supposed to be self-
sustainable and deliver on the public mandate, which two are competing
interests, and a balance needs to be struck; new skills and technology are
needed. This means that an ageing institution will shed its old skills base
and allow a new generation of workers who will be more knowledgeable and
have more energy to work.

The government should, at all costs, avoid privatising institutions merely
to increase revenue, and rather have a balance, with BEEs as financial
inclusion. For instance, Eskom still needs to deliver a chunk of
electricity in the rural areas.

As part of service delivery, Denel should improve its technological
intellectual property rights and do more research and development to appeal
to both local and international markets and be competitive and capture the
imagination of this clientele and prove that not only France, Germany,
Russia and others are the sole producers of military hardware.

The development finance institutions should also be tasked with the
responsibility of looking at agrarian reform to ensure that rural
development is placed high on our agenda to minimise rural migration and
restore skills that our people have obtained over time in order to prepare
them to be SMMEs that participate in the export outputs of the country. One
of the tools that government needs to utilise is the Expropriation Bill.
The Expropriation Bill must also have its day in Parliament in order to
empower our people to have access to land, to be merchants in the
agricultural markets and to also ensure that all are equal before the law
and all benefit from the proceeds of our economy.

People also exonerate the private sector from participating in creating
decent jobs and sustainable livelihoods, whereas these institutions are
maximising profit at the expense of the poor and don’t receive as much
attention as government. Therefore, the media must concentrate on the role
of the private sector.

The newly established National Youth Development Agency will address the
limitations that were presented by the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the
National Youth Commission respectively. It will help young people, a very
vulnerable, but patient sector that has registered in high numbers for the
elections, to expel the notion that they are apathetic. We should also
encourage small enterprises owned by youth to ensure democratisation of the
country.

Given all the circumstances mentioned above, it was reported last year that
commodity prices were volatile and that only the ANC-led government could
negotiate the reduction of food and oil prices. Is that not delivery? Well,
it depends where you stand on this matter. Only the ANC government could
have ensured that our financial institutions were protected from relying
too much on foreign banks, hence the economic crisis has not affected us
that much because we assessed the risk and played it safe.

Much as people exaggerate corruption in governance, it has also been
reported that South Africa received 15 “A” rankings for public financial
management out of a total of 28 indicators, which is said to be the highest
the world over. We need to give ourselves applause. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Voorsitter, agb President, ek is baie bevoorreg om ’n
laaste toespraak in die politieke arena in hierdie binnekring te hou. Baie
dankie vir die voorreg om hier te kon lewe in dié arena vir 22 jaar.

Ek was bevoorreg om hier te kon sit toe president F W de Klerk sy
belangrike toespraak 19 jaar gelede hier gemaak het en ek was bevoorreg om
aktief te kon deelneem aan die onderhandelinge om ’n nuwe Suid-Afrika tot
stand te bring. Ek het dit gedoen in die oortuiging, soos mnr De Klerk, dat
ons nooit ’n toekoms langer sou kon bou op beginsels wat nie moreel
regverdigbaar en nie moreel verdedigbaar is nie. Dit was ons uitgangspunt.

Ek kon deelneem oor al die jare in terme van wat ek is – ’n plaasseun, ’n
Afrikanerseun van Kirkwood in die Oos-Kaap – en ek kon wees wat ek is onder
die leierskap van mnr De Klerk, iemand wat nie vandag die eer kry wat hom
toekom nie. Maar so ook, onder my volgende leier, Tony Leon, en nou onder
my leier, Helen Zille. Baie dankie dat ek vandag kan sê ek gaan uit die
politieke arena uit. Ek het baie opponente en ons het harde debatte gevoer,
maar ek het nie vyande nie, nie in enige party iewers in hierdie Huis nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr J T DELPORT: Chairperson, hon President, I am very privileged to have
the honour of making a last speech in the political arena, in this inner
circle. Thank you for the privilege to have been able to live here, in this
arena, for 22 years.

I was privileged to have sat here when president F W de Klerk delivered his
important speech 19 years ago and I was privileged to have been actively
part of the negotiations to bring about the birth of a new South Africa. I
did that with the conviction, like Mr De Klerk, that we could no longer
build a future based on principles that were not morally justifiable and
not morally defensible. That was our point of departure.

I could participate throughout all these years in terms of who I am – a
farm boy, an Afrikaner boy from Kirkwood in the Eastern Cape – and I could
be what I am, under the leadership of Mr De Klerk, someone who does not
receive the honour that he deserves today. But so too, I could be what I am
under the next leader, Tony Leon, and now under my present leader, Helen
Zille. Thank you that I can announce today that I shall be leaving the
political arena. I have had many adversaries and we have had many heated
debates, but I do not have enemies, not in any party anywhere in this
House.]

There is a well-known story of a man who built a house. However, when the
storms came, the house collapsed and it collapsed because its foundation
was built on sand. Please accept my observations here today as an honest
attempt to direct your attention, the attention of your government, to
serious cracks in our House, which are indicative of defects in the very
fabric of our nation.

I’m merely going to underline some of it: Our ability to curb violence and
crime is declining; our educational system, as you have said, President,
just does not work; the criminal legal system, as Deputy Minister Johnny de
Lange has said, is dysfunctional; the policy of BEE does not work, says Mr
Matthews Phosa; we are still faced with an electricity crisis lurking in
our future; we are on the brink of a water contamination crisis; our roads
network is degenerating; local municipalities are failing, even collapsing;
the SADF is just a shadow of what it used to be; health care facilities are
declining; public administration is in a shocking state.

Mr President, 15 years have gone by since the Mandela government took
office, or, correction: Fifteen years have gone by since the struggle
claimed victory; since the ANC achieved its first goal and that was to
partake in its rightful share of the wealth and all activities of South
Africa - understandably and correctly so.

The struggle wanted its share of what there was to be shared. It was not
primarily concerned with the opportunity to create and to produce and
unfortunately this has now developed into a culture of entitlement, a
culture in which, for many, self-interest and self-gain have become a
legitimate objective. This has permeated our policies, our appointments and
our whole society. So the moral foundation of our new South Africa has once
again become flawed. There is simply no right to get rich, nor is there a
right to use corrupt means to become rich.
The time has come to find a new morality in a culture that strives to
build, to improve and to produce and not to gain, to amass and to consume
if we accept that the task and duty of government and government leaders
and officials is about giving and not about getting. As we once had to move
away from the indefensible apartheid morality, we need once again to turn
away from the indefensible entitlement morality.

During the negotiations friendships were formed across party lines. Among
those that I hold dear, as a friend, is the President of the ANC, Mr Jacob
Zuma – as a friend, and I mean that from the bottom of my heart. As a
friend, I ask of him today to consider standing back as President until the
court cases are behind us. Set the tone, Jacob, for a new morality for a
South Africa that really can become a shining city on the hill.

Ek gaan afsluit met ’n boodskap aan my eie mense, en wat ’n lekker geveggie
het ons nie ’n tyd gelede gehad oor die gebruik van “my mense” nie? Ons is
verneder en verguis oor apartheid. Ek was die eerste lid van die De Klerk-
regering wat om verskoning gevra het vir dit wat apartheid aan mense gedoen
het. Dit was in Junie 1990 in ’n debat by die Setlaarsmonument, ’n debat
met wyle Oom Ray Mhlaba. Ek het verskoning gevra, want dit was nodig, net
soos dit nodig is dat die Britte verskoning behoort te vra vir die dood van
27 000 vroue en kinders in die konsentrasiekampe; dat die Amerikaners
verskoning moet vra aan die wêreld vir slawerny en diskriminasie; dat
Afrikavolke verskoning moet vra vir menseslagtings en selfs volksmoorde,
soos so baie ander om verskoning moet vra.

Ek en my mense is steeds Afrikaners in ons diepste wese. Suid-Afrika is ons
vaderland en Suid-Afrika het my mense nodig - hulle kundigheid, hulle
innerlike krag en hulle bydrae. Ek vra vir my mense, leef saam met alles
wat goed en mooi is in jou verlede. Hou vas aan jou vaderland, dit bly jou
vaderland. Hou vas aan jou taak, jou kultuur, dit is jou erfenis. Belowe
tog, vra ek vandag en sê: Vaderland, ons sal die adel van jou naam met eer
dra, waar en trou as Afrikaners, kinders van Suid-Afrika. Dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I shall conclude with a message to my own people, and what a lovely
“scrap” we had a while ago over the use of “my people”? We were humiliated
and vilified over apartheid. I was the first member of the De Klerk
government to publicly apologise for the all the ills apartheid had caused
people. This happened in June 1990 in a debate at the Settler’s Monument, a
debate with the late Oom Ray Mhlaba. I apologised to him because it was
necessary, just as it is necessary that the British should apologise for
the deaths in the concentration camps of 27 000 women and children; that
the Americans should apologise to the world for slavery and discrimination;
that African countries should apologise for mass killings and even
genocide, as so many others should apologise.

My people and I remain Afrikaners to the core. South Africa is our
fatherland and South Africa needs my people - their skills, their inner
strength and their contribution. I appeal to my people, to accept all
things good and beautiful from your past. Hold on to your fatherland, it
remains your fatherland. Hold on to your task, your culture, it is your
legacy. Just promise, this I ask of you today and say: Fatherland, we shall
honour your noble name, true and loyal Afrikaners that we are, children of
South Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon
members and comrades, it is a great honour for me to take part in this
debate on the reply of the President to the state of the nation address. We
do so, cognisant of the imperative outlined by the President in his words:
“Informing these, our endeavours, are two basic principles: the need for us
to complete the mandate accorded this government ... that comes in after
the election” and “finds a ready platform to implement its programmes
without undue delays”.

We have no doubt, of course, that the new government will be the ANC
government. We are going to occupy more seats on this side. [Applause.] We
should also acknowledge our success in various competitions, which include
the Commonwealth Games in India, in which South Africa came fourth out of
71, and at the Zone 6 Games in Tlokwe, Potchefstroom, South Africa topped
the medals table and remained on top. These developments are encouraging
for the future of sports stars and the future of South African sport.

We would like to take this opportunity to outline recent developments in
school sport. This time, Minister of Education, last year school sport was
in disarray, but I can proudly stand tall here today – I am short – and say
that this year school sport is well-organised. Both the Department of
Education and the Department of Sport and Recreation have produced a
calendar of school sport this year, something that all of us welcome.
[Applause.]

In this regard, we support the call from the hon Minister of Sport and
Recreation for schools to return to Wednesday afternoon being dedicated to
physical education and school sporting activities. Also, we will raise
these issues with our counterpart colleagues in the Portfolio Committee on
Education so that we do vigilant monitoring of the execution of these noble
goals for the betterment of the future of our children.

In December 2007, the ANC, at its 52nd national conference, decided that
the current municipal infrastructure grant had really not done the good job
it was intended to do. This decision was taken in a conference 14 months
down the line, and up to today the issue of the grant between the two
departments has not been resolved. We are raising this matter because as
soon as people invade a piece of land this money is diverted to create
roads and give people water and the focus is taken away from setting up the
basic facilities for sport for our children. We think that, as far as this
matter is concerned, the ANC has taken the correct decision in saying that
this should go back to Sport and Recreation, so that they can implement
this programme.

During the four-year period starting in 2001-02, when Sport and Recreation
received the funds for the “Building for Sport and Recreation” programme,
we built 363 basic sports facilities. But with the advent of the municipal
infrastructure grant, from 2004 to mid-2008, only 45 facilities were built
by the grant and we have lost 318 of basic facilities. I think this is a
great loss.

Where we have failed we need to be bold enough to admit that and address
the situation. This was done at conference level and it needs to be
implemented. It would not do justice to our mandate if we did not raise the
issue of transformation in sport and recreation. The lack of facilities in
our peri-urban areas and rural areas definitely retards our ability to
transform sport. It is clear that our progress in school sports will be
retarded if there are insufficient basic sports facilities in close
proximity to people, where children can easily access them.

We welcome the new housing strategy, Comrade Minister of Housing, Breaking
New Ground. This is because whilst houses were being built in our
communities, they were not taking into consideration the play facilities
for children. Maybe Breaking New Ground is going to be the answer when it
comes to basic facilities for our communities.

This presents another challenge to the incoming government and further
demonstrates the failure of the municipal infrastructure grant. It is sad
that schools do not allow local communities to use school sports facilities
where they exist and where the schools have such facilities in our
different communities. We have said much about this over the years and we
hope that the federations will use their funding significantly to transform
sports and open them up to other children.

The National Lottery is a point we have discussed in our conference as the
ANC. It has also been disappointing in terms of the ability to allocate and
disburse funds that are allocated for sports through the lottery. The
Ministry has indicated its intention to work with the Minister of Trade and
Industry to amend section 25 of the lotteries Act, and we support that.
This has been said for a long time. It has not happened. We are pleading
for this amendment to be made so that sport is accorded a better cut of the
lottery fund.

The process of distributing funds would then be aligned with the
responsibilities, and the Minister of Sport and Recreation and the
Ministries would have a direct effect on the oversight of those funds. We
have spent too much time in sport over the years in creating our own
fiefdoms and avoiding the need to transform. This is reinforced by the
lottery system, as it currently exists, and it is feeding another
department. With this, we are in a very bad state of disjuncture.

We need to enforce accountability, but we cannot do so when funding and the
system are under the jurisdiction of another department. This has to change
early in the term of the incoming government. The Doubting Thomases and
critics of the 2010 Soccer World Cup in South Africa would do the Macbeth
witches proud. They are a constant source of gloom and negative
predictions. They see very small hurdles as insurmountable obstacles.
Indeed, as you listen to them, it is astonishing that South Africa got the
bid at all.

Fifa’s bid committee, world-wise people who have seen everything and have
the experience and reputation, comprises experts who saw fit to award South
Africa the 2010 Soccer World Cup, but the prophets of doom think it was a
mistake to give it to the African continent.

Fifa has invested US$200 million in this country. We doubt that at this
time of global financial crisis that any organisation would disburse such
an amount casually without necessarily taking this into consideration. If
we were to be persuaded by the critics, then we would need to forget that
this is a nation of four Nobel Prize winners and that one of them is our
own Nelson Mandela. We should not forget that we created the technology and
we had the courage to dig the ...
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Hon member, you are deep into injury
time.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Business suspended at 16:05 and resumed at 16:23.

Debate interrupted.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, your Excellency President Kgalema Motlanthe,
hon members, distinguished guests, if there are any, and fellow
compatriots, as they say: “Good wine needs no bush” – and I don’t mean
George. I run the risk of repeating the beautiful things said and the
gracious wisdom that has been displayed in this House today.

Ka Setswana ke tla re, ba ntseetse mafoko ka dipuo tse dintle tse di agang
setšhaba; kagiso, tolamo le botho, e seng ditshelenyana tse di sa reng
sepe. Mogolo o a tle a re fa o leka go mo sotla: “ga o nthee magogorwana ke
wena.” Ka isiXhosa ba bo ba peteketsa ba re: “Akunamkhuluwa uyinyoka”
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)
[I would say, wise words have been said on peace and humanity – thus I do
not have to repeat that. When you try and tease an elderly person, he would
say “you don’t really mean that, you coward!” In isiXhosa it is said:
“Can’t you show your elder brother respect?”]
Let me first thank my colleagues, Sandra Botha, Tony Leon and many in this
House who have integrity in sharing the sentiments expressed.

It is not my wish to condescend and sink to the paltry level of responding
to vexatious diatribe or myopic sectarian slander that is misunderstood as
legitimate political banter. I wish, also sincerely, to thank our senior
statesman and elder, hon Dr M G Buthelezi, for his courageous wisdom in
these times, when puerile charlatans who espouse ubuntu-botho but insult
their parents and great grandparents; one wonders where ubuntu has gone.
Anyway ... molaya kgosi o a mo itaela. [... what you put in is what you get
out.]

These people have been taught to be vulgar and abusive from the political
cradle and so nurtured. It was Dostoevsky, in his book House of Death, who
said:

   Whoever has experienced the power, the unrestrained ability to humiliate
   another human being automatically loses power over his own sensations.
   Tyranny is a habit, it has its own organic life, it develops finally into
   a disease. The habit can kill and coarsen the very best of man or woman
   to the level of a beast. Blood and power intoxicate ... and the return to
   human dignity, to repentance and regeneration become almost impossible.


Any government or society should avoid divisive posturing in exercising its
mandated power.

Mr President, at the threshold of your entry into this House, I stood next
to you, as the only contestant, for a profound visionary reason, if not the
imperative duty to nurture the vision of a new democratic society and
order: Like you, it was not out of malice or unbridled ambition, but merely
as a signal to our people that in a democracy all can contest – to open up
society to open opportunities. The office that you hold is neither the
divine right nor God-ordained monopoly of any one party, race, gender or
socio-political status.

You and I, Your Excellency, come from a background that teaches one this
fundamental stabilising wisdom: Se nkganang se nthola morwalo. [You may not
like it, but it is for your own good.]

Take victory with humility and defeat with grace. We have a nation to build
and serve here, more than we should be served.

In your address, Mr President, a large part of your delivery reminded one
of the wise Mario Cabral and his colleagues when they spoke of what was
happening in their times and country, and that is, they did not let
themselves fall into ingenuous euphoria, nor did they lose their humility.

Our glorious struggle history tends to lull us into false complacency and
self-congratulatory mode, driving us to rest firmly on our laurels. Words -
empty rhetoric – will not feed the hungry nor uplift the poor, nor even
raise the dead.

With that in mind, let me give credit where credit is due, as all good
democrats are prepared to do. We take pride and give accolades to the South
Africa-Mali efforts in collecting and preserving the ancient Timbuktu
Manuscripts. This should jog this African giant out of lethargy and
continental entitlement.

This should spur us to the realisation that indeed the African continent is
so richly endowed and therefore should not allow itself to wallow in abject
poverty, wanton suicidal conflict and despotic, authoritarian rule. Let
unadulterated democracy reign supreme right across Africa.

Should peace, stability and prosperity be so mercurially elusive for the
African continent which we are part of? That is the great question to
answer. Introspection and self-examination should not be obliterated by
spurious labels of Afropessimism.

To go forward, you need to pause, look behind and move on, taking other
steps forward. For how long must this sad liturgy go on?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Order, hon member! You are in injury
time.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr H P MALULEKA: Chairperson, hon President, Madam Deputy President, hon
Ministers, hon members, fellow South Africans, the bedrock of the
liberation struggle, the one factor that cuts across all endeavours, was
the arts and cultural activities that inspired and kept the spirit of the
people, and cadres of the liberation movement, high. This had to be so
because those activities represented deep resistance, and a rejection of
colonial and apartheid attempts to abuse and exploit our identities and the
things we valued, our heritage.

Hope and resilience were fuelled by arts and culture. We rejected the view
that what was indigenous was useless and inferior, and that we could not,
as a people, enjoy and benefit from our artistic and cultural activities
like the rest of humanity. We refused to be mechanically divorced from the
rest of humanity - our values had similar universal validity as those of
others.

The work of government, Parliament and the judiciary has laid the
foundation for further work still to be done to promote, protect and
preserve our artistic and cultural heritage. The example you gave of the
handover of the Timbuktu Mali project, is an African heritage project with
significance so high that, its impact will be huge beyond measure.

The impact of arts and culture is more in the realm of the intangible and
spiritual. We cannot speak of reconstruction and development without this
sector. In its own right, this sector perhaps requires more attention than
we have given it to date.

In the last five years we took the significant step of dedicating a
department to this sector to give it focused attention. The productive
relations and exchanges with our neighbours and others further afield,
including through bilateral and multilateral contact, is another important
step we have taken to grow our artistic and cultural endeavours.

Our campaign, calling for stolen arts and cultural entities to be returned
to the countries of origin on the continent, is highly significant as well.
It fits well with, working with, progressive forces on the continent and
elsewhere to build a better world.
We in the ANC believe the incoming government should promote decent
remuneration of arts and cultural workers. The public sector must be
exemplary in this, as must be its investment.

The priorities identified, such as decent work, health, education, rural
development and combating crime, easily lend themselves to the employ of
arts and culture to transform and improve the quality of life of our people
in those areas. An inclusive, participatory government recognises the value
of involving art and culture workers right from the beginning to the end of
every process.

We must simultaneously put pressure on the private sector to do more than
it is doing and collaborate with it to build more creatively.

We draw the above from the Freedom Charter, which says that “the doors of
learning and culture shall be opened to all”, which you referred to when
you said that everyone has a right to speak the language of their choice.

Kuns en kultuur is noodsaaklik om ons nasionale transformasie-agenda te
verwesenlik. Dit kan gedoen word deur die bevordering van multi-
kulturalisme, veeltaligheid, vryheid van spraak en assosiasie; deur die bou
van sosiale samehorigheid en samewerking rondom kwessies soos nasionale
identiteit en patriotisme, wat ons andersins sou verdeel het; deur die
verandering en herstel van ons geografiese landskap deur naamveranderings;
deur die dekolonisering van ons Afrika-erfenis en identiteit; en deur die
bekragtiging van ons Afrika-waardestelsel en die filosofie van
medemenslikheid, ubuntu-botho. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Arts and culture is essential to realise our national agenda for
transformation. This can be done by promoting multiculturalism,
multilingualism, freedom of expression and association; by building social
cohesion and co-operation with regard to issues, such as national identity
and patriotism, that would otherwise have divided us; by the changing and
restoration of our geographical landscape with name changes; by the
decolonisation of our African heritage and identity; and through the
affirmation of our African value system and the philosophy of common
humanity, ubuntu-botho.]

In a sense, we seek, through arts and culture, to undo the damage
colonialism and apartheid visited largely upon Africans in particular and
upon Blacks in general, and to restore and rebuild our society on a more
progressive, inclusive trajectory.

Our continuing reintegration with the global community must be on a
positive, equal basis and not on the assumption that we swallow - holus-
bolus - others’ cultural mores because they are economically dominant. In
this regard, the public broadcaster and the community media - both
electronic and print - are critical vehicles for achieving our objectives.
Subsidising them appropriately, as resolved in Polokwane, is key. Without
this public support, these public media become hostage to commercial,
tabloid interests, which erode their public mandate.

Perhaps the fourth Parliament must be asked, at one of its first major
assemblies, to invite arts and culture workers from across our country to
come and speak to the people’s Parliament so as to inform its work over the
next five years. This work must then be followed in the provinces and
municipalities in order to harness the power and creativity of arts and
culture workers to help drive the implementation, monitoring and evaluation
of the new mandate.

The ANC is clear that the arts and culture sector is indeed the backbone of
our national transformation agenda. It needs nothing less than our
undivided focus, funds and other resources. A lot of good work has been
done since 1994. The foundation is right, the moment is here. Working
together, we can do more. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, Mr President, Madam Deputy President, in these
turbulent economic times the desperate, the dispossessed, the damned and
the disinherited are seeking relief. Sadly, 15 years after the liberation
struggle in our country, we are becoming a Muvhango nation, a country whose
economy is growing, but which already has the second-widest poverty gap in
the world between the rich minority and the poor majority.

I don’t have the luxury of time. Let me simply say that education is the
most powerful weapon for nation-building. It simultaneously improves the
individual’s chances of success in life, effective service in the nation
and self-reliance. The world is becoming a tough, competitive global
village. Those who have knowledge will get all the riches and comforts in
this village. Those without knowledge in this global village will collect
only crumbs.
Education must be free for the poor. The few schools that have been
declared no-fee schools are not the same thing as free education.

It is technological-economic power that determines the places of nations in
the world. Our education must be tailored to the needs of our country, and
this education must be of a high quality and diversified. The present
system of education is too academic and contributes to unemployment and
poverty. Five hundred thousand jobs have been reported, but there are no
skilled people to fill them.

We must take education more seriously. Perhaps the billions of rands that
are spent on the nine provincial parliaments must be invested in an
education that skills this nation in all fields of knowledge and gives it
the technological capacity to process our raw materials and export them as
finished goods. We are throwing away our riches by exporting our raw
materials unprocessed, and buying them back as finished goods from Europe
and America.

Our ancestors had no university degrees, but they wisely identified land as
the most fundamental national asset for their nationhood and as the source
of their wealth and development. Poverty in this nation will not go away
for the African majority until we do the right thing: identify land as the
fundamental asset, learn how to use it and care for it, especially in these
days of climate change and threatening food insecurity.

Section 25(7) of the Constitution is merely the entrenchment of the Native
Land Act of 1913 in disguise. This Act unjustly allocated less land to the
African majority and almost the whole country to the minority.

Billions of rands have been spent on land restitution, but millions of our
people remain landless and economically oppressed because this restitution
route is a fallacy. It is a suicidal capitulation on the land question.
This is complicated by the fact that our land is being sold to foreigners
at an alarming rate. There must be a law prohibiting the sale of land to
foreigners. Millions of our people do not even have a decent place to
sleep. This includes millions of workers.

The continued unjust distribution of land and its resources is a violation
of basic rights. Food, homes, clothes, gold, fish, medicines are not in the
air. Land is the primary natural resource required to satisfy the basic
needs of men, women and children. Even in death we need land for our
graves.

The United Nations declared apartheid a crime against humanity. It is the
conundrum of conundrums that more victims of apartheid were imprisoned than
the number of perpetrators of the crime pardoned by the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. Mr P W Botha refused to appear before the TRC.
He was not imprisoned and was offered a state funeral when he died.
All Azanian People’s Liberation Army members, and others who fought the
apartheid crime, must be released. A crime against humanity applies to
them.

Those who boast that they will rule this country until Jesus comes back,
and who call our judges “counter-revolutionaries”, speak the language of
fascists. They have not studied eschatology carefully. Power is like
lightning. It is very dangerous when handled with pomposity.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Pheko, your time has expired.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Izwe lethu! [Our country!]

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Hon Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy
President and hon members, the ANC cares. The ANC is a caring organisation.
I thank the hon President for his speech on Friday, 6 February, because he
put greater emphasis on children, youth and people with disabilities.
That’s because the ANC cares.

In the 2004 election manifesto, former President Thabo Mbeki wrote in his
letter “Message from the President” that:

   Having united the overwhelming majority of South Africans in struggle,
   the possibility was created in 1994 for us to work together practically
   to construct a society that cares.

Democracy and equality before the law were entrenched in our Constitution.
Women, workers, youth, professionals, people with disabilities, traditional
leaders, religious communities, businesspeople and rural communities all
have the right to utilise the opportunities that have come with freedom.

The former President, Thabo Mbeki, spoke about the first 10 years of
freedom as 10 years of growing unity in action, 10 years of peace and
stability, 10 years of increasingly making resources in the hands of the
state available to uplifting disadvantaged South Africans and 10 years of
expanding opportunities to building a better life for all.

Nonracialism, nonsexism and programmes to prevent other forms of
discrimination are central to our values and our practical actions. But,
yes, the ANC has always been and still is an organisation that truly cares.
Yes, 2008 became the year of mass mobilisation to build a caring society.

In January 2008, Comrade Jacob Zuma, our President of the ANC, said that
the ANC would continue to draw on its expertise as we together steer the
movement forward in the fight against poverty, unemployment and bridging
the gap between the rich and the poor. The people will share in the wealth
of the country. By that we say that the number of employed people has
increased every year. This, and the extension of social security and basic
infrastructure, and the distribution of assets to the poor have led to a
significant reduction in the level of severe poverty and to improvement in
the quality of life of millions of our people.

The ANC government has taken on the task of tackling poverty and
unemployment. While many families have access to social grants and other
poverty-alleviation programmes, many homes and communities still remain
trapped in poverty and are dependent on the state. More than 12 million
people now receive social grants, out of which 8,1 million are children.

However, the rate in income increases for the poor has not matched that of
the better off. So, income inequality has increased. The ANC is determined
to enhance efforts to improve the conditions of children and youth in
poverty, which is why, arising out of our Polokwane resolutions, the ANC
government will work on ways to extend child support grants to the age of
18.

In the ANC’s 2009 election manifesto, which many have said to be pro-poor,
it is stated that the ANC will build cohesive and sustainable communities
and that there shall be houses, security and comfort for all.
The ANC will continue to protect and strengthen the gains we have made
during the past 15 years. Through our programmes on housing, social
security, sport and recreation, we aim to continue building a better life
for all.

Housing is not just about building houses. It is about transforming our
cities and towns and building cohesive, sustainable and caring communities
with closer access to work and social amenities.

Our social security system, such as the provision of social grants, is
aimed at empowering our people actively to take part in the social and
economic life of our country. In addition, ANC policies will continue to
promote the role of interfaith organisations in promoting cohesive, caring
and sustainable communities.

As mentioned in the ANC manifesto, in the next five years the ANC plans to
extend the provision of the child support grant from the age of 15 to 18.
This will be implemented in a phased manner and will be linked to
compulsory schooling requirements. Legislative measures will be taken to
ensure that we realise this requirement, work towards a bold expansion of
unemployment insurance and introduce social security systems to provide for
guaranteed requirements, disability and survivor benefits while
streamlining the road accident occupational injuries and unemployment
benefits.

The ANC government will consult closely with trade unions on any changes to
the pension system. It will also establish a consensus on our future social
security system to make it comprehensive and inclusive. We will also
increase access to secure and decent housing for all through government’s
newly adopted housing programme, including the continued conversion of
hostels into family housing units, as well as ensure that all qualifying
military veterans will receive subsidised housing.

Hon President, as the chairperson of the Joint Monitoring Committee on
Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled
Persons, I must inform you that the Office on the Rights of the Child, the
National Youth Commission and the Office on the Status of Disabled People
all report to this committee. All three sectors have indicated with grave
concern that there are very few focal points at the provincial level and at
local municipalities or that there is a lack or disability desks in some of
our government departments.

We join our President in saying that we are disappointed with the low
target rate of 0,2% of disabled people employed in the public sector. As
the hon President mentioned, if the rate is so low in the public sector,
how much lower is it in the private sector?

In the State of the Public Service Report 2008, it is stated that key
observations and suggestions made in 2006 show that recruitment and
selection policies were not sufficiently focused on attracting people with
disabilities. There was a lack of innovation in recruiting people with
disabilities. It was also stated that senior managers needed to demonstrate
their commitment to promoting people with disabilities, especially in their
retention strategies targeted at people with disabilities.

The Office on the Rights of the Child is also concerned that the
mainstreaming of children’s rights delivery in municipalities has not been
happening as fast as it should. The National Youth Commission is also
concerned that there are not enough youth desks at these municipalities and
that they are not budgeted for.

Recently, we ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Disabled People and its optional protocol. This convention marks a major
shift in the way society views disabled people, giving them full
participation in formulating and implementing plans and policies affecting
them. We have also just recommended to Parliament that it ratify the
African Youth Charter, which will happen soon.

Chairperson, I don’t have time to finish my speech so I will skip a few
pages, but I would like to speak to the hon President on the following. We
have a few deaf people in the gallery. They won’t have access to your
speech tomorrow replying to the state of the nation debate because there is
no captioning, or sign-language interpreters on television. We have
interpreters in the House, but they are only available to the hon members.

I would like you to support me in lobbying for more captioning, or sign-
language interpreters on television so that they can have access to an
important debate like this and participate as full citizens of our country.
That, in turn, makes us a caring society. So I want to thank you very much,
hon President. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President and hon
members, the ACDP welcomes the President’s announcement of programmes to
address the impact of the global financial crisis on the South African
economy. While we have been protected to a certain degree domestically, it
is very clear that we have experienced slower economic growth which has
impacted on various sectors of our economy, leading to job losses in
certain areas.

While the full impact will no doubt be explained on Wednesday during the
Finance Minister’s Budget Speech, government needs to step in and help
industries that are in distress as a result of the economic crisis. We must
find alternatives to job losses such as extended training and shorter
working hours.

We cannot be reliant only on mining and agriculture for exports, and we
must extend our manufacturing sector. The ACDP welcomes the increased
public-sector expenditure on infrastructure which will assist to stimulate
the economy and assist with job creation in the short term, while
positioning the country to take advantage of the next positive economic
cycle.

Mr President, we were surprised to hear you say government made the fight
against corruption one of the core areas of focus. There are many
contradictions that do not confirm what the President said. For example,
like most South Africans, we want to know why the President still refuses
to institute a commission of inquiry to look into the arms deal if
government is indeed concerned about corruption in both the public and the
private sector. Corruption eats away at the soul of the nation and denies
the poor and the vulnerable opportunities to work and make a decent living.

The ACDP believes that in view of the widespread corruption at all levels
of society, it is crucial for this country to reset its moral compass.
Integrity is the internal compass we all must carry. We must develop
leaders of character and integrity, who would not want to govern others
while they themselves are not self-governed.

We further believe that for this nation to excel to its fullest potential,
we need righteousness at all levels of government as righteousness exalts
the nation.

The ACDP is extremely concerned with the epidemic spread of cholera through
Zimbabwe, which has had dire effects on South Africa. We regret the
widespread loss of life in our country and in Zimbabwe and trust that the
new multiparty government there will succeed in addressing the economic and
health crises facing that nation.

The cholera epidemic has spread to South Africa, resulting in some 26
deaths and widespread infections. The ACDP regrets that the President did
not give more attention to this pressing issue. It is unacceptable that a
disease that is easily preventable and treatable, like cholera, is still
spreading in our provinces and robbing people of their precious lives. The
ACDP manifesto states that besides ensuring the provision of clear water
and proper sanitation for all our people, the ACDP will also ensure that
basic health and hygiene is taught from primary school level upwards.

While the President focused, to a large extent, on government’s
achievements over the past number of years, it is clear that the government
has failed to deliver in a large number of areas if one has regard for the
high levels of unemployment and poverty, the scourge of HIV/Aids, the high
levels of crime and corruption, the dysfunctional health and education
systems and poor service delivery to communities. In our view, the writing
is on the wall for the ANC. It has been weighed on the scales and found
wanting. It is time for a new government in South Africa.

I want to agree with the hon Komphela, who said prophetically that after
the elections the ANC would be occupying the seats on my left. What he did
not say was “as members of the opposition”. [Interjections.] And the
question is asked whether they will cope.

The ACDP calls on all political parties to prevail on their members and
supporters to be respectful and tolerant of all those who differ and
disagree with them. They must urge them to stop the name-calling, war talk
and the provocation of others. What is of particular concern is to see that
the majority party, which should be setting a good example for others to
follow, seems to be the common denominator whenever there are threats of
violence or disruptions of meetings.

I was shocked by reports in today’s papers about seven Cope members who
were injured when they were allegedly attacked by ANC members yesterday
while attending a meeting in Kou-Kamma in the Eastern Cape.
[Interjections.] Their chairman said: “They broke down the front gate of
the hall and entered carrying knobkerries, knives, iron pipes and sticks.”
“They then started beating our members with their weapons ...”, he said.
The seven injured people were taken to hospital for treatment.

Mr President, I want to appeal to you this afternoon to ensure that such
intolerance and barbaric acts do not continue, regardless of who the
instigator is. The robustness of our political engagement during this
season of campaigning should not be allowed to lead to violent
confrontations.

The ACDP is also concerned, Mr President, that you did not deal
sufficiently with major shortcomings in our education system; this,
particularly, in the light of the poor matriculation results in the first
year of the implementation of OBE at matriculation level. It is shocking
that certain results, as in Mpumalanga, are still not available, showing
gross inefficiency in the national and provincial education departments.

It is clear that our education system is in crisis and requires a complete
overhaul. There is, in particular, a dire need to depoliticise teaching as
a profession as, in our view, far too much time is spent by teachers on
political and trade union activities – time which could be better spent
teaching our children. There is also a clear need to return to value-based
education and to upgrade teachers’ levels of competency, particularly in
mathematics and science. The ACDP also supports calls for the
reintroduction of school inspectors to ensure quality education and
facilities.

The President’s concern about crime rings hollow in light of the fact that
the President himself signed into law the Bill disbanding the Scorpions.
This, notwithstanding the high success rate of the unit in fighting
organised crime and the public outrage at the decision to disband the unit,
which flies in the face of the Khampepe commission report. The
incorporation of the Scorpions into the SA Police Service will result in
the loss of many experienced special investigators who are not prepared to
work in the SAPS and who will be snapped up by the private sector. This
will negatively impact on the fight against organised crime in our country.
This ANC government must therefore be held responsible for the reckless
decision they made and, in our view, intended to protect high-ranking ANC
members.

Additionally, the President’s decision not to reinstate Adv Pikoli as head
of the National Prosecuting Authority is another blow in the fight against
organised crime. The Ginwala commission found that Adv Pikoli was a person
of “unimpeachable integrity” and that, notwithstanding certain adverse
findings, he should be reinstated as head of the NPA. While Parliament is
still deliberating the Pikoli issue, it is apparent that ANC MPs will most
likely rubber-stamp the President’s decision. And, as a result, the NPA
will lose its highly skilled and experienced national director. [Time
expired.]
Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, hon President and hon members, at the
time you, Mr President, ascended to the highest office of our land, there
was a feeling of uncertainty, a feeling of uneasiness, a feeling of doubt.
It seemed then that our country was going to face a difficult transition.
We needed stability, certainty, honesty, discipline and dignity. These
attributes you brought to the Presidency.

At that stage, Azapo called for a leadership that could make a distinction
between service to South Africa and service to our different political
interests. To this end, Azapo has promoted a slogan for the sake of our
country. Azapo felt, for the sake of our country, that we should build a
strong democracy based on respect for the rule of law, where all are equal
before the law without according anyone any favour. And now, for the sake
of our country, let there be no “no-go” areas during elections. For the
sake of our country, let there be tolerance of each other’s views and
opinions. For the sake of our country, let there be no disruption of
political rallies during the election and thereafter. For the sake of our
country, let us build a national consciousness geared at promoting
patriotism, love for the continent and humanity.

It is common knowledge that the judicial system we inherited from the
apartheid era was largely designed to further the interests of the
privileged and to the extent that ordinary South Africans, blacks in
particular, were part of this deceit. They were merely passive
participants. For this reason, the transformation of the judiciary, as well
as the criminal justice system, is of paramount importance. This should be
accelerated to get rid of racism and all impediments that make access to
justice a problem for the poor.

However, Azapo believes that transformation should not mean disregard for
the constitutional imperative of the judiciary, its independence and the
separation of powers. To Azapo a transformation process, particularly one
that is meant to get rid of the vestiges of apartheid, should seek to
dismantle power relations, practices and attitudes of the past, and not
seek to marginalise persons from the new society we seek to build. To this
end, Azapo believes that unless the transformation agenda is pursued
vigorously after the election, the poor will still be where they are today,
that is in informal settlements, in RDP houses that are either cracking or
falling apart, in places where there are only narrow streets to drive on,
in places that have no proper schooling for children, in places where the
bucket system of sanitation is still prevalent, on white farms where
evictions are a constant threat, or where a farmer can confiscate your ID
during elections so that you cannot exercise your democratic right. It is
Azapo’s belief that no nation can have pride and dignity whilst the
majority of its people live in squalid conditions. The black community has
endured decades of humiliation, inferiority and poverty. This must now come
to an end.

Mr President, you mentioned in your state of the nation address the
question of our economic growth that is not accompanied by jobs for our
people. You reminded me of what I said very long ago on 18 February 2003,
during a similar debate in this Chamber, and I quote myself:

  The growth of the economy in the various sectors mentioned in the address
  by the President is indeed an encouraging factor in so far as it
  strengthens economic fundamentals. However, this growth should at the
  same time, be accompanied by growth in jobs and in the standard of living
  of the poor. The extent to which this is not happening is a matter that
  Azapo believes should be attended to with speed.

[Laughter.] [Interjections.] [Applause.]

It has been almost 15 years since the coming into being of a new political
dispensation, and yet – and yet - housing developments have not taken a
nonracial basis. Blacks still receive their RDP houses in black residential
areas and whites still acquire their houses in white residential areas. Mr
President, if this pattern of housing is left unchecked, nonracialism and
national cohesion will remain a dream. We need a review of the land Act,
including the constitutional provisions that militate against the poor
having easy access to land. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, hon President, Madam Deputy
President, I think it is important that we inform the House that the
President leads a transparent government that does report regularly on the
progress it is making with respect to its programmes.

Therefore, any hon member who has a computer provided by this Parliament is
able to access the appropriate website and find out what progress has been
made in eradicating the bucket system, in building houses, and in providing
basic services. They would discover that the ANC is well on track. It is
hon members’ duty to do this kind of homework.

With respect to the matriculation results, every learner who wrote the
exams, the right subjects, has his or her assessment marks on their
school’s system; they would have had their results by Wednesday last week.
Those who do not have their results are those who are being investigated
because of irregularities, and they total 771 candidates. I hope that
answers that question.

One of the interesting features of the debate has been the selective and
self-serving interpretation by some hon members – not all – of the rights
and freedoms in our Constitution. They espouse the right to vote, but
freely voting to give a large majority to the ANC is considered
undemocratic. They espouse the right to free expression, a right held just
to criticise the ANC, to call the ANC names, to denigrate the ANC, but free
and open criticism of institutions of governance in the country is
considered undemocratic.

Where is it written that the judiciary is inviolate from public commentary?
Absolutely it must be respected, yes, there’s no doubt about that ...
[Applause.] ... but the notion that nothing at all can be said is
challenged by the right to free expression in our Constitution.

Prior to assuming this Office, our hon President made reference to the
matter of affirmative action. I think what he said has been somewhat
twisted for the purposes of political interest. One sees that in the debate
today.

The notion propounded by the hon Delport that those we appoint in Public
Service are unqualified for such office, is, in fact, not confirmed by
reality. I hope, hon President, that at some point you will clarify the
intent of affirmative action and ditch the notion that exists that no black
persons in South Africa ever made an effort to study, have no
qualifications, and thus do not merit appointment. They were denied
appointment whatever their ability or qualification. [Applause.]

Hon President, I was certainly very pleased that you paid a great deal of
attention to calling on all of us to build partnerships towards a better
life for all our people. You said we should mobilise our society for change
and mobilise all to build a better life.

The inclusion of all in the change agenda is, I believe, one of the most
critical challenges of every aspect of socioeconomic change in South
Africa. We have to find a mobilisation strategy or programme that will
convincingly persuade every person that, with government support and
assistance, they have a core and critical role to play in changing their
lives.
A society of engaged citizens creating the vista of development and
enterprise envisioned, Mr President, in your reference to former President
Mandela, cannot become a reality if we constrain the people of South Africa
by rendering them observers of life and opportunity, rather than working
with them to become full participants in building a new, thriving society
in which every person can make a difference.

The urgency of change, and motivated change, is most necessary in the
education sector. We must secure public collaboration for excellence far
more vigorously than we have done up to now. We must support all our people
to aspire to, to demand and, in fact, to expect excellence in all our
educational establishments.

The programme of change that we have developed as the ANC intends to give
greater practical meaning to the ideals of people’s education. Alongside
strategies directed at addressing the quality and provision of shortcomings
identified by the hon President, it is the ANC’s intention to work with
communities to ensure that they have the skills and information that will
allow them to make a direct contribution to educational change in their
local community.

One of the striking features of the ANC’s focus since December 2007 has
been the manner in which the leadership of the ANC has engaged in key
public debates on education. The focus on education and its identification
as a key priority for the next 10 years signifies a welcome shift in
emphasis.

The continuing inadequacies and failures in parts of the system require
urgent review and prioritisation of interventions that can and will make a
difference. I can report to the House that we do have the report on the
national evaluation unit that we intend to build as the evaluation unit for
South Africa. We will be working as government and as the ANC to ensure
that this independent office is put in place.

In his speech the President was succinct in outlining the successes in
education: the drop in the educator-learner ratio, as well as our almost
universal access in terms of enrolment at primary and secondary school
levels. And I would remind hon members that compulsory education is 10
years up to Grade 9, and therefore retention beyond Grade 9 is a very
welcome and positive development for South Africa. We need to look at
expanding it, but compulsory access is up to age 15, Grade 9, in South
Africa. Members should change that law perhaps.

We also have an improvement in the number of young people passing
mathematics. I will report on the expert panel’s report on the 2008 maths
examination later this week. Their findings and comments are most
encouraging.

We also have improved infrastructure in communities that never had good
infrastructure in the past. It is interesting to note that members of this
House who headed governments in semi-independent, or Bantustan states,
never built schools in their time, but come and talk of infrastructure
here. [Applause.]

I am told by all provincial departments of education that we no longer have
schools under trees in the country, and that provinces continue to build
schools and provide mobile facilities where there are shortages or
disasters.

You have outlined, Mr President, the future focus of education
interventions. These must be the retention of young people beyond the
compulsory phase of education in secondary schools and in tertiary
institutions; addressing the shortage of skills needed by society;
invigorated attention being paid to eroding the legacy of underperformance
in our poorer schools. Your conclusion therefore, Mr President, on your
education school report was clearly “could do much better”, especially in
terms of the challenge of breaking the cycle of poverty and inequality.

It is our aim to ensure that we tackle the inadequacies. National,
provincial and education levels must do more and better. We will also
address teacher capacity and development in the next five years.

We will do this through building alliances with all stakeholders and
experts in education to improve education together. This is because we have
no doubt in our minds that no Minister on his or her own will make a
difference. It is partnerships - working together - that will make head
against our challenges.

We will work with stakeholders to craft a national social compact for
quality education that will ensure action on the non-negotiables that we
elaborated on and agreed to at Polokwane. We will set key performance
targets for every category of stakeholder.

We are fortunate that our existing schools Act allows for such co-
operation. We will ensure we make partnerships that work for every school
and for every child. One of the areas of action has to be the increased
empowerment of school governing bodies and the provision of empowering
support for their representative national associations.

Fortunately, we have already mobilised for this collaboration through the
national teaching and learning campaign. Teacher unions, parents, learners
and government departments have all identified a set of agreed commitments
that each sector must live and work by.

If all of us give these commitments space to thrive, the changes we all
desire in education will develop at an accelerated pace. If teacher unions
act on their commitment to be in class on time, teaching, sober, not
abusive, knowledgeable and competent, we will see change.

If the Minister of Education and MECs avoid policy overload and work with
the system to make it more predictable and efficient, well-resourced and
granted space to innovate and focus on teaching, we will see change. If
civil servants execute their tasks with due attention to getting things
right and provide administration and service with integrity, we will see
change, and the ANC will see that this change occurs.

Working closely with all stakeholders, we have developed and adopted an
education road map. It focuses on what already exists and on how we can
make it work better. It does not radically transform or redesign the
system, because we don’t need a radical redesign. Rather, it indicates
where modification and review may benefit the sector. It seeks to close the
gap between what we aspire to and what actually happens in our education
system.

The road map focuses on improving the education system as a whole. It
focuses on expanding early childhood care and learning. It focuses on
eroding infrastructural backlogs, with an innovative plan proposed for
funding this. It focuses on training new and better teachers and retraining
old ones. It focuses on encouraging teachers to use textbooks, to be in
class on time and to spread the joy of teaching wherever they are.
It supports teachers to focus on the basics of learning through the
Foundations for Learning framework that provides guidelines and support to
teachers on how to teach reading, writing and numeracy in the early grades.
It is this road map - the ANC’s “better use of resources strategy” - that
indicates that better learning will result from investing more and earlier
in children and in teachers. This is not a mere belief as evidenced by the
increased resourcing for early childhood development in all education
provincial budgets.

On the subject of infrastructure, those who visit schools and who study
budgets and expenditure know that we are providing new and better schools
in our country. In 1998, we had R481 million available for school
infrastructure. In 2007-08, we had grown from that R481 million to R5,3
billion for schools, for education infrastructure. [Applause.]

In fact, in the four years since 2005, we have witnessed significantly
increased investment in education improvement. There are more and better
schools. The FET colleges’ recapitalisation programme has given new life to
these previously neglected institutions. The no-fee schools policy has
freed many families from the worry of financial exclusion. Also, the
reintroduction of teacher bursaries has renewed interest in the profession.


Clearly, though, there are many failings. I received the report last Friday
on the late release of 2008 results. It indicates some lack of competence,
inadequate preparation and poor administrative capacity in some of our
examination offices and in some of our school administrations of continual
assessment.

A number of recommendations have been made. We will correct all the
failings and I repeat here my apology to all candidates, their families and
friends who fell victim to our inadequacies. Much does remain to be done,
and we are ready as the ANC to redouble our efforts in order to ensure that
more occurs.

Our lessons from all research indicate that schools cannot improve on their
own. They must have appropriate support from parents, from the staff who
work within them, from the state and from their local communities.

There has been a great deal of criticism in the past few weeks of the new
curriculum. We have made changes, which members are clearly not aware of,
to the original framework introduced in 1998. We continue to work with
teachers and experts to improve the support we provide to schools.

We are working hard to address any concerns that exist. And, of course, the
National Curriculum Statement that we now have after many revisions is the
framework we utilise. Everybody who talks about the curriculum is talking
about the 1998 Curriculum 2005. Very few have studied the curriculum as it
exists today.
Fortunately, there are thousands of teachers who have taken the opportunity
to transform teaching and learning with vigour, determination and
enthusiasm. Our thanks go to each one of them for their service and
commitment.

In his contribution last Friday in the state of the nation address, our
President focused primarily on schools. This often happens because schools
loom large in our consciousness. But we should never forget colleges and
universities. We cannot forget that students can go to FET colleges for
free and acquire critical skills which are absolutely necessary to the
economy of this country.

Our policy of expanding access to studying at university level has been
successful in attracting first-generation black and female students into
higher education. Support has been provided to parents and families that
cannot afford university fees. Universities make their own bursaries
available to students and the state provides support through the National
Student Financial Aid Scheme.

In 2004, the scheme was allocated R578 million. In 2008, the allocation to
higher education was R1,3 billion. And, listen to this: a further R433
million was added from recovered funds in loans paid back by working
graduates. [Applause.] So in 2008, we had R1,8 billion available for
providing loans and grants to students in higher education. And this year,
we will have more than R2 billion available for such support. [Applause.]
In 2007, we began our support for teacher bursaries. We allocated R120
million for full bursaries for those who wished to become teachers in
critical-subject domains. In that year, we also began our bursary programme
for FET college bursaries and made a R100 million available to young people
to study for free at our FET colleges.

The total number of young people supported through these funds to date is
479 589. So, today, currently in South Africa, one in four undergraduate
students has a National Student Financial Aid Scheme loan and bursary.

Due to concerns that have been expressed about the scheme, we are reviewing
it to make sure that we do provide improved support to the talented young
people of our country. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Chairperson, Comrade President, Comrade Deputy
President, comrades, hon members, it is indeed an honour to participate in
this debate as a member of the ANC.

The January 8 Statement of 2009 said the following:

   We pay tribute to the millions of South Africans who continue daily to
   work towards the achievement of a better society and struggle tirelessly
   to overcome the devastating apartheid legacy.
   It is due to their efforts that we can now say with confidence that much
   has been done in addressing the legacy of apartheid over the last 15
   years and that much remains to be done.

We agree with you, Comrade President, where you said: “These South Africans
represent the hope and resilience that characterise our nation.” Clearly,
these and many other South Africans understand and agree with the ANC when
it says that “Working together, we can do more”.

Comrade President, we appreciate the fact that you have given an honest
assessment of the state of our country. But, more importantly, you have
given us hope for the future. Indeed, we agree with the President’s
message, when he draws on the wisdom of former President Mandela that: “In
times of tribulation we should not linger in despair, for our long walk is
not yet ended.”

Our people and many here in this House continue to recall the painful
legacy left us by the apartheid state, because many continue to live the
reality of this legacy in their daily lives. It is for this reason that as
the ANC, we adopted the Reconstruction and Development Programme in 1994;
as a vehicle to achieve the ideals of the Freedom Charter.

Today, 15 years onwards, we continue to make advancements in the
reconstruction and development of our society. And, unlike the 1994
reality, we stand better poised to achieve a better life for all our
people.

I am sure that the discourse around the adoption in 1994 of the RDP and the
building of a developmental state are still fresh in everyone’s mind. These
opinions continue trying to make us understand the pitfalls in the path
that we chose to make South Africa belong to all who live in it, black and
white, as promised in the Freedom Charter.

Yet, in all this, in the language that was being used, at the different
starting points, there was no mistaking the fact that there were
differences in concept and meaning in understanding the imperatives of our
times. Today, as we turn towards another decade of experiencing democracy,
those very differences continue to mar the discourse.

However, premised on the creation of a developmental state, we welcome
without a doubt an opportunity to make use of both intellectual and
political debates, to transcend convictions set on pessimism, despondency
or even ideology. For what we propose as the ANC is an instrument that
brought confidence in the world economy in the 1980s and 1990s.
Historically, the failure of the market forces in the late 1920s in the USA
led to a massive loss of jobs.

The period 1929 to 1933 witnessed some of the worst ravages of unregulated
market forces which had a severe impact on the lives of hundreds of
thousands of people. This led to the correct understanding that in order to
safeguard the socioeconomic conditions of the vulnerable in society, to
ensure sustained economic growth with development and redistribution, the
role of the state becomes central in shaping, regulating and directing the
economy. However, whilst there are numerous examples of developmental
states, not all have developed with the important ingredient of a social
compact.

The ANC, when talking about a developmental state joins together with this
the critical component - the social compact. The masses of our people are
the reason for the need for growth and development, and the programmes and
projects are structured to benefit them. This is carried out together with
the masses of our people, involving them in decision-making, getting
feedback and involving them in evaluating whether the programmes actually
have an impact on the quality of their lives.

Unlike in other countries where social contracts have been entered into,
which have inevitably broken up years later in acrimony and disrepute, a
social compact draws upon the very ethos of the Freedom Charter, that: “The
people shall govern.” To put into effect this clause means that we must
involve the people in their future and get ideas from them.
The ANC’s 2009 five-year manifesto holds as its central slogan “Together we
can to more.” This refers to the type of social compact we are trying to
develop. Equally, going forward over the next five years, the co-ordination
of state planning of the economy and governance will reflect the
characteristics of a developmental state.

The Joint Budget Committee has continually raised the need for improved
interdepartmental co-ordination, co-operation, planning and budgeting to
take place in its reports to this House. There is a need for all government
departments to work together so that they can do more.

The developmental state at a higher stage integrates the various components
of economic growth of the economy with the overall social and economic
development of its citizens, redistributing the economic wealth that is
created and ploughing this back into the economy through increased
infrastructure development, linked to increased job creation stimulation of
the domestic economy, linked to a social protection programme; it is this
that brings about social cohesion in society.

The immensity of the social and infrastructural challenges and backlogs we
have demand that we no longer simply debate what has to be done to rid our
people of poverty. Major public and private investments in public goods and
services have to be realised in order to increase the opportunities in the
economy and alleviate poverty. The state must have the capacity to direct
investments.

Effectively, this means that our service delivery must improve. More low-
income housing has to be provided in order to build the assets of families
and communities. We need cohesive and sustainable communities that have
adequate housing, water, transport, which are near to economic activities,
including sport and recreation facilities.

Based on the experience of 15 years of governing, we know that all these
objectives will never be met unless we have a developmental state. They
will never be met through an economy that, as in ignorance, grows
independently of the hardships of society. The instrument to make certain
that we do not live through such an experience is a developmental state.

Three major reviews that were concluded by the Presidency, beginning with
the 10-year Review “A Nation in the Making” and the 15-year Review, all
emphasised the point that the strides that had been made to date in
delivering these basic services and assets would not have been possible
were it not for the efforts of the state. However, we admit serious
backlogs do remain.

We should not pretend that the state has all the capacity it needs. The
roll-over of departmental budgets indicates that not all the necessary
capacity is in place. And here we need to place greater emphasis on filling
vacant posts with the correctly skilled staff.

The implications for the delivery of basic services are immense and
threaten the stability of our country. Reviews of the government’s
performance since 1994 by the SA Institute of Race Relations make that
clear. They record, for example, that better living conditions have
resulted due to a massive roll-out by government of low-income housing.
However, they note that even with this impressive performance, the demand
continues to outstrip the supply. And here I just want to indicate to those
who still complain about housing that, under the leadership of Minister
Sisulu in the last five years, we have made great strides in improving the
quality of housing.

We have moved away from simply building rows of houses to building
communities and new suburbs. I am absolutely convinced that under the ANC
in the coming five years, we will continue to even further improve on our
current housing delivery programme.

Surely, what we need is a collective discussion and mapping of a way in
which we have to resolve these lingering problems. Taking the cue from the
President last Friday, each one of us, as students, workers, sectoral and
racial groups fought apartheid together and achieved victory in 1994. He
specifically implored us to utilise the lessons we learned in the Doha
Round of Negotiations over trade, mentioning in this regard the value of
partnerships.

It, indeed, does seem to be an opportune time to rally everyone around the
idea of the developmental state. This includes opposition parties, both
inside and outside this House. The developmental state and the social
compact is a critical nexus which explains the relationship between the
masses of our people and how they relate to the state and how the state
carries out programmes and projects informed by this relationship.

The choice that the ANC has made, that our state should be a developmental
state, is one that is based upon both the historic analysis of
international socioeconomic relations and the analysis of the current
contradictions of the world economic order and its impact upon
socioeconomic relations.

Our vision as the ANC is a state based on the will of the people, in which
all, including business, strive towards a common and shared vision. The ANC
understanding of such a state is a state that is central to all state
organs, has the institutional capacity for government-wide economic
planning, with the necessary resources and authority to prepare and
implement long, short and medium-term economic and developmental planning.

In this regard, many commentators have equally acknowledged the
significance and practicality of ANC policies in addressing the needs of
the country. One would trust that members of the academia, media and
intellectuals in general would take the opportunity to help enrich these
views and shape the collective direction we are taking. The ANC would love
to have them take their place of being the guides and conscience of the
united and democratic South Africa we seek to build. That, after all, is
what we mean when we say “Working together, we can achieve more.”

We would like not to be abandoned when we have come this far collectively.
So, even when we disagree on certain issues, there is more common security
and comfort in staying the course and in working together. Together let us
build a better country and a better life for all our people in our
generation.

The demand we have for infrastructure and basic services is great.
Therefore, the notion that the role of the state in addressing these
backlogs should be reduced makes absolutely no sense at all.

The ANC has committed itself to making full use of available material and
human resources to grow the economy and create jobs so that the most
vulnerable in our country are cushioned from poverty and deprivation. In a
developmental state, we want to build a compassionate society in which all
South Africans, irrespective of different social and economic backgrounds,
identify with the particular hardships experienced by women, children, the
youth and people with disabilities.

As I come to a conclusion, personal experience in the ward in which I live,
Ward 100 in Johannesburg, a number of religious organisations, local
farmers and businesspeople have come together  to work with the local ward
councillor in identifying solutions to the challenges which are facing the
local community.

In one of the initiatives a group of 25 young people are being trained in
business practices. To date, 15 of these young people have been employed.
Further groups of young people are being trained.

A further initiative has seen a local landowner make some of his land
available for use as a community food garden. It is clear that these South
Africans understand and support the ANC when it says, “Working together, we
can do more.”

At a time when there is growing concern about the lack of vigorous civic
engagement, when consumerism is manufacturing, in subversive ways, a nation
of alienated and self-seeking individuals with very little regard for the
common good, we in the ANC recommit ourselves to building a community of
citizens passionate about their obligations to each other and the state,
and eager to fulfil the responsibilities of self-government and self-
ownership.
In conclusion, to all South Africans, we will shortly have an opportunity
to elect new public representatives and a new governing party which will,
of course, be the ANC. We have one of two choices: either we can choose to
go down the road of the unknown and follow the manifestos and policies of
parties which are untested and untried, or we can choose to allow the ANC
to continue to implement its tried-and-tested policies which have
significantly transformed our nation into a far better and improved country
than it was 15 years ago. [Applause.]

When I cast my vote for the ANC, I will have certainty of the direction in
which our country is being taken over the next five years. The ANC provides
this through its track record of improving the lives of millions of South
Africans throughout the country. Its manifesto clearly indicates what will
be done over the next five years. Together, let us all vote for the ANC so
that indeed we can do more. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, Ministers and
members, we are all witnessing a fresh change in our political environment,
which calls for some reflection on the past and for us to ask ourselves why
South Africans are taking charge to usher in a new political era.

On Friday the President spoke of the gracious contributions made by some
stalwarts of the liberation movement. We are grateful for their role in
South Africa’s political history. Yet we fail to understand fully the
demise of apartheid, if we believe that the struggle was only about
political liberation. The end of apartheid was also about restoring the
spirit and the soul of our nation.

In this respect, we also owe the achievements of our democracy to the role
of the church during the days of apartheid. Like the President, we would
like to call to mind South Africans from all walks of life, the ordinary as
well as the prominent, who dedicated life and limb to achieve a free and
just society.

We remember the role of the church during those years - how they allowed
the use of their pulpits to speak and pray for change in South Africa. The
church has played a prophetic role in our society. The Cottesloe
Consultation, the message of the people statement, the Belhar Confession,
the Kairos Document, and the Evangelical Witness are some of the essential
documents that united the church to speak out against the evils of
apartheid.

The FD, a member of the Christian Democratic Alliance, at this time wishes
to recognise the role of the church in helping to bring about a nonviolent
society and for its guidance in restoring values such as reconciliation,
compassion, peace and justice in our land.

In today’s society we live in an amoral morass. Our society seems to
function without a moral compass and, as a consequence, crime is ravaging
our nation and our neighbourhoods. Legalised abortion has killed hundreds
of thousands of innocent babies since government passed this law. It is
estimated that every 17 seconds a woman is raped in our country, which can
amount to an average of over 1 000 women raped per day.

We have legalised gambling. We have opened media channels and shop outlets
to sell obscene and violent material. In effect, government has had a hand
in creating a Sodom and Gomorrah, a very permissive society in which the
rule of law matters little and in which officials are corrupt, and
political favouritism is the order of the day.

I want to commend and concur with the hon Minister of Safety and Security -
I think it is one of the most important departments along with the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development – who said here that
they were looking at a new, modernised criminal justices system in which
there would be an enhanced level of integration between the Police, Justice
and Correctional Services.

He also spoke about increasing the capacity of detective services and of
taking a very strong stand about protecting unarmed and defenceless people
against violence. He also said that 16 days of activism will become 365
days of activism, and that he would make sure, with his department, to rid
our society of rapists.

Hon Minister, I want to commend you for those words. When I went to the
Eastern Cape on Saturday last weekend, this the headline caught my eye in
the Saturday’s Daily Dispatch: “Home of Horror”. This article is about four
thugs, armed with a gun, a spear and a knife, that broke into an orphanage,
assaulted a 57-year-old guardian and gang-raped a teenage girl - a helpless
girl in a home, in an orphanage, who needs to be protected by society. We
concur with the Minister that is the kind of violence, the kind of thing,
we have to really take on. And if that is your plan, Minister, to rid our
society of this kind of personality, then we in the FD will give you 100%
of our support.

The FD believes that we could have avoided most of the challenges we face
today had government based its laws on values respecting God and
recognising the limits of human power. Instead, government opted for a
secular, humanist society, which brings with it questionable levels of
accountable government.

Chairperson, my time has run out, so let me just say, in conclusion, the
time has come to usher in a new political era. The FD, a member of the
Christian Democratic Alliance, believes that it is time to restore moral
governance to our institutions and take more seriously the moral
regeneration of our nation. I thank you.

Mnu S J NJIKELANA: Sihlalo, Mongameli welizwe neSekela lakho, baPhathiswa
abahloniphekileyo, Malungu ePalamente, maqabane nezihlobo zonke, nani nonke
baseMzantsi Afrika, ikakhulu nina bakhandeke nguGawulayo, kude kwalapha
siphethene nalo mhlola kaGawulayo kunye nezifo ezalamana naye. Futhi uluntu
lwaseMzantsi lusebenzisana norhulumente wethu ukulwa esi sifo.

Okubukekayo kukuba ungquzalwano obe lukhona nobe lusenza idabi lethu
noGawulayo lube nyhengelele, luhlile ngoku. UGawulayo usababhuqa
abakwiminyaka esukela kumashumi amathathu ukuya kwengamashumi amane
ngaphandle komnyinyiva.
Ndingema nasenkundleni yamatyala ndilikhuphe litsole elokuba, apha eMzantsi
Afrika uninzi luyazi ukuba uGawulayo lo ungena njani emntwini, kwanokuba
inkqubo i-ABC - Abstain, Be Faithful, Condomise - yeyona iluncedo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S J NJIKELANA: Chairperson, President of our country, Deputy President,
hon Ministers, Members of Parliament, comrades and friends and all South
African citizens, especially those suffering from Aids, up to this point we
have been handling this mystery of Aids and opportunistic infections that
go with it. All South Africans, together with our government, are fighting
this disease.

Notably the conflict that existed and which had weakened our fight against
Aids, has been resolved. Aids is still infecting those between 30 and 40
years of age without abating.

I can even stand in a court of law and testify that the majority of South
Africans know how one gets infected with Aids and that the ABC programme -
Abstain, Be faithful, Condomise - is very effective.]

It is worth noting that government allocations from 2008 to 2011 for the
comprehensive HIV and Aids conditional grants, with the aim to expand
coverage of the comprehensive plan and strengthen prevention programmes,
are R350 million, R600 million and R1,2 billion respectively.

Our achievements in the battle against HIV and Aids speak for themselves,
because South Africa has one of the best plans to fight this pandemic, and
as such is recognised by the global community. This plan ensures that we
achieve the targets indicated by the Millennium Development Goals and begin
to reverse the spirit of Aids by 2015.
Eyona nto ke kufuneka siyenzile kukungena entsimini siqinise nangaphezu
kokuba sisenza ngoku. [The best thing we can do is to go into the field and
work even harder than we are working now.]

I can only say with pride that 90% of our health facilities are providing
voluntary counselling, testing and prevention of mother-to-child
transmission. Furthermore, all hospitals and 90% of primary health care
facilities also offer the Prevention of Mother-to-Child-Transmission
programme. The introduction of the dual antiretroviral therapy has also
assisted with our PMTCT programme.
ARVs have not yet reached all those in need. However, as a state that leads
a caring society, there is a full commitment thereto. However, I can
proudly say that currently there are over 690 000 patients being treated
with ARVs as the treatment programme continues to be rolled out.

In assisting with prevention, the condom distribution target has been
exceeded for both male and female, which was made possible through
partnership with community-based organisations. In this case, I would like
to hear anyone disputing the obvious, that together we have achieved so
much - a social phenomenon that could only have succeeded under the
leadership of the ANC.

Central to the primary health care strategy is a comprehensive approach to
health care. By the way, as we all know, the primary approach to health
care is made up of various components, namely promotion, prevention,
palliative and rehabilitative. These are components that find their
expression in the national strategic programme for HIV and Aids.

Distribution of nutrition supplements to 480 000 eligible people has also
focused on people living with HIV/Aids, tuberculosis and other debilitating
conditions. The provision of food parcels and establishing food gardens at
health facilities, schools and communities have been an ongoing practise
throughout the country.

Yinyaniso enganakuphikiswa ukuba akukwazi kufaka iyeza emlonyeni kungekho
nto esiswini. [It is an absolute truth that you cannot take medical
treatment without first eating.]

Food security is a major challenge with the current economic problems. Lest
we forget, scourges such as HIV and Aids have a devastating effect on the
poor, particularly the indigent.

Health sector interventions have included providing vitamin A
supplementation to children and mothers. By the end of March 2007, around
96% of children aged between 6 and 11 months and 60% of postpartum mothers
at health facilities received these supplements.

Two thousand and fifty-seven health professionals, doctors and nurses have
been trained in TB and HIV clinical management. Whilst the number may be
inadequate, this intervention is critical in addressing TB and HIV
comorbidity.

Kodwa masingawalibali amawaka-waka amavolontiya asebenza ubusuku nemini,
enceda iindwadunge ezidalwe nguGawulayo. Andazi nokuba ukhona osafuna
ubungqina bokuba, ngokubambisana singenza lukhulu.
Nina basebenza bahlale namavolontiya niyawazi umsebenzi wawo. Asazi nokuba
ke aba bakhe umkhanya, bayawazi na umsebenzi omhle kangaka. Umkhomba-ndlela
wona uthini? (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We must not forget the thousands of volunteers who work tirelessly day and
night helping those affected by Aids. I do not know if there is anyone who
still needs evidence that working together, we can achieve more. Those who
work and live with the volunteers know how hard they work. I do not know
whether those who are watching from a distance know about this great
service the volunteers are rendering. What is the way forward?]

Working together, we have to launch an aggressive prevention campaign to
reduce HIV infection by 50% and expand access to appropriate treatment,
care and support to at least 80% of all HIV-positive people and their
families ...

... phofu ndigqale kwaba basamana besithi imfazwe noGawulayo yimhemhe
karhulumente. Yeyona mpazamo inkulu leyo ngoba, abasebenzi abanesakhono
namava bayalishiya eli phakade, futhi umthwalo kurhulumente wokujongana
neembedlenge zikaGawulayo, uya ukhula. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[... focusing especially on those who always claim the fight against Aids
is the government’s sole responsibility. That is a grave mistake, because
workers with skills and experience die, leaving the government with an
increasing burden to support the destitute.]

The government is expected to allocate more resources to strengthening the
implementation of the national plan on HIV and Aids as well as sexually
transmitted infections.

Ndithi ke mna, makusetyenziswane ngabasebenzi, oosomashishini nemibutho
yasekuhlaleni, kuphunywe iphulo nengqina kuphakanyelwe uGawulayo nezihlobo
zakhe. Mandidomboze ke koosomashishini, iizinhanha nabafume ngolona hlobo,
kuba uGawulayo ungugqoloma obhubhisa kuvakale nalapha kuqoqosho lwelizwe.
Ukuba nabo ke abanakho ukubhinqa omfutshane, kwakonakala ukuhlala.

Andinakho ukuwalibala amagqirha nezanuse, nditsho bonke abantu bomlambo,
kuba balindeleke ukuba bafake isandla, futhi urhulumente we-ANC akanakuze
abafulathele kule ndima sikuyo ngoku. Masizikhwebule kumalinge okuvalela
ngaphandle imizamo eyeminye ezama ukudiliza lo Gawulayo. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I say workers, business and community groups must work together, organise
campaigns to fight Aids and opportunistic infections as a collective. I
must express gratitude to business and the wealthy because Aids is a
pandemic which manifests itself in all spheres, including the economy of
the country. If they are unwilling to help, there will be great damage.

I cannot forget the traditional healers, I mean all the chosen of the river
people, because they are also expected to contribute. The ANC-led
government cannot turn its back on them now. Let us refrain from excluding
other efforts in the fight against this pandemic.]

The forthcoming ANC-led government will have to improve the health profile
of the population and achieve the health-related Millennium Development
Goals.

Ngaphandle kwamathandabuzo, yonke indawo yempilo - nokuba yiklinikhi okanye
isibhedlele, nditsho nendawana yokuxilongela - mayibe yindawo yokunceda
abarhawulwe sesi sifo simasikizi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Without doubt, every health institution, be it a clinic or hospital - I
mean even a tiny consulting room – must be a place where those infected by
this terrible disease can get assistance.]

However, a word of warning: HIV and Aids cannot be effectively combated by
adequately distributing ARVs only, and the national strategic plan
expresses that unequivocally. We, therefore, have to ensure that government
continues and expands the nutrition programme. Good nutrition is critical
to fighting the side-effects of ARV treatment.

Interventions such as living positively, circles of support, the youth
campaign, our time, our choice and our future have been intensified in
taverns, bus and taxi ranks, as well as on major roads for truck drivers
and commercial sex workers.

Mandihlabe ikhwelo eluntwini, egameni likaKhongolose, ikakhulu kubazali,
kuba izifo ezidalwa zezesondo zingaphepheka ukuba singaqina ekufundiseni
ulutsha ngendlela yokuziphatha nyulu, okanye sixhathise ngenkqubo i-ABC.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Let me appeal to the community, on behalf of the ANC, especially to
parents, because sexually transmitted diseases can be prevented if we
resolve to teach the youth how to behave morally or reinforce the ABC
programme.]

Strengthening formal partnership against Aids, including Sanac and the
Southern African Development Community, have to be part of our agenda.
Historically, humanity has in the face of shock and awe eventually reversed
epidemics and pandemics. The ANC has the legacy, skill and experience to
join the world in the effort against HIV and Aids.

Lastly, the ANC, together with any government formed under its leadership,
has and always will provide leadership on socioeconomic challenges that
include the scourge of HIV and Aids and related STIs. Ndiyabulela. [I thank
you.] [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President and hon
members, the President came to this podium on Friday like many of his
predecessors, listing several challenges while renewing several promises
which have not been delivered on in the 15 years since the dawn of
democracy in South Africa.

After our first democratic elections in 1994, there was a feeling of great
optimism and hope. The spirits of the millions of South Africans who had
suffered under apartheid were lifted. These sentiments were further
enhanced by the promises made by our new leaders in government. After
nearly 15 years of ANC governance this optimism has waned.

In general, service delivery, in some instances, has been poor and, in
other cases, nonexistent. Great disparity still exists most notably between
the urban and rural areas, and corruption is rife. While the IFP does agree
that there have been achievements since 1994, there have also been glaring
failures, including the lack of success in dealing with crime, poverty
eradication, rural development and land reform, to name but a few. These
issues have been prominent on the agenda since 1994, and, despite their
best efforts, the current government seems to be at loss about how best to
deal with some of these critical challenges.

The IFP has always been a strong advocate for the devolution of power. We
believe that provinces and municipalities should be at the forefront of
service delivery. However, the performance of some provincial departments
and municipalities over the years has been dismal to say the least and the
people most in need of critical services have been let down.

Despite the best efforts of the national government, the promises made to
the electorate will never be met if the current culture of corruption and
self-enrichment continues. This practice is especially prominent at the
provincial and local levels. Some municipalities, such as Mbombela in
Nelspruit, have been totally ineffective and crippled by corruption. No
wonder, Mr President, that in certain areas, like Ntuzuma in Durban, people
today blockaded roads in protest against the lack of service delivery, not
that we condone this kind of action.

However, this seems to be a sign of the times, as in other parts of the
country similar protests have also been prominent, and in some areas
residents are even vowing not to vote in the upcoming elections.

Speaking about the province from where I hail, KwaZulu-Natal, the ANC-led
provincial government has not fulfilled their mandate and failed to deliver
to the people of the province. This province seems to be riddled with
corrupt and ineffective officials, resulting in service delivery failures
once again.

Public health has effectively collapsed. Durban’s King Edward VIII
Hospital, for example, had more than 20 operations cancelled last week in
the space of two days because of a lack of medical supplies. Surgeons did
not have basic supplies such as swabs, dressings and gauze. The department
has a budget overrun of R2 billion and has effectively frozen medical posts
despite staff shortages.

At the St Benedictine Hospital in Nongoma getting to see a doctor is like
winning the Lotto. There is a great shortage of doctors and medicines. As
if that were not enough, the MEC for health in the province, Ms Peggy
Nkonyeni, is out on bail for allegedly being involved with two other people
in the purchase of mammogram machines for an amount of R1,5 million each,
whereas these machines cost only R400 000. Mr President, Sir, is it any
wonder therefore that basic medical care is suffering due to what we call a
supposed shortage of funds? I am glad that the hon Minister of Health is
going to be following in this debate because I am sure that she might
respond to some of these issues.

While HIV and Aids is a disease that is infecting, inflicting and affecting
society in general, I think, Madam Minister, you need to prepare for
another disease that many people are getting in government, as officials,
and that disease is called arthritis. We have to find a cure for arthritis.
So many officials are taking backhanders that their hands have grown like
this now, because for every contract they want something put in their
hands. So we have to find the cure for arthritis and backhanders.

Ithala Bank, formerly known as the KwaZulu Finance Corporation and founded
by our leader Prince M G Buthelezi and the KwaZulu-Natal government,
provided finance to fund small business ventures, in particular for black
people, but has now being turned into a bank that benefits a few, including
the wives of MECs and other high-ranking officials. CEOs have changed many
times in the recent past. In a strange twist of events, last week, Mr
President, the head of the provincial treasury department in KwaZulu-Natal
was made head of the financial institution Ithala, whilst we understand
that an acting head of department has been appointed to the provincial
treasury department. Something is not right here, Mr President.

The people of KwaZulu-Natal are being short-changed and we want to say that
the IFP is ready to provide sound governance once again in the province.
[Interjections.] The people of KwaZulu-Natal are waiting in anticipation,
Mr President, for you to announce the election date as they cannot wait any
longer to vote the IFP back into government.

I want to turn to land reform, something that the hon President mentioned
yesterday. We accept that there has been some progress in restoring land to
those who have been deprived of it, but it is unacceptable that, whilst the
cut-off date for claims was 31 December 1998, 11 years ago, there are still
hundreds of claims not yet gazetted. Issues of land are very emotive and
the slow progress thus far is causing much distress and unnecessarily
fuelling tensions. Why has it taken over 10 years for this process to be
realised? A policy should, as far as possible, be developed in a manner, Mr
President, that builds common purpose rather than provokes division. We
should be searching for common solutions.

In conclusion, while we might have progressive legislation and policies,
the inability in certain instances for administration to effectively
deliver renders these policies ineffective. In the run-up to the elections,
voters are promised and we are wary that these will once again remain fine
words on billboards and glossy paper and not translate into tangible
delivery. Mr President, there is the saying that we can fool some of the
people some of the time, but we can’t fool all the people all the time.

Finally, hon President of our country and deputy president of the ANC, we
young members in the IFP - and I include myself in this group - have been
nurtured to appreciate the role and wisdom of elders in our society in the
spirit of ubuntu-botho. However, Sir, some of the utterances made by the
president of the ANC Youth League smack of total disrespect and utter
arrogance. Nobody must tell us as the IFP, Sir, who our leader should be.
We are more than capable of choosing our own leader, and that leader is the
hon Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi. I thank you. [Applause.]
The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Mr Chair, Mr President, Madam Deputy President, I
think in terms of elections I would like to make a proposal. Every member
of the IFP who appears on the election list will be tested for arthritis,
and if they test positive they will be excluded from the election list.
[Interjections.] I can see great enthusiasm, so we are going to have long
queues of people testing for arthritis and then we will see how many
backhanded people there are within the IFP ranks as well. [Interjections.]

On a most sober note, many people have referred to the distressing
conditions in which many of our health care workers have to perform their
tasks. As a Minister, and as a Ministry, it is very disturbing when, on a
daily basis, you get letters of pleas and desperation. Let me read to you
just one such letter. It comes from the head of a paediatric unit in a very
large hospital in a province of ours, and it goes:

  Dear Minister Hogan


  It is out of sheer frustration and absolute desperation that I write this
  letter to you. I am head of the paediatric unit at this hospital. Ours is
  an extremely busy unit, despite functioning only at a district level of
  care. At present, we have a few vacant entry-level medical officer posts.

  At the end of this year, we will be losing four doctors - one of our
  doctors will be going to work abroad - and as a result of the moratorium
  that was placed on the appointment of new employees on 13 June this year,
  we are unable to advertise the posts that will be vacated at the end of
  the year, let alone the posts that are presently vacant. Our human
  resources department has sent motivation after motivation to the district
  and head offices, yet these posts remain frozen.


  Our human resources department and senior management have tried so hard
  and continue to do so, but it appears that we are asking for the
  impossible.
And then he asks the question:

  Does anyone realise the enormity of the crisis that is looming ahead in
  January? We will not have enough doctors to maintain the workload, and
  there is going to be a total collapse in service delivery.

Now, this is the kind of letter that we receive. I want to pay tribute to
these people who have chosen to remain in the system, under extremely
difficult circumstances, and soldier on and continue to fight the good
fight.

I want to pay tribute too to the 60 000 community-based health care workers
who, every day, with very little compensation, go out and care for our
people in the communities; who look after people who are desperately ill
... [Applause.] ... who themselves suffer enormous depression about having
to face the scale of the problems that we face in this country.

I also want to pay tribute to the nurses who are the backbone of our health
system, who, despite low wages, despite lack of recognition, continue to
work in primary health care districts in our hospitals with vigilance, with
strength, with courage. Because what we are facing here is no simple crisis
- just a matter of mismanagement, or backhanders, or corruption. What we
are facing is unprecedented in most countries. We have one of the highest
HIV/Aids prevalence rates in the world. We have one of the highest TB
prevalence rates in the world.

We came to government in 1994 when there was hardly a primary health care
clinic in black communities. And so at that very moment when we were poised
to roll out health care to the majority of our people, we were hit by a
burden of disease that none of us anticipated. Perhaps we did not respond
fast enough, but I defy any country to respond to the scale of the burden
of disease which we are battling at the moment.

So we have certain things that we do announce and state with triumph. In
the face of toned-down government spending - in those early years when
fiscal prudence and austerity were the name of the game and we all
encouraged it - we have still been able to roll out over 1 800 clinics and
community centres since 1994. This means that 95% of our people are able to
reach a clinic within a 5-kilometre radius. That is extraordinary.
[Applause.]

It has enabled us to double our head-count usage of primary health care
from 67 million visits in 1998, to more than 101 million this year. People
are using our facilities. The hospital revitalisation programme has seen
eight new hospitals being built since its inception a couple of years ago,
and about 33 projects are currently running on site.

We are improving nurses’ salaries. We have started with a process and at
this stage we are now seeing, despite the teething problems, a welcome
return of nurses to the nursing profession. [Applause.] They recognise that
they are being recognised.

Let us not forget the huge battles and the courageous battles that this
government undertook in the early 2000s against pharmaceutical companies
and the price of medicines. Let us not forget the battles that were
undertaken in the United States and in this country alone. We have been
able, through those battles, to reduce the price of medicines by 30% in the
past five years - a considerable achievement. [Applause.]

We have also had a number of successes in other diseases in this country.
We were declared a polio-free country a little while ago. We have reduced
the incidence of malaria significantly, and in the past year, once the head
count is in, we will see how significant that reduction has been. We are
battling the TB epidemic, and we are fighting it with every ounce of
strength we have. We have TB tracer teams throughout the country, and we
are hoping and we are confident that we are going to record an even greater
increase in success than we recorded in previous years.

We can go on about on some of the achievements that we have achieved, at
great cost and dedication. But let me say that there are real issues that
we do have to confront. This isn’t something that we are saying we just
have to live with.

In the past two years, particularly in the past 18 months, it is on record
that every provincial health department in our country has been
overspending significantly. We can play political games with that, we can
point at MECs, we can do what we like, but the reality is that every
provincial department of health is facing significant spending pressures.

We know that some of this is related to HIV and Aids and the roll-out, and
we are proud of the fact that we have over 700 000 people on
antiretrovirals, which exceeds the target that we had set for this year.
But what is it that is driving up the cost of health? What is it that is
forcing a head of a department of a major hospital - this paediatrician is
head of a unit - to declare a moratorium on employing new people? What is
it that is forcing, as has been pointed out, limitations on stocks in
hospitals so that we are running out of basics? What are those cost
drivers?

We are unable to say at this moment exactly what they are, but on the part
of the national Department of Health we have assembled a team of over 15
people, under the leadership of an ex-deputy Auditor-General, with the
consent of all our MECs and our health departments which we reached at our
National Health Council meeting last week.

They are going out into each and every province. They are going to be
sitting with CFOs, with heads of departments. They are going to be speaking
to auditors, they are going to be speaking to the Accountant-General and
they are going to discover for us and bring to us what they believe are the
chief cost drivers in health at the moment. [Applause.]

We cannot go forward with budgeting until we know what these cost drivers
are. We anticipate that some of them are the fact that we have had extremes
in inflation in this country, as we have had worldwide, and these have
particular implications for health products in South Africa. We are
awaiting the report of these teams urgently, because only once we start to
understand what the cost drivers are, are we going to understand how we
budget better.

Alongside that, we are drawing up and finalising our human resource
policies for health. In other words, we are saying, these are the numbers
of people we need if we are going to have to produce. So, the whole aim at
this moment in time is to improve our planning and budgeting capacities, so
that we do not have these fateful stock-outs.

But we would be misguided to believe that this is only a budgeting and
managerial solution. We have to look at innovative solutions as well within
our health care sector. We have already - and I have spoken to these
matters - a whole range of other initiatives which we have in place, which
we want to roll out within the next couple of months.

Very critical to all of this is an understanding that our National
Treasury, our provincial treasuries and our departments of health need to
be speaking to one another. Too often we find people dumping and saying,
“This is Treasury's fault”, or Treasury saying, “This is Health's fault. We
can no longer afford those budgeting games. We are going to be speaking
with one voice in addressing these issues.

National health insurance must become a very important debate in our
country. We are aware that in the private sector more money is expended on
fewer people than there is in the public sector. The public sector is left
to handle more people with fewer resources than in the private sector. This
does not mean to say that we are now going to attack the private sector,
take away funding from it. But every country in the world generally,
developed countries, has moved to national health insurance.

We cannot look just simply at revenues gained from the National Treasury to
fund health alone. We have to look at a particular form of national health
insurance to see how we can increase the envelope for funding health. That
will be the subject, Mr President, of a long conversation in our country;
it is not going to be something that we are just simply going to impose.
The rationale for national health insurance could surely never be more
persuasively argued than now, when we face the critical funding shortages
that we have here?

So we look forward to that debate. We look forward to engaging. We look
forward to the private sector, who has been meeting with us on a regular
basis now, to explain ways in which it can assist us to achieve the targets
that we want.

Finally, we want to thank the many people who have been engaged in
litigation against us in the national Department of Health, such as the
dispensing doctors, the pharmacists, for their decision to withdraw
litigation. We are now engaging to get an interim agreement with them, so
that we do not need to be involved anymore. That is the spirit of co-
operation we want from our country; that is the spirit that we need from
all and sundry in the health sector. [Applause.]

So, Mr President, the health sector is facing significant challenges, but,
as I have said before, I am so impressed with the level of dedication, the
spirit of co-operativeness and the spirit of innovation in this country
that I am certain that we will be able to make significant differences to
our health care. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, hon President, Deputy President, Ministers and
colleagues, on Friday I listened to one of the narrowest, most Africanist
and egotistical state of the nation speeches since being in Parliament.
[Interjections.] It, however, does not come as a surprise, because it comes
from a party that promotes racially oriented policy.

The ANC government defends its racially based policy with the same
intensity and aggression as the old national government did for so long.
The hon President’s claim that: “Our democracy is healthy ... it is
steadily growing stronger”, is nothing but a myth, given the consistent
interference and threats that the independence of the three spheres of
government have to endure. This results in the illusion ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Simmons ... What is it, hon
Minister? Why are you standing up?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: I just want to find out if it is parliamentary for
the hon member to blatantly distort facts.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We will come to that point.
Continue, hon Simmons.

Mr S SIMMONS: This results in the illusion, for instance, that the hon
President refers to the government’s pride in having changed the
demographic composition of the Public Service which in virtually all
respects approximates the character of our society. This, read together
with the hon President’s statement that the implementation of affirmative
action must be accelerated and that it is not in pursuit of a racial
agenda, is clearly an example of delusion.

It has to be a racial agenda when the Minister approves legislation that
requires employers to employ two Africans for every coloured or Indian. The
same Minister gets away with blatant racist comments when he says: “This
thing about coloureds is your problem and not ours.” This makes the hon
President and his predecessor presidents of a racist Minister and
government.

The hon President should consider why the Western Cape is rapidly slipping
further away from the ANC. Mr President, the ANC is openly making coloured
people subservient to Africans with its regulation of two Africans for
every coloured in the workplace, when it was coloured students that stood
up in solidarity on 17 June 1976, when it was coloured students that
marched in the 1980s to make the University of the Western Cape an open
university - a people’s university. Clearly, coloured people do not enjoy
the same degree of solidarity from their black brothers, despite having
laid down their lives fighting for freedom.

The ANC should be exposed for the racist party it is when its constitution
states, in 2.1:

   The aims and the objectives of the ANC are to:

      Unite all South Africans, Africans in particular ...

This makes the ANC a party whose priority lies with a particular race
group. Its claim of being a nonracial party is a lie. In the same way the
1948 National Party used and abused the coloured vote to promote its
disguised racial agenda, the ANC has clearly occupied itself with a
subterfuge agenda.

If the ANC does not care about the coloured people, I want to categorically
state that the NA cares about the coloured people.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Simmons, just a minute. There is
a point of order.

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you very much, Chair. I think that the Minister of
Housing has posed a question ... a point of order. I think that you must
rule on that point of order because he’s continuing to tell lies.
[Interjections.] Could you please take ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Bloem. Will you take
your seat. In a debate, expressions do get made, and I think this was an
opinion on his side because he quoted the President correctly, and after
the quote he said “in his own opinion” it’s mythical. I think that is a
debatable issue, so we will leave this as an opinion of his because he did
not distort anybody’s statement. So we will leave this as just an opinion
being expressed in a debate. Whatever he has been doing and saying, it’s
parliamentary. [Interjections.] Thank you.

Mr S SIMMONS: The NA ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, please! Let the speaker
conclude. No, no, you continue, hon Simmons.

Mr S SIMMONS: Thank you, Chair. In this coming election the NA will base
its campaign on the constitutional principle of freedom of association, in
order to ensure that coloured people and other people enjoy the same labour
and other rights as the rest of the population. I thank you.
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, President of the Republic of
South Africa, hon Deputy President, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
Members of Parliament, colleagues and friends, allow me to extend to you,
Mr President, our congratulations and gratitude on your state of the nation
address, that you delivered in this House last Friday. I add my voice to
that of many other hon members who described your address as an important
message of hope to our people in the face of the difficult period they are
experiencing as the result of the ongoing global economic meltdown.

Allow me, Mr President, to thank the Chief Whip for giving me this
opportunity to address Parliament this afternoon. You may have noted that I
was not on the speakers’ list. I feel that it’s necessary to use this
opportunity of today’s debate to make an announcement to all South Africans
regarding the decision by the government of the United Kingdom to impose a
visa requirement on South African travellers intending to visit that
country.

I received formal communication from the UK government today, dated 6
February 2008, informing me that after the conclusion of the visa waiver
test, they have now decided to introduce a visa requirement for South
African citizens. This decision, together with other countries affected by
this, will be announced in the House of Commons this afternoon. According
to this communication, the British government took this decision based on
its concern regarding the ease with which non-South Africans can acquire
genuine South African travel documents from the proper issuing authority
and use them to travel to the United Kingdom.

This decision to introduce visas is open to ongoing review. The South
African government has accepted this decision and respects the prerogative
of the UK government to take such a sovereign decision.

Mr M WATERS: What an indictment!

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: We have undertaken to continue current
engagements aimed at resolving some of the concerns that have been advanced
by them in this regard, and the South African government will continue to
discuss this matter with the British government through existing bilateral
mechanisms between the two governments.

It is an indictment. Yes, you are right. I think all of us, if we are
responsible enough, should take the responsibility for that.
[Interjections.]

I just want to say to Mr ... oops. I see Mr “Oops” has gone. I think that
it is incorrect to whip up the emotions of the coloured voters in the
Western Cape. We should find better platforms, better ways of attracting
voters to vote for our parties. On this day and time in South Africa that
is what this is, an indictment, to actually use race to whip up people’s
emotions. I think we should not take advantage of the people’s
vulnerability. I think it is incorrect to do that. [Applause.]

I want to conclude by saying that it is also not correct to keep on making
reference to parties and people being racist when you have not been
introspective, looked at yourself in the mirror and seen how racist you can
be. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Speaker, a party leader on the campaign trail can be
forgiven for occasionally glossing over the less convenient aspects of his
government’s record. But it ill behoves a President addressing the citizens
of his country to lurk behind obfuscation and omission, for it is not
enough to consider that there are problems without properly measuring the
scale of those problems and responding to them accordingly.

You cannot preach against corruption and claim credit for detecting and
punishing it, when your government and its ANC predecessors have
perpetrated one of the greatest cover-ups of all time and disbanded the
country’s leading corruption-fighting agency. A stand against corruption is
a stand taken on indivisible principle, or it is no stand at all. One
cannot be opposed to 70% of it and think that that makes you its enemy. The
ANC is corruption’s friend. That is the truth, period.
You can also not glory in the expansion of the social wage when you have
failed to create an opportunity for our citizens to earn a wage of their
own. Indeed, we are in danger of becoming a nation of welfare dependants
without the skills or opportunity to take control of their own destiny. So,
for example, we extend the child grant to indigent parents in an effort to
keep bread on the table, and it is right that we do because no child should
ever go hungry. But we fail to provide those same children with an
education that empowers them to put bread on their own tables one day.

You cannot claim credit for the strength of our constitutional structures
when your own party has been the source of every assault on those very
structures. You cannot praise yourself for representivity in the Public
Service when the Public Service is incapable of living up to the meaning of
its own name.

You cannot claim to be the custodian of sound fiscal and monetary policies
when your party has been taken hostage by communist revanchists and
populists of all stripes, who rail on publicly against the inevitable
collapse of the very economic system you claim to support.

You cannot claim to stand for freedom when you confuse it with the
communist oppression and exploitation visited on the people of Cuba these
past 50 years. You cannot claim credit for a foreign policy towards
Zimbabwe premised on callous indifference towards the misery of its people
and that has produced, finally, a government that may be inclusive but is
by no means democratically elected.

And so, as election speeches go, the President’s address was not
particularly convincing, but to be fair this is not entirely the
President’s fault. He is, after all, not his party’s chief campaigner or
its presidential candidate. He is - as he himself conceded - a by-product
of the ANC’s culture of vicious internal combat.

That party remains hellbent on discrediting our country by running Mr Zuma
for President. And that unhappy fact by itself makes a mockery of the claim
that the state of our nation is good. The trouble with Mr Zuma is that he
is less a leader than he is a cipher of a certain kind of discontent inside
the ANC or for the ambitions of a dangerous and corrupt clique. The fact of
the matter is that the ANC can go on to its heart’s content about the
developmental state, but at the end of the day a state has to be paid for.
What we don’t know about the ANC – as we see it before us today and in its
manifesto – is who is going to pay for the developmental state. Are we
going to run a deficit over 3% and borrow the money? Are we going to drive
up tax?

It’s hard to know whether the ANC that presents itself to the electorate in
this election is the ANC of Trevor Manuel or the ANC of Jeremy Cronin, or –
God help us all – the ANC of Blade Nzimande. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] I
would very much like to know from the hon Cronin, who now has something to
rebut, how he intends to answer those questions and which ANC he represents
and which ANC, actually, is going to present itself at the polls later on
this year.

Let me use my final minute to say something else. I would like to take this
opportunity to wish well those of my colleagues who are retiring and I’m
sure they will forgive me if I single out for a moment Tony Leon, also
known as the hon A J Leon. He used to like to quote a colleague of his from
the city council in Johannesburg who used to say that the West Park
Cemetery was full of indispensable people. I suppose that is true; none of
us is indispensable. But the truth of the matter is that he came as close
as one can come to being indispensable in the creation of the legitimacy
and credibility of an opposition – a critical opposition – in South Africa
that is loyal to the constitutional order. [Interjections.] That is his
singular achievement, and it’s an achievement that history will record. And
while opposition may not always be comfortable, it is ultimately what makes
us a democracy. Majorities don’t make democracies, minorities do. That is
the legacy of Tony Leon and I would like to salute him for that. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Speaker, Comrade President, Comrade Deputy President,
Ministers, comrades, colleagues and colleagues, hon members, I would like
to begin, Comrade Kgalema Motlanthe, by thanking you for your thoughtful,
sober and inspiring state of the nation address. [Applause.] They say you
are a caretaker. I am a sweeper. And they are both honourable professions -
the real ones.

In the weeks and days before your state of the nation address last Friday,
we were asked to believe by the media that you would be looking over your
left shoulder, your right shoulder and several other shoulders, so much so
that you would not be able to say very much at all, that you would avoid
saying anything. I think that the wonderful, motivating, inspiring, but
honest - this was also important - state of the nation address you
delivered on Friday confounded even the most hard-bitten sceptics.
[Applause.] I think we are all proud of you, certainly as ANC members - one
ANC and not several ANCs, hon Coetzee.

I am in a difficult position. I am supposed to be sweeping. But there is
actually very little to sweep, if the truth be told, because the nonevent
has been the responses and attempted responses from this side of the House.
[Interjections.]

I was listening very intently. We listened to very inspiring farewell
speeches from those who are going. We listened to other speeches from those
who are also going, but don’t realise that they were delivering farewell
speeches. [Laughter.] [Applause.] I could spend some time, as the Minister
of Home Affairs has already done, dealing with the most disgraceful form of
ethnic mobilisation – an attempt to do that - from someone who didn’t
realise he was giving a farewell speech, but was.

But, I think, to do that would be to waste our time. I mean, Africa is
littered with examples of this kind of ethnic mobilisation. Fortunately, in
our country, we have built the beginnings of a nonracial society.
Fortunately, that kind of disgraceful display does not cut any ice amongst
the great majority of South Africans. We are fortunate in that respect,
although we need to be vigilant and make sure that we don’t allow that to
happen. But I don’t want to spend time on that kind of nonsense.

Generally, and interestingly, a great deal of the media that were
predicting a nonevent acknowledged that this was actually an important
state of the nation address and a significant one. Not all of them did
that. Needless to say, that degree of generosity, and the concession that
they had underestimated what would be forthcoming, was not to be found.

Immediately after your speech on South African TV, someone who was
identified by South African TV as Helen Zille - I sometimes have difficulty
now in recognising her with all the makeovers and rebrandings that are
happening ... [Laughter.] ... described your speech, Comrade President, as
vacuous. She said we were given a history lesson, and she sort of lifted up
her nose at this. She said in her madamish tones: “We were given an
inventory of failures, but we know what those failures are.” And then she
said: “... and then we were given a wish list”.

Let us take this troika of lamentation so typical of what we hear from
certain quotas that are smug in their conservatism and in their privilege.
[Interjections.] We have here an unwanted history lesson, an inventory of
failings and challenges which we know all about, and allegations of a wish
list. Let us take each one of those in turn.

This ANC and this government make no apology for seeking to articulate the
wishes and aspirations of the great majority of South Africans. [Applause.]
Those with accumulated resources and privileges never want the working
class and the poor to imagine that things could be fundamentally different
- that a better world and a better country are both imaginable and
possible. Hope is a mobiliser; despondency is a demobiliser.

If you fear the majority of people, then despondency will be the name of
your game. That is why conservative forces everywhere around the world
constantly pour cold water over the legitimate aspirations of ordinary
people. [Applause.] That is why back in 1994, when the RDP said they would
build one million subsidised houses for the poor, we were told “wish list”
by those, of course, who were living in houses and many of them in
mansions.

In 1994, when we said in the RDP that we were committed to providing access
to running water to poor households, those with jacuzzis in their houses
told us it was economic populism. In 1994, when we said workers and the
poor should have access to electricity, we were told it was ultra-leftism,
Marxism, wish lists and so forth. They scoffed. We said that we had to
dramatically expand our social security list, and again came the chorus:
Wish list; wish list; wish list.

But today – real numbers - 3,1 million subsidised homes have been built ...
[Applause.] ... 12,5 people receive social grants compared to 3 million in
1996; 88% of households have access to potable water - that should be 100%,
and that is what we are working towards, but the wish list is beginning to
be translated into reality – 80% of homes have electricity. [Applause.] The
wish lists of ordinary South Africans are becoming a reality.

Of course, we are all too aware that much still needs to be done. We
cannot, as you said, Comrade President, just satisfy ourselves with
throwing around figures and quantitative changes. What is the quality of
the homes we build? They are often not good. What is the quality of the
services we have increased? They are often not satisfactory. We concede, as
Minister Hogan so eloquently conceded a short while ago, that there are
areas where progress has been frustratingly slow, where errors have been
made by us. We admit them. There are areas where policies require review or
where there is a lack of sufficient skill or determination to carry through
implementation.

This brings me to Mayor Zille’s second lamentation. She said that you
provided us with a list with failures, but we know all about them. At least
she admitted that you were conceding that there were difficulties and
challenges. But wouldn’t it be refreshing if the DA also came forward
sometimes with the same degree of self-reflection and self-criticism - the
same spirit? We never see it and we never hear it.

I haven’t been in Parliament as long as the hon Tony Leon. I have been here
for 10 years and he has been here for 20 years. I was not in the tricameral
Parliament. But for the past decade that I have been here, year in and year
out in Budget debates I have heard the DA, for instance, calling for the
scrapping of exchange controls and for the deregulation of markets.

Yet, now even they are admitting that the residual exchange controls we
still have and the credit regulations we battled to implement to make sure
that the financial markets were not behaving like they were in the United
States have been absolutely critical in ensuring that our financial sector
in this country is at least somewhat protected against the huge waves of
tsunamis. [Applause.]

Wouldn’t it be nice if the DA could admit - just quietly, like Minister
Hogan, like President Comrade Kgalema – “Yes, there have been some
problems”; “Yes, we have made mistakes”. We never hear it from you. I think
we should have an economic truth and reconciliation commission.
[Interjections.] Let’s have some reconciliation, but let’s have some truth-
telling first before we get to reconciliation. They want to be part of
discussions and debates. But a condition for that is a degree of honesty
about things we have been wrong about and things we have been right about.
If we were to move forward, then let us have some truth-telling.

No wonder the hon Leon thinks what we have is an international credit
crisis. He’s read Rosa Luxemburg, but he’s read one paragraph. If he had
read some more paragraphs from that wonderful Marxist Rosa Luxemburg, he
might have understood the kind of global economic crisis we have, which is
all-round and systemic. It is not just a credit crisis. She predicted it in
1917, and it came about in 1929, as she had predicted. In the 1930s, it
came back again in the same massive problem. But, don’t worry. That is why
he also gives us lectures about not moving to protectionism. Well, tell
that to the United States, tell that to the Europeans, tell that to the
United Kingdom. You tell us: disarm ourselves, while they proceed to do
whatever they want. Well they are entitled to their errors, of course, and
to their confusions. We are living in a free country, and people are
entitled or free to be confused if they want to be.

But let me correct that statement. We are actually not living in a free
country; we are living in a liberated country. There is a big difference
between a free country and a liberated country. Freedom in South Africa did
not come for free, which brings me to the next point which Helen Zille
raised: “We don’t need history lessons”, she says. [Interjections.] The
rest of you are not going to be here so that is why I am talking to the
leader of your party; because the rest of you are saying goodbye.

This brings me to this third issue: “We don’t need history lessons.” What
is it about history that parties like the DA fear and want to suppress?
Comrade President, you spoke generously about the late Helen Suzman, and I
think that was appropriate. You said she represented the values of this
Parliament in the Chambers of the previous parliament. I think that was a
generous comment, but an appropriate one to an outstanding South African.
We have no doubt about that. But Helen Suzman was also honest, and she
wouldn’t want us to be dishonest about what she stood for. The party she
represented in the previous Chambers of the previous parliament believed
that the majority of South Africans were not yet ready for the vote, which
is why they argued for a qualified franchise. Is this part of the history
that you don’t want us to remember? [Interjections.] Yes, that is the old
policy. Now you have moved along and now you are more sophisticated. You
don’t say that people can’t have the vote, but you say, “Let’s still
qualify the democracy we have.” You say, “Let’s have affirmation but not
affirmative action.” What is that? It is the same habits of limitation of
democracy, of nonracialism, of nonsexism and of building unity in South
Africa. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

Mr J P CRONIN: Let’s move along. Comrades, let’s move along. I don’t want
to focus this speech. Let us also talk about our history as the ANC.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! I can’t even follow.

Mr J P CRONIN: It’s fine. There is a rural town in central Tanzania and it
is called Morogoro. I have never been to Morogoro. [Interjections.] For me
and many tens of thousands of South Africans, particularly of my
generation, Morogoro is a legendary name. In the mid-1960s the ANC had
suffered a devastating strategic defeat. Our structures were smashed. Our
leadership and our activists were imprisoned. Others were killed or
horribly maimed in torture chambers, and some were executed on the gallows.
Others were banished to remote parts of our country and many thousands were
in exile. [Interjections.]

As we were to admit, in this period of the mid and late 1960s, as we looked
back, we had made mistakes. We had allowed the rapid decolonisation that
was beginning to happen in the late 1950s and early 1960s in other parts of
Africa to delude us into thinking that our own anticolonial struggle
against white minority rule would be relatively short. We underestimated
the obduracy and the barbarism of the apartheid regime.

For its part – now we are talking about the mid-1960s and late 1960s – the
apartheid regime was convinced that it had finally smashed the ANC once and
forever, that it had smashed the progressive trade union movement once and
forever. Foreign investors were very impressed and they poured into
apartheid South Africa after 1963, as they were pouring into Brazil then
under military dictatorship from 1965. In the early 1970s the US
administration developed a Southern African scenario - perspective - in
which it famously declared that the colonial and white minority regimes in
Mozambique, in Angola, in what was then Rhodesia, in what was then South
West Africa and South Africa were, as it said, “here to stay” and should be
engaged with constructively. That was the early 1970s.

In the late 1960s the ANC sought to rekindle some degree of organisation
and struggle, and despite heroic endeavours these attempts were generally
snuffed out quite quickly. Thousands of comrades in exile, who had left,
expecting to return again to their homes and to their country, found
themselves scattered, blocked, unable to return and in distant places.
There were inevitable tensions inside of the ANC and the morale was
seriously threatened by this situation. It was in this challenging and
depressing situation that the ANC convened its congress, its conference, at
Morogoro. This was to mark a decisive turning point in the history of our
organisation. It was the beginning of a regrouping, of a revitalisation, of
halting the downward cycle.

The delegates gathered at Morogoro and used the opportunity to step back
and say: What, actually, is going on in the world? Have we understood it
properly? Have we analysed it correctly? Have we made mistakes? They used
the opportunity to be self-critical and, above all, to recommit themselves
and our organisation to its most basic principles. Our liberation struggle,
the Morogoro conference said, “... must not be confused with the classical
drive ...” of some other national struggles, “... of an elitist group among
the oppressed people to gain ascendency so that they ...”, the new elite,
“... can replace the old elite in oppressing and exploiting the mass” of
people.

It was this commitment to millions upon millions of working-class and poor
South Africans, this commitment to service to them, but also of trust, in
their capacity to self-mobilise and to emancipate themselves that was to be
the bedrock upon which over the following decades the ANC was to re-emerge
once more as the pre-eminent, not the only one, but the pre-eminent
political formation in our country, despite all of the odds.

What is the point of recalling all of this now? Forty years ago, almost
exactly to this day, in 1969, the ANC had to regroup in the midst of a
bitter defeat. Over the past years the ANC has had to confront other
challenges: the challenge of success, the challenge of sustained electoral
majorities, the challenge of huge social and economic advances led by the
ANC, working together with the great majority of South Africans. The ANC
speakers before me in this debate have all highlighted these successes,
these victories, these important advances, but if defeat brings challenges,
so too does success.

There are dangers of complacency. Major successes in some sectors can blind
you to persisting problems in other areas. Crime? Yes. Unemployment? Yes.
Persisting racialised inequality? Yes. The health care sector, as the
Minister mentioned. This can lead to denialism. Your own successes can lead
you to becoming defensive on other quarters and to denialism.

There are, also, if you are a ruling party, dangers of narrow individualism
and bureaucratisation. To join the ANC in 1969, for instance, meant likely
death, imprisonment or exile. Thankfully, those are no longer stark
realities. To be a member of a ruling party with a secure electoral
majority means that foes and adversaries will often now seek to curry
favour or to present themselves as honest brokers and advisers.

Just before the 1999 elections, for instance, the Centre for Development
and Enterprise run by Ann Bernstein advised the incoming president, Comrade
Thabo Mbeki, to break the alliance with the SACP and Cosatu, to stamp out
popular protests ruthlessly and to develop an ANC cadreship and leadership
with MBA degrees. I promise you, that is what she said. Obviously, she had
not read the Morogoro declaration about new elites replacing old elites.

Inside of the ANC we have not waited for the media or the opposition
parties to raise concerns about careerism, factionalism, bureaucratism. We
know that a movement can stagnate as a result of defeats but also as a
result of successes.

President Kgalema, in your former capacity as the secretary-general of the
ANC, you were at the forefront of raising concerns about these dangers.
Above all, it has been our own grass-roots ANC membership, our alliance
membership, our broader mass base that has spoken out in Khutsong, in
communities ravaged by HIV and Aids, in informal settlements rendered
absolutely unstable by crime, amongst youth who have never had the
opportunity of employment, from the landless and from the land-hungry,
frustrated quite rightly at the slow pace of rural transformation, from
informalised workers exploited by labour brokers. From the ranks of all
these sectors a very clear message has come in and through the ANC. It is
they as communities, as shop steward locals, as branch delegates who have
spearheaded the renewal and dynamising of the ANC and its movement - it is
their experience, their concerns, their aspirations that inform today’s ANC
election manifesto.

In the last year or so the ANC has had a Morogoro 2 process of
revitalisation. It is a process of democratic renewal that is often being
poorly understood or deliberately misrepresented in the media and
elsewhere. Sometimes painful decisions have had to be made in the process
of this renewal. I think, for instance, of the recall of former President
Mbeki. To his great credit, Comrade Mbeki accepted the recall with
composure and without hesitation.

But what are we to make of those who describe this as unconstitutional, a
coup d’état, a left-wing communist takeover? What are we to make of a
prominent cleric, who I greatly admire, who predicted bloodshed and civil
war and said that he was not going to vote? I am pleased to see today that
he said he is going to vote. And that is one of the endearing things about
that cleric. He changes his mind. [Applause.]

Sometimes people underestimate the durability of our constitutional
democracy and of our democratic institutions. But, above all, they
underestimate the concerns, the frustrations and the capacity of the great
majority of ordinary South Africans. As the ANC, we are saying that our
priorities remain the building of a constitutional democracy that is
united, nonracial, nonsexist and much more egalitarian.
We are saying that our overarching priorities are decent work and
sustainable livelihoods, rural transformation, community safety, accessible
and affordable health care for all, a greatly improved education system. We
are not saying that we are going to deliver these things from on high. We
are saying that together with learners, parents, teachers, health care
workers, communities and commuters, with the landless and the land hungry,
with the employed and the unemployed, with the young and old, with
consumers frustrated by the big cartels that put up food prices when the
oil price goes up but don’t bring them down when the oil price comes down,
with small and even large entrepreneurs whose employment-creating potential
is choked and stifled by the market-distorting behaviour of the Sasols and
the agroprocesses, we must and we can transform our country.

Together we must and we can realise the ideals affirmed by the Freedom
Charter, endorsed 40 years ago at a conference in Morogoro and deeply
embodied in everything that we must do and are now doing going bravely into
the future. Together we can and must do more. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Hon Cronin, will you please take the
nearest seat you can find so that I can continue with the rest of the
proceedings. [Applause.] That concludes the speakers’ list. The President
will reply tomorrow. The House is adjourned.

The House adjourned at 18:59.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 06 FEBRUARY 2009

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on the annual report and
   financial statements of the Department of Defence for financial year
   2007/2008, dated 20 November 2008:

   The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having considered the Annual Report
   and Financial Statements of the Department of Defence (DOD) for
   2007/2008, reports as follows:

1.    INTRODUCTION

The Portfolio Committee on Defence has scrutinised the 2007/2008 Annual
Report of the Department of Defence. Departmental hearings on the Annual
Report of the DOD were held on 18 and 19 November 2008.
2.    OVERVIEW OF PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE

The Department indicated that the outputs of the DOD are achieved by means
of the following nine programmes:

    • Programme 1 – Administration
    • Programme 2 – Landward Defence
    • Programme 3 – Air Defence
    • Programme 4 – Maritime Defence
    • Programme 5 – Military Health Support
    • Programme 6 – Defence Intelligence
    • Programme 7 – Joint Support
    • Programme 8 – Force Employment
    • Programme 9 – Special Defence Account

The Committee was furthermore informed that, in order to make the cost of
the main programmes more visible, the allocations of the Special Defence
Account have been made to the respective recipient programmes, although the
acquisition of strategic capital equipment remains the responsibility of
Chief Defence Matériel.

The Department reported that it successfully executed most of its mission,
namely the provision, management, preparation and employment of the defence
capabilities. The following general issues relating to the functioning and
service delivery of the Department were noted:

    • The DOD has exhausted its re-prioritisation options for the current
      commitments.
    • The DOD continues to engage with its regional counterparts in Africa.
    • Progress has been made in restructuring the defence staff division and
      management structures.
    • Although some challenges relating to the new weapons systems for the
      SA Air Force and Navy were experienced, elements of progress have been
      made.
    • The combination of the Military Skills Development System (MSDS),
      selective appointments in the Core Service System, and the effective
      and efficient implementation of the Mobility Exit Mechanism will
      enable the DOD to rejuvenate the South African National Defence Force
      (SANDF). This will assist the DOD to achieve the goals set by the
      Human Resources Strategy 2010.
    • Although the DOD benefits from the MSDS, additional funding is
      required in order to sustain the programme.
    • Various challenges remain, including the state of the DOD’s
      facilities, the Landward Defence programme’s Prime Mission Equipment,
      and the health and age-rank profile of the SANDF. However, corrective
      action has been taken and short and long term programmes are in place.
    • Loss of scarce skills to the private sector remains a cause of
      concern.
    • The Balanced Scorecard has been implemented at Level 1.

The Committee commended the Department on the reporting method that was
followed in the Annual Report. Problems and challenges were stated clearly
and failure to meet certain targets was explained in every programme.

The key achievements per programme were reported as follows.

2.1   Programme 1: Administration

The purpose of this programme is to conduct the policy development,
management and administration of the Department. The following issues,
achievements and challenges relating to the programme were reported:

2.1.1 Ministerial Direction

The DOD cooperated with the Portfolio Committee on Defence in its oversight
function over the Department, and extensive work was done with the costing
of the force design and the migration plans in order to obtain the Credible
Force Design.


2.1.2 Departmental Direction

    • The Defence Update 2025 has been reviewed and redesigned and the DOD
      is now in a position to take it to the Minister of Defence (MOD),
      Cabinet and Parliament.
    • The organisational structures of Defence Headquarters were reviewed
      and appropriate restructuring commenced in order to ensure the
      efficient and effective functioning of the headquarters.
    • The process of capacitating the Chief of the SANDF to manage the
      Department’s finances in accordance with the Public Financial
      Management Act (PFMA) commenced and was completed after the reporting
      period.
    • Measures have been implemented to address the issues that led to a
      qualified Auditor General’s (AG) report in FY 2006/07.
    • Measures were taken to ensure the staffing of key vacant posts in the
      Defence Secretariat.

The Committee expressed grave concern about the delay in the presentation
of the Defence Update to Parliament. This issue has been raised at various
occasions. In the 2006/07 Annual Report it was stated that the Minister of
Defence has provided direction on the finalisation of the White Paper on
Defence as well as the Defence Review (Defence Update). This process has
started in 2004. According to the 2006 Estimates of National Expenditure,
the update was supposed to have been completed during 2006. The 2007/08
Annual Report indicated that the DOD is now positioned to take the Defence
Update to the Minister in April 2008 and, with his authority, onwards to
Cabinet and Parliament. It is recommended that the process of finalising
and approval of the Defence Update by the Department and the Executive
needs to be fast tracked and Parliament should be informed about the
contents of the Update as a matter of urgency.

The Committee furthermore indicated that it is problematic that the
Military Bargaining Council (MBC) and Military Arbitration Board (MAB) are
currently not functioning, resulting in a breakdown of communication
between the DOD as employer and the military unions. The tensions between
the DOD and the military unions are very serious and needs to be managed
with extreme caution and sensitivity. It is recommended that the Department
should investigate alternative structures and/or procedures to replace the
current defective grievance structures. The possibility of formalising
legislation regulating military unions should be pursued as a matter of
urgency.

The Committee also expressed concern about the fact that the Prohibition of
Mercenary Activities and the Regulation of Certain Activities in a Country
of Armed Conflict Act (Act 27 of 2006) will not be in operation until such
time that Regulations are promulgated. This legislation has been signed
into law by the President in December 2007, and the delay in the
operationalisation of the Act is of grave concern and should be addressed
as a matter of urgency. The Department indicated that the Regulations are
in the process of being drafted and that it will be completed by the end of
FY 2008/09.
   3. SANDF Command and Control

The SANDF successfully executed its ordered commitments, i.e. six peace
support operations, six general military assistance missions and three
internal employments. Continued progress was also made with the reshaping,
restructuring, re-equipping and repositioning of the SANDF.
2.1.4 Government Information Technology

14 Defence Information Communication Technology Architectures (DICTA) and
Strategic Studies were completed to provide strategic direction for the
management of the Information and Communication Services (ICS) in the DOD.
The Defence Enterprise Information Systems (DEIS) Regulatory Framework
Solution Project has been activated.

2.1.5 Financial Services

Interventions were initiated within the human resources, procurement,
logistics and financial management components to address the lack of
internal controls that resulted in the AG’s audit qualifications and
emphasis of matter items.

2.1.6 Acquisition

All four frigates have been delivered to the SA Navy; two Agusta A109 light
utility helicopters were delivered and accepted; the second submarine was
delivered; the new rapid deployment logistical vehicles for the airborne
forces and the rapid deployment reconnaissance vehicles for the Special
Forces were commissioned; the upgraded Mamba vehicles, new light machine
guns and automatic grenade launchers were handed over to the SA Army; and
the upgrade of the SA Army Casspir Mk III was successfully completed.

The Committee expressed concern about the inefficient expenditure of the SA
Navy’s and Air Force’s acquisition budgets. The Department indicated that
this was caused by a delay in the deliverance of some of the Navy and Air
Force’s ordered equipment, including surface-to-air missiles, Gripen
aircraft and the light utility helicopters. The Committee was, however,
assured that this will not have any serious impact on the combat readiness
of the two Arms of Service.

2.1.7 Inspection Services

Various internal audits were executed and a large number of SANDF members
participated in fraud awareness campaigns.

2.1.8 Military Strategy and Planning Office

The Military Strategy was revised and approved; the overarching Support
Concept for the DOD was approved and adopted as part of the Military
Strategy; and the SANDF Readiness Forum was established as a sub-committee
of the Military Command Council.

2.1.9 Defence Legal Services

The shortage of skilled military legal practitioners and trained
interpreters hindered performance. However, the approval of the
establishment and funding of a number of interpreters and court
orderly/protector posts by the Minister of Defence will bring relief.
2.1.10      Defence Reserve Direction

A total number of 14 Reserve infantry companies and two engineer troops
were successfully deployed internally as well as externally and
respectively to the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and Burundi. The
Reserves were also deployed in Operation Bata (during the public services
strike) as part of the “One Force Core Force” concept.
A total number of 500 former Army Territorial Reserve (ATR) members were
transferred to the Army Conventional Reserves and retrained, and the first
small meaningful exit from the MSDS to the Reserves took place in December
2007. However, difficulties were experienced with motivating these members
to remain in the Reserves, as they are seeking full-time employment in the
SANDF’s regular force.

The risk exist that, prior to 2011, the non-infantry Reserve units and
formations of the SA Army, which received limited budgets, will fall below
critical mass.

2.1.11      Defence Foreign Relations

A new Defence Mission was opened in Uganda, bringing the total number of
defence missions to 32 abroad.

  12. Property Management

All claims for accommodation charges, leases, and municipality services by
the National Department of Public Works (NDPW) were paid in full and on
time by the DOD. However, 13 percent of the allocated amount for
municipality services was not claimed for by NDPW and these funds were
reallocated to assist in the financing of the Air Force Base Waterkloof
runway.

2.2   Programme 2: Landward Defence

The purpose of this programme is to provide prepared and supported landward
defence capabilities for the defence and protection of South Africa.

The Department indicated that the SA Army’s main risks and challenges are
as follows:



        The retention of scarce skills, particularly within the Engineer
        Corps and Technical Service Corps.


        The limited availability of ammunition for force preparation.

      • The nearing of obsolescence of certain landward defence systems.
      • The aging rank/age profile of its members.

These risks and challenges were managed as follows:

      • A monetary incentive scheme has been developed for technical
        personnel and similar schemes are being investigated to retain
        scarce skills in other musterings.
      • Since no additional funding was provided to address the shortage of
        ammunition, the Army concentrated on utilising simulation. However,
        this can only partially compensate for training with live
        ammunition.
      • Additional funding was provided by Parliament to specifically
        address the operational readiness of the Army’s vehicle fleet.
      • The conventional capability has been restricted to the minimum to
        make more funds available for ordered commitments.
      • Additional funding was provided by Parliament to increase intakes
        of MSDS members in order to rejuvenate the Army with young and
        healthy soldiers.

The Department reported that the SA Army met most of the required force
levels. Approximately 4 200 Infantry members were deployed externally
within several rotations. In addition, 24 Regular and six Reserve companies
were provided for internal deployments, and during Operation Bata, an
additional 62 Regular and Reserve platoons were deployed on short notice.

The Corporate SA Army Performance Review System to monitor and manage
corporate performance was developed with a view to improve internal
control. SA Army Seminar 21 was successfully conducted and explored the
future trends, threats and realities impacting on the landward capability.

In terms of re-skilling, skills shortages and the rejuvenation of the Army,
the following was reported:

    • A number of members completed their Code 8 license training and were
      transferred to the South African Police Services (SAPS). In addition,
      the first pilot group of volunteers commenced training for the
      public/private transport industry Code 14 drivers license.
    • In order to address the skills shortages, the Engineer Formation was
      mandated by the MOD to interact directly with the Engineering Council
      of South Africa to recruit members.
    • The January 2007 MSDS intake completed the force preparation cycle by
      participating in Exercises Seboka and Young Eagle.

The Department furthermore indicated that the plans for the modernisation
of the landward systems have been completed and that the Army is still
awaiting approval of funding for its modernisation.

The Committee noted that the unavailability and serviceability of prime
mission equipment for the SA Army seems to be a recurring obstacle to the
achievement of set targets and mandates within various sub-programmes. The
Department admitted that this is a challenge, but indicated that it will be
addressed by the upgrading and acquisition of new prime mission equipment
for the landward forces in future (as allegedly specified in the Defence
Update 2025).
2.3   Programme 3: Air Defence

The purpose of this programme is to provide prepared and supported air
defence capabilities for the defence and protection of South Africa.

The Department reported that the SA Air Force’s main risks and challenges
are as follows:

    • The underfunding of the operating budget continues to have a negative
      effect on the optimisation of the newly acquired systems and the
      continual decline of main air systems to conduct external operations.
    • The deterioration of facilities remains a major concern. Insufficient
      funding and dolomite subsidence in the Pretoria area continue to
      contribute to the deterioration of operational infrastructure and
      facilities such as the Air Force Base Waterkloof.
    • Inflation reached extreme levels, with the cost of aviation fuel
      rising by 96 per cent in six years, and the total aviation inflation
      being in the region of 15 per cent per annum. Whilst modest escalation
      adjustments are made to the annual budget allocation, more than two
      thirds of the operating budget is affected by the high aviation-
      related escalation.
    • With regard to skills and capacity, the shortcomings in service
      delivery were mainly due to critical shortages of qualified
      technicians as a result of over 200 resignations in the financial
      year.
    • The loss of pilots and technical ground crew due to resignations also
      hampers the implementation of the new aircraft systems. Coupled with
      underfunding, this situation has led to the operating of aircraft
      systems at levels far below the optimum.
    • Static and mobile navigation and surveillance systems are old and have
      become progressively difficult and expensive to maintain. This has
      affected aircraft system integrity negatively.
These risks and challenges were managed as follows:

    • In an effort to overcome these challenges in the most efficient and
      economical way, senior management embarked on creating solutions, such
      as improved accountability, better efficiency and improved career
      management to effect skills retention.
    • While some progress was made with the retention of scarce skills
      through improving incentives for aircrew and technicians, the
      challenge remains due to the strong attraction and poaching from the
      public and private sectors as well as some foreign countries.
    • Reserve Force pilots have been appointed to supplement the loss of
      skilled personnel, but this has only had a limited effect on the
      overall problem.

The Department indicated that the Air Force met the majority of its force
employment flying hours and reported the following achievements and issues
relating to the programme:

    • The newly integrated Lynx helicopter was successfully established on
      the Operational Support Information System (OSIS), providing support
      electronically and not on a manual reporting system.
    • The Air Force Reserves flew 8.5 percent of the total force employment
      hours.
    • The Air Force conducted exercises with the United States of America
      (USA) Navy and the German Air Force.
    • Two pupil pilot training courses were conducted where 42 learners
      qualified as pilots. In terms of HR transformation and skills
      shortages, an increased number of black candidates were earmarked for
      training, and the implementation of the reviewed technical incentive
      scheme was met with some success.
    • Possible private-public partnerships (PPPs) have been identified for
      the commercial co-use of Air Force Bases Ysterplaat and Overberg.
    • The Boeing 707 and the Cheetah fighter aircraft were phased out and
      the three Allouette III helicopters were withdrawn for phasing out.

The Committee expressed concern about the fact that only 42 of the targeted
68 pilots, and only 4 of the targeted 12 navigators, qualified during the
year. The Committee furthermore indicated its unease caused by the fact
that the scheduled servicing of aircraft is falling behind as priority is
given to repairing unserviceable aircraft. The Department reported that the
SANDF and Denel are cooperating in this regard to address the backlog.

The Committee also enquired about the decommissioning of the Cheetah
programme and the operationalisation of the Gripen system. The Department
indicated that the Gripen system will only be fully operational in 2012 and
undertook to brief the Committee in more detail on the decommissioning of
the Cheetah programme, and the effect thereof on the Air Force’s combat
readiness, during the combat readiness workshop scheduled for 25-26
November 2008.

2.4   Programme 4: Maritime Defence

The purpose of this programme is to provide prepared and supported maritime
defence capabilities for the defence and protection of South Africa.
Although the SA Navy met all its force employment requirements, the loss of
personnel within the combat and technical domains to the public and private
sector as well as foreign countries remains a challenge. Various
initiatives are being pursued to address this situation. The intervention
of targeting members with technical qualifications or partial technical
qualifications to further their training and attain accredited
qualifications has had a positive effect, with such members being staffed
in technical posts.

The following achievements and issues relating to the programme were
reported:

    • The Maritime Reaction Squadron Platoon deployed in Burundi.
    • Four frigates and two of the new submarines are in service. The first
      Submarine Officer Commanding Course was successfully concluded, and
      the first locally designed and manufactured submarine berthing pontoon
      was put into operation.
    • Staff officers conducted meetings with the navies of Argentina,
      Germany, India and Pakistan; exercises were held with the navies of
      Brazil, France, Germany, Ghana, Kenya, the Netherlands, Tanzania and
      the USA.
    • Joint trials were conducted with the Air Force, demonstrating the
      successful integration of the Strategic Defence Packages.
    • Training was provided to the Central African Republic as part of the
      SA Military Assistance Training Team.
    • The MSDS programme enabled the rejuvenation of both the Regular and
      Reserve components. Representivity in terms of race and gender is
      progressing well.
    • The Navy is the first Service to have the accounting system of one of
      its depots successfully transferred from the Directorate Integrated
      Management Systems (DIMS) to the Operational Support Information
      System (OSIS).
    • The PPP for a Sea Safety Training Centre is progressing well and a
      possible PPP for a new Fleet Command Headquarters building in Simons
      Town has been identified.

The Committee, in general, noted with concern the loss of skills and the
high vacancy rates within the DOD and recommends the following:

    • The Department should engage on a diplomatic level with the Australian
      government to address the fact that a recruiting office for the
      Australian defence force has been established in Simons Town.
    • The Department should investigate the possibility of formalising
      legislation to tighten the contracts of scarce skills personnel.

2.5   Programme 5: Military Health Support

The purpose of this programme is to provide prepared and supported medical
combat support elements and services. The Department indicated that the
South African Military Health Services (SAMHS) fulfilled its international
obligations and supported all external and internal deployments, and also
played a leading role in operation Bata during the labour action in the
Public Service.
The SAMHS’s main risks and challenges are as follows:

    • The shortage in healthcare practitioners, including those with
      specialist skills, remains one of the main risks prohibiting the SAMHS
      from fully achieving its targets as set out in the Strategic Business
      Plan.
    • Hospitals, facilities and equipment are deteriorating rapidly.
    • The high rate of medical inflation is putting financial strain on the
      SAMHS budget.
    • The unacceptable high workload of health professionals has a
      detrimental effect on the outputs and service delivery of the SAMHS as
      a whole.

These risks and challenges were managed as follows:

    • Progress has been made with the Repair and Maintenance Programme
      (RAMP) at the three military hospitals. Increased funds were aligned
      in other units and force structure elements to upgrade and repair
      facilities.
    • The high rate of medical inflation was managed through the
      implementation of the Military Medicine Code Lists; full participation
      in the National Treasury rate term contracts for pharmaceuticals and
      medical consumables; and increased utilisation of generic
      pharmaceuticals and products.
    • In order to reduce the high workload of healthcare professionals, the
      SAMHS endeavoured to shorten and expedite the appointment of
      healthcare professionals who had been recruited for employment in the
      DOD. In addition, several healthcare facilities have instituted
      working hours for their personnel in shifts in order to meet the
      demands for service delivery. Managers and staff officers are also
      performing clinical duties at facilities which are experiencing a
      shortage of personnel.
The Department reported that the SAMHS reviewed its approach to the
recruitment and training of healthcare practitioners, and initiated a new
drive to increase the benefits to military healthcare practitioners. This
resulted in a number of benefits, including a new dispensation for the
nursing profession; an increase in training capabilities; and the upgrading
of the different healthcare facilities such as military hospitals.

The Committee congratulated the SAMHS on the progress they have made in
addressing the various challenges.

2.6   Programme 6: Defence Intelligence
The purpose of this programme is to provide a defence intelligence and
counter-intelligence capability. The Department indicated that the
programme’s main risks and challenges are as follows:

    • The loss of skilled personnel and the staffing of posts with
      intelligence-qualified personnel remains a challenge.
    • The intelligence collection environment is challenged by technological
      advances that require expensive solutions.
    • The poor and deteriorating condition of the Defence Intelligence (DI)
      Headquarters building will remain a challenge until DI is relocated.

These risks and challenges were managed as follows:

    • In order to retain skills, a workgroup had been appointed to
      investigate the viability of an intelligence dispensation as well as
      salary disparities between the different intelligence organisations.
      The planned new dispensation has however not been achieved during the
      reporting period and the work will continue in the new financial year.
    • National Treasury made funds available for the procurement of
      intelligence-collection technology, but the project was stalled on the
      instruction of the Minister of Defence.
    • Defence Intelligence was involved in the preparation for a Public-
      Private Partnership (PPP) process to work towards a new headquarters
      building. The process was however halted and the process for a new
      headquarters building will start over.

The Department furthermore reported on the following achievements:

    • Strong cooperative relations were forged with African countries, and
      assistance was rendered to the DRC, Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire and Sudan.
      A foreign intelligence course was presented to 24 participants from 17
      countries, and two DI instructors presented a South African
      Development Community (SADC) Intelligence course in Tanzania.
    • DI was part of the establishment of a Border Integrity Intelligence
      Centre.
    • Collection of information was improved.
    • DI was involved with the updating of the African Battle Space
      analysis.
    • Specific language training was initiated.
    • DI provided support to SANDF operations and exercises as required.
    • Two African female colonels were promoted to brigadier general.

The Committee expressed its concern about the fact that the PPP process for
the new DI Headquarters has been halted and urged the Department to attend
to this long standing challenge as matter of urgency.

2.7   Programme 7: Joint Support

The purpose of this programme is to provide joint support capabilities and
services to the Department. The following achievements and challenges
relating to the programme were reported by the Department:

2.7.1 Command and Management Information Systems (CMIS)

CMI met all its force employment requirements, and supported 11 operations
and 10 exercises. It also participated in the African Standby Force; the
African Union Computer, Command and Control Information Systems; the Inter-
State Defence and Security Committee (ISDSC) Telecommunications and
Information Systems work group; and the SADC Brigade Planning Element
workshops.

The Disaster Recovery Plan for the corporate Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) equipment systems was developed and tested, and the
migration plan for the CMIS Service Centres to the Air Force, the Navy, DI
and the Military Police Agency was completed.

A total number of 136 MSDS members were trained.

2.7.2 Logistic Agency

    • A total number of 37 units were prioritised and funded in the Repair
      and Maintenance Programme (RAMP) and submitted to NDPW. However,
      progress with the RAMP units for 2007/08 was impeded due to the change
      in NDPW requirements.
    • The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research was appointed to
      assist with the compilation of a strategic plan for immovable assets.
    • A logistic intervention and repositioning programme (LIRP) has been
      established to manage gaps in logistic support performance.
    • Mozambique and Uganda were assisted with the demolition of unexploded
      ammunition.
    • Military veterans were used to eradicate alien and invasive vegetation
      on SANDF-controlled properties.
    • A part of Ditholo Training Area was provided for the establishment of
      Dinokeng Game Reserve, and game to the value of R7 million was donated
      by the Department to the project.
    • Good progress has been made with the Wahlmansthal land claim. Hell’s
      Gate and Madimbo areas will be concluded once it has been cleared of
      unexploded ordnance.
    • The De Aar demolition range was re-qualified to conduct disposal
      through open demolition.
    • The challenges within the sub-programme were as follows: The
      maintenance backlog of facilities continues to be a challenge; the
      asset accounting management system was not fully compliant with
      Generally Required Accounting Practices (GRAP); a backlog exists in
      the disposal of redundant and unserviceable ammunition; there is a
      lack of specialist logistic personnel; and the DOD Air Supply Unit is
      deteriorating and experiences a lack of equipment.

The Committee expressed concern with regards to the deterioration of
facilities and the maintenance backlog. It is recommended that the
Department should provide Parliament with an updated report on the state of
facilities and the maintenance backlog, as well as plans to eliminate this
backlog.

The Committee furthermore conveyed its unease with the slow progress made
with regards to the disposal of ammunition. It is recommended that the
Department should provide Parliament with a report, indicating the details
regarding the disposal of ammunition.
2.7.3 Military Police

The force employment requirements were met, and the backlog of 7 521 cases
from the previous year were reduced to 6 788; the first DOD Anti-Crime
Conference was held; 86 members of the Military Police were deployed
externally; a Nodal Point on Anti-Criminality was established at the
Military Police Division Headquarters; the MOD approved the new Divisional
structure; and 10 members were transferred to the SAPS, whilst 58 MSDS
members were recruited.

The Committee probed the Department about various media reports that have
surfaced on the loss of vehicles and equipment in the SANDF. The Department
indicated that the allegations are being investigated. It is recommended
that the findings of the internal investigation should be reported to
Parliament as soon as it has been finalised.

2.8   Programme 8: Force Employment

This programme provides for the employment of defence capabilities,
including an operational capability, to successfully conduct all
operations, and joint and multinational military exercises.

The Department reported that all primary force employment commitments were
met. However, a number of issues are a cause of concern, i.e. the
serviceability of equipment, the health of members, the lack of junior
leaders, and the inability to sustain flights. The Department indicated
that corrective plans are in place to address these challenges.

The Committee took note of the Department’s planned assistance to the South
African Police Services during the 2010 World Cup Soccer tournament. It is,
however, a concern that no additional funds have been made available to the
Department for this purpose. It is recommended that the Department should
engage with stakeholders in order to secure additional funding.

3.    STATUS OF THE SANDF RESERVES

The Department reported that the implementation of the Reserve Force
Strategy that was approved in 2004 received a boost in 2007 at the Reserve
Force Symposium when the Strategy was publically evaluated and endorsed.
The role of the Reserve has allegedly been confirmed in the Defence Update
as providing the majority of the conventional landward defence capability;
providing support to the people; supplementing peace support operations;
and maintaining a pool of specialist skills.
It was furthermore indicated that service in the Reserves continues to be
popular, with the total number of members volunteering approaching 18 000
out of a force design of 70 052 per the last draft of the Defence Update.
At the end of 2007, the first significant transfer of 1 800 MSDS members to
the Reserves occurred.

The Committee commended the Reserve Force with the progress made during the
reporting period and confirmed that it will continue to support the efforts
of the Reserves. It is recommended that in future, issues relating to the
Reserves should form part of the main body of the Annual Report and should
not be an appendix.

4.    FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

4.1   Report of the Audit Committee

The Department reported that the Audit Committee has identified four issues
of concern, i.e. significant internal control weaknesses resulting in non-
compliance; the levels of skills retained within the DOD; the high vacancy
levels and the time it takes to fill vacancies; and the information
technology architecture that needs considerable investment.

The Portfolio Committee expressed its concern about the attendance of Audit
Committee meetings by members of the Audit Committee. It is recommended
that the attendance of members (and more specifically the reasons for non-
attendance) should be clearly indicated in the Annual Report. If members of
the Audit Committee are unable to regularly attend the meetings, their
membership should be reconsidered, and the Secretary for Defence, as the
Accounting Officer, should attend all meetings of the Audit Committee.
The Committee furthermore observed that the Report of the Audit Committee
has not been signed.  It is recommended that the Chairperson of the Audit
Committee should in future take care to sign the Report.

4.2   Report of the Accounting Officer

With reference to the Report of the Accounting Officer, the Department
indicated that the strategic issues relating to the Department include the
rightsizing of the DOD; defence capabilities; DOD infrastructure; redundant
and surplus equipment; the Defence Act; the White Paper on Defence and the
Defence Review; the health status of the SANDF’s members; asset protection
in the DOD; the DOD Shared Value System; the Materiel Life Cycle Management
Policy; information systems; alignment of core and support processes with
the PFMA imperatives; the Reserve Force; Education, Training and
Development Management; and the Defence Related Industry.
With regards to risk management, it was reported that the Risk Management
Strategy is part of the total management process and that it is reported on
a quarterly basis. Action plans were also developed to mitigate or minimise
these risks.

The Committee expressed its concern about the unforeseeable and unavoidable
expenditure resulting from the additional requests for peace support
operations.

The Committee furthermore indicated that the following issues relating to
the report of the Accounting Officer needs to be addressed:

    • Explanations relating to virements should be accompanied/supported by
      the relevant numbers/figures.
    • Memoranda of Understanding relating to peace support operations should
      be audited in order to determine the effect thereof on the
      Department’s overall budget.
    • The Committee takes note of the problems with regards to the
      Integrated Financial Management System and recommends that the
      Department should discuss possible mitigating measures in detail with
      National Treasury.

4.3   Report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements and
      Performance Information of the Department of Defence and the Special
      Defence Account

The DOD received a qualified audit report from the AG. This is the sixth
consecutive year that the Department receives a qualified audit report. The
Committee expressed its concern in this regard and urged the Department to
address the issues raised by the AG as a matter of urgency.

The Department reported that the basis for the qualified opinion was as
follows:

    • Tangible and intangible capital assets: Disclosure was limited to cash
      additions, the assets register was inadequate, and weaknesses in
      internal controls were prevalent.
    • Employee benefit provision: Inadequate monitoring functions were
      executed by management.
    • Contingent liabilities: The completeness of contingent liabilities in
      respect of the National Environmental Management Act (Act 107 of 1998)
      could not be confirmed. Contingent liabilities in respect of housing
      guarantees could also not be confirmed.
    • Accruals: Accruals were understated by an unquantifiable amount.
    • Lease commitments: Lease commitments were not adequately disclosed and
      no effective and efficient system of control was in place.
    • Related parties: All related parties were not disclosed due to the
      absence of systems for identification and recording of transactions of
      related parties and related party transactions.
    • Departmental revenue: Completeness of departmental revenue could not
      be confirmed.

In all these cases, the Department indicated that comprehensive corrective
action plans were introduced. According to these plans, five of the seven
qualifications will be cleared by the end of FY 2008/09.

The Committee commended the Special Defence Account on receiving an
unqualified AG audit report.

5.    SUMMARY OF COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS

The following is a summary of the recommendations with reference to the
2007/2008 Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
Defence:
    • Defence Update 2025: The process of finalising and approval of the
      Defence Update by the Department and the Executive needs to be fast
      tracked and Parliament must continually be informed about the contents
      of the Update as a matter of urgency.
    • Defence Unions: The Department must investigate alternative structures
      and/or procedures to replace the current defective grievance
      structures. The possibility of formalising legislation regulating
      defence unions must be pursued as a matter of urgency.
    • Loss of skills/vacancy levels: The Department should engage on a
      diplomatic level with the Australian government to address the fact
      that a recruiting office for the Australian defence force has been
      established in Simons Town. The Department must also investigate the
      possibility of formalising legislation to tighten the contracts of
      scarce skills personnel.
    • Facilities maintenance backlog: The Department must provide Parliament
      with an updated report on the state of facilities and the maintenance
      backlog, as well as plans to eliminate this backlog.
    • Ammunition disposal: The Department must provide Parliament with a
      report, indicating the details regarding the disposal of obsolete and
      unserviceable ammunition.
    • Loss of equipment and vehicles: The findings of the internal
      investigation on the loss of equipment and vehicles must be reported
      to Parliament as soon as it has been finalised.
    • World Cup Soccer: The Department must engage with stakeholders in
      order to secure additional funding for the DOD to execute its mandate
      regarding the World Cup, and must report back to Parliament on the
      progress made in this regard.
    • Reserve Forces: Ring-fenced continuation training for the Reserve
      units must be addressed as a matter of urgency, with a report to
      Parliament on plans and progress.
    • Audit Committee: The following issues relating to the attendance of
      the Audit Committee meetings must be addressed:
      o The attendance of members (and more specifically the reasons for
        non-attendance) must be clearly indicated in the Annual Report.
      o If members of the Audit Committee are unable to regularly attend
        the meetings, their membership must be reconsidered.
      o The Secretary for Defence, as the Accounting Officer, must attend
        all meetings of the Audit Committee.
    • Accounting Officer’s Report: The following issues relating to the
      report of the Accounting Officer needs to be addressed:
      o Explanations relating to virements must be accompanied/supported by
        the relevant numbers/figures.
      o Memoranda of Understanding relating to peace support operations
        must be audited in order to determine the effect thereof on the
        Department’s overall budget.
      o The Committee takes note of the problems with regards to the
        Integrated Financial Management System and recommends that the
        Department must discuss possible mitigating measures in detail with
        National Treasury.

6.    CONCLUSION

Although the following issues were not pertinently stated during the
departmental hearings on the Annual Report, it should be taken into
consideration:

    • World Cup Soccer: Whereas the issues relating to the World Cup Soccer
      are not a primary function of the DOD, the Department should ensure
      that it is adequately represented at all meetings. The DOD should
      furthermore ensure that it is ready for any eventuality, as the SANDF
      will be the last resort for critical intervention.
    • Military Veterans: Whilst this report is silent about the categorising
      of persons, the DOD has a responsibility towards military veterans.

 2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on the 2007/2008 annual
    report of the Armaments Corporation of South Africa, Pty Ltd

    The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having conducted hearings on the
    2007/2008 Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments
    Corporation of South Africa, Limited (Armscor), reports as follows:

A.    INTRODUCTION

The Portfolio Committee on Defence has scrutinised the 2007/2008 Annual
Reports of the Armaments Corporation of South Africa (Armscor), tabled on
19 September 2008. A hearing on this Annual Report was held on 17 November
2008.

This Committee report is based on the following sources:

    • Armscor 2007/2008 Annual Report
    • Armscor’s Integrated Corporate and Business Plan: 2007/2008 -
      2008/2009
    • Analysis of the 2007/2008 Annual Report of Armscor: Parliamentary
      Research Unit
    • Committee comments and observations.

B.    2007/2008 ANNUAL REPORT OF ARMSCOR

Mr S Thomo of Armscor, the Chief Executive Officer of Armscor, presented
the Annual Report.  The Committee expressed concern over the absence of the
Chairperson of the Board of Armscor, Dr P Molefe and stressed the
importance of the presence of the Chairperson in future presentations of
the Annual Reports to Parliament.

The Committee requested Armscor to provide clarity on the following matters
during its presentation:

    • The restructuring of Armscor.
    • The finalisation of the grievance instituted by the General Manager of
      Corporate Affairs against the CEO.
    • The investigation into the tender process of Project Vistula.
    • The funding of Armscor.
    • The review of operations and acquisitions objectives.
    • The Defence Industrial Participation (DIP) programme and the projected
      six month delay in the delivery of the A400M Heavy Lift Transport
      Aircraft.
    • The status of the Rooivalk Helicopter and Project Hoefyster.
    • The future plans for the entity.

1.    OVERVIEW OF PERFORMANCE AGAINST OBJECTIVES

Armscor outlined the outputs of the entity through the following nine
objectives:

    • Objective 1:           Acquire Defence matériel, facilities and
      services.
    • Objective 2:           Establishment of a programme management system.
    • Objective 3:           Provision of a quality assurance capability.
    • Objective 4:           Disposal of Defence matériel.
    • Objective 5:           Support, maintain and manage strategic and
      essential
                       defence industrial capabilities, resources and
                 technologies.
    • Objective 6:           Establishment of a Defence Industrial
      Participation
                       Programme Management System.
    • Objective 7:           Corporate Governance.
    • Objective 8:           Armscor’s Strategic Initiatives in support of
      national
                       Initiatives.
    • Objective 9:           Armscor’s Operational Strategic Objectives.

The following achievements were highlighted:

    • The receipt of an unqualified Auditor-General report for the period
      under review but with the restructuring of Armscor remaining a matter
      of emphasis.
    • The completion of an investigation into the preferred corporate form
      and position of Armscor, which was presented to the Minister of
      Defence. This will ensure that Armscor focuses on its main objective -
      to meet the Defencematériel Requirements of the Department of Defence.
    • The study into the establishment of the Defence Evaluation and
      Research Institute (DERI) was complete. This was presented to the
      various stakeholders and the Minister of Defence.
    • The transfer of management of the Simonstown Dockyard to Armscor on 1
      September 2007.
    • The entity achieved its Black Economic Empowerment (BEE) objectives.
    • Most of the objectives set to improve the demographic profile of the
      Corporation were achieved.
    • Progress made in the fulfilment of Defence Industrial Participation
      (83 per cent of total obligations) by 31 March 2008.
Progress made with the Strategic Defence Packages (SDPs) was also reported.


    • The last of the four frigates were commissioned and handed over to the
      South African Navy. All four frigates are now fully operational and
      maintenance support contracts had been concluded both with local and
      foreign contractors for the platforms and combat suites of the
      vessels.
    • All 4 maritime patrol helicopters were delivered by July 2007. These
      helicopters will be deployed to the frigates performing anti-surface
      warfare, maritime patrol and search and rescue roles.
    • A total of 23 out of the 30 Light Utility Helicopters have been
      delivered to date.
    • SAAF will be supplied with 26 Gripen advanced light aircraft. While
      the manufacturing of these aircraft continues, the first dual seat
      Gripen completed the initial flight test programme. A second duel seat
      Gripen had been delivered to Air Force Base Makhado in March 2008 for
      the start of ground crew training.
    • To date, 21 of the 24 Hawk Lead-In-Fighter Trainer aircraft have been
      delivered to 85 Combat Flying School. The 24 aircraft will be
      assembled locally by Denel Aviation, according to a DIP agreement with
      BAE.

The Committee notes the following challenges as outlined in the Annual
Report:

    • While the annual financial transfer from the Department of Defence to
      Armscor increased by 5 percent for the past two years, this represents
      a decrease in real terms considering the current rate of inflation
      which fluctuates between 3.8 and 10.1 percent during the period under
      review.
    • Armscor salary increases were not market - related. This resulted in
      more frequent resignations and the loss of critical capabilities.
      Armscor is losing key personnel and this hampers the Corporation’s
      ability to provide quality service to its clients and to meet the set
      objectives specified in the Service Level Agreement signed between
      Armscor and the Department of Defence.
    • Armscor has an ageing and predominantly white workforce. Inadequate
      funding and the loss of scarce skills are key challenges to the
      realisation of key transformation goals. An increased transfer payment
      would partly address these difficulties. Discussions between the DOD
      and National treasury regarding this matter continue.
    • The tendency of DOD members to issue direct instruction to senior
      managers, without due regards for the official channels remains a
      problem, but measures are in place to address these.

The Committee evaluated the following nine key performance indicators
against the reported actual performance:

1.1   Objective 1: The acquisition of defence materiel, facilities and
services

(a)   Key performance indicators
(i)   The establishment and implementation of a Capability Management Model
      by 1 September 2007.
(ii)  Armscor is subjected to annual ISO 9001 audits. Zero significant
      audit findings allowed while ISO listing should be maintained at the
      end of each financialyear.
(iii) The establishment of a Naval Ship Support Agency.

(b)   Actual performance
(i)   While the entity reported a delay in the full implementation of the
      capability management initiative, this will be completed within six
      months subject to the completion of the finalisation of all employees’
      job descriptions. The business register and system development have
      been integrated and the roll-out of the authorisation system
      continues. This objective was not fully achieved.
(ii)  Scheduled internal audits were scheduled according to the three-year
      audit plan, and no major findings were reported. This objective was
      achieved.
(iii) The Naval Ship Support Centre was initiated during April 2007 at
      Simonstown Naval Base. This objective was achieved.

1.2    Objective 2: The establishment of a programme management system

(a)   Key performance indicator
(i)   Improve the tool to be integrated with the Departmental Acquisition
      and Procurement Division (DAPB) Baseline Approval Data, Capability
      Management, Job Description and the link to the tool to project
      management system.

(b)   Actual performance
(i)   This objective could not be fully achieved due to the replacement of
      the initial project management system with the Acquisition Business
      Register. While the implementation of the Business Register and the
      inclusion of the Status Reporting and Works Authorisation and
      Intellectual Property Management System commenced, the full
      implementation of the project management system can only be achieved
      once the computer based contract and order and administration based
      system (COMAS) is delivered.

1.3   Objective 3: Provision of a quality assurance capability

(a)   Key performance indicator:
(i)   Accepted and approved learnerships by the Service Sector and
      Education and Training Authority (SETA) in the Quality Assurance
      Environment of Armscor.
(ii)  The establishment of a baseline for Quality Assurance Competency and
      the development and implementation of Competency Management Model.

(b)   Actual performance:
(i)   The learnerships have been submitted to the South African
      Qualifications Authority. The speed of the process is now determined
      by SAQA. Objective was partially achieved.
(ii)  The capability management model was developed and implemented by the
      end of March 2008. This objective was achieved.

   4. Objective 4: Disposal of Defence Matériel in consultation with the
      original
      equipment manufacturer (OEM)

(a)   Key performance indicator
(i)   Sales turn-over to be reached was set at 90 percent of Sales Plan.

(b)   Actual performance
(i)   This objective was not achieved due to the following factors:
    • Changes in the sales approval processes resulted in a delay of sales
      to the value of R106 million.
    • Restrictions on the sale of Samil vehicles due to its reclassification
      as controlled items.
    • Delays in the disposal of SANDF vehicles since these were not
      registered on NATIS.
    • The donation of disposed stock by the Department of Defence, valued at
      R40 million, which had to be withdrawn from the Sales Plan.
    • The Committee raised concerns regarding the sale of vehicles to the
      Central African Republic, as well as the loss of income to Armscor due
      to changes imposed upon Defence matériel Disposal regarding the sale
      processes and restrictions placed by the NCACC on the sale of Samil
      vehicles. Armscor responded that the matter was an internal DoD
      matter. This has subsequently been resolved.

   5. Objective 5:  Support, maintain, and manage strategic defence
      industrial capabilities, resources  and technologies
(a)   Key performance indicator
(i)   The transfer of the management of the Simonstown Naval Dockyard to
Armscor.

(b)   Actual performance
(i)   The transfer of management has been completed and the full staff
      support provided. The Business Plan for Simonstown Dockyard is still
      to be finalised.

In response to further questions raised by the Committee, Armscor stated
that the recapitalisation of the Simonstown Dockyard was a priority. A
memorandum of understanding with an international company was signed to
assist in the rejuvenation of the Dockyard through the establishment of an
apprentice school to provide training in technical areas that are much
needed in the maritime environment. The proposal for such an initiative as
well as the possible value of the total investment would be finalised in
the beginning of 2009.  Armscor plan the management of the Dockyard
carefully without compromising the Dockyard’s primary function, i.e the
maintenance of services for the Navy.
1.6   Objective 6: The Corporation must establish a Defence Industrial
      Participation (DIP) Programme Management System

(a)   Key performance indicator
(i)   Approval of DIP credits in line with the Strategic Defence Packages
      and other acquisitions contracts.

(b)   Actual performance
(i)   Total DIP credits of R1.4 billion were approved, exceeding its target
      of R1.2 billion credits.  DIP obligations on the Strategic Defence
      Packages, managed by Armscor, represent an 83 percent of actual
      performance against obligations. This objective was achieved.
In response to questions raised regarding the total DIP obligation for the
Gripen aircraft and the maritime helicopters, it was explained that the
total obligations for the period ending 31 March 2008 were recorded as
follows: Gripen aircraft sales amounted to R170 million, R180 million for
technology transfers as well as R172 million in investments. The total
obligations for maritime helicopters were recorded as follows: R170 million
for sales,  R29 million for technology transfers and R2 million for
investments.

1.7   Objective 7: Corporate Governance

(a)   Key performance indicator
(i)   Armscor’s external audit report to contain zero Audit Report Matters.


(b)   Actual performance
(i)   The Auditor-General indicated that no material weaknesses were
      identified in the internal control systems. The audit report contained
      no significant matters identified by external auditors. This objective
      was achieved.

1.8   Objective 8: Armscor strategic initiatives in support of national
initiatives

(a)   Key performance indicator
(i)   Increase Armscor’s spending in respect of its operating budget and
      the Strategic Defence Account (SDA), and the General Defence Account
      (GDA) on BEE companies.
(ii)  Execute Energy Savings Plan by conforming to 90 percent of the Energy
Savings Plan.

(b)   Actual performance
(i)   Operating budget – 59 percent: This objective was exceeded.
      SDA and GDA: 26 percent. This objective was exceeded.
      Armscor business: 48 percent of discretionary costs: This objective
was exceeded.
(ii)  This objective was achieved.

1.9.  Objective 9: ARMSCOR’s operational strategic objectives

(a)   Key performance indicator
(i)   Improve the demographic profile of Armscor to reflect the national
      and regional demographic profile.
(ii)  Bursaries.
(iii) Talent Development Programme.

(b)   Actual performance
(i)   The entity reported the following achievements:
    • 90.9 percent (targeted 80 percent) of all external appointees were
      black;
    • Women make up 20 percent (target 20 percent)  of external appointees
      in the technical functional groups;
    • 63.83 percent (target 65 percent) of external appointees in the non-
      technical functional groups were women; and
    • 29.07 percent (targeted 29 percent) of employees at supervisory
      levels and above were women.
  ii) Bursaries, granted to students in engineering fields, were initially
      awarded to four students prior to the review of the bursary programme.
      Bursaries have been awarded to 1 African male, 4 African females and 4
      Indian females, in April 2008. All bursaries were granted to students
      in engineering.
 iii) Fifteen people were drawn into the Talent Development Programme during
      the period under review.

Armscor further highlighted the age and demographic profile of the
organisation as a key human resource risk. The entity is currently
developing a strategy to ensure the transfer of skills to younger
employees, especially those in technical areas.

  10. Additional matters
Armscor provided clarity on the following additional matters, as requested
by the Committee:

(a)   Airbus A400M heavy Lift Transport Aircraft
The six month delay in the delivery of the A400M is reported in the Annual
Report. In response to queries raised by the Committee, Armscor explained
that this delay could be extended to one year.  Problems relating to
software used and assembly lines contributed to the delays. This is a multi-
national project and the precise impact on the South African production
could not currently be reported.  Milestones are attached to the project
and are subject to penalties.

(b)   Project Vistula
Armscor stated that the cancellation of the tender process was due to the
bidders failing to meet the critical criteria. Non-compliance with Armscor
processes and procedures were also reported. Armscor further explained that
after a lengthy investigation instituted by the then Secretary of Defence,
disciplinary actions had been taken against the officials concerned. A new
tender process will start by February 2009. Measures have been taken to
resolve weaknesses in the tender processes. The Department of Defence
committed itself to provide the Committee with all relevant information
regarding this project. It requested that this be done in a closed session,
given the sensitive nature of information.  The Committee requested that
this report be submitted to within seven working days of the hearing.

(c)   Grievance against the CEO
The Committee raised concerns over the delay in finalising the grievance
instituted by the General Manager of Corporate Affairs against the CEO.
Armscor indicated that this grievance has indeed been finalised and that it
would submit the relevant information to the Committee in this regard. The
total cost of the grievances case of the General Manager of Corporate
Affairs against the CEO of Armscor amount to R1.8 million. The Committee
received a letter from the Chairperson of Armscor on 4 December 2008
regarding the finalisation of this matter.

2.    FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL

2.1   Financial Statements
The reported revenue of the Armscor Group for the period under review,
R1.462 billion, represents a decline from the R1.653 billion reported for
the previous financial year.  Sources of revenue include an increased
transfer payment of R415.6 million, mainly due to an additional R51.3
million allocated to fund the transfer of the Simonstown Naval Dockyard,
but also a R269 000 decline in the sales of goods.

A loss of R8 million, compared to a surplus of R27.8 million for the
previous financial year is recorded by subsidiaries.  This is attributed to
the declining performance of Armscor Business (Pty) Ltd due to a delay in
the approval to dispose of surplus defence materiel. Delays on the part of
the Department of Defence, in placing orders timeously with the defence
industry resulted in a delay in service delivery for the financial year
under review. However Gerotek and Alkantpan performed better than expected
and the company managed to recover some of the losses incurred.

2.2   Report of the Auditor–General (A-G)
While Armscor received an unqualified audit opinion, the AG drew attention
to the emphasis of matter, namely, the process of restructuring Armscor and
the impact this will have on the group in future periods.

In its briefing to the Committee, Armscor highlighted the following related
matters:

    • Aim of the restructuring process: Based on a Cabinet decision, the
      transformation process would refocus Armscor as a defence acquisition
      organisation for the State. This entails the reclassification of the
      entity from a Schedule 2 company to a Schedule 3A public entity, in
      terms of the PFMA.
    • The proposed establishment of the Defence, Evaluation and Research
      Institute (DERI): This will consolidate defence technology, research,
      development, test and evaluation capabilities.

Responding to concerns raised by the Committee regarding the restructuring
process, Armscor explained that the Minister requested the restructuring of
the entity to ensure that it focuses on the acquisition of defence materiel
as well as the formation of the DERI. A process was put in place to
investigate the best corporate form for Armscor as well as the
establishment of the DERI. The latter was done in consultation with the
Ministers of Defence, Science and Technology and Public Enterprises. While
the Minister of Defence approved some of the suggested changes, namely the
reclassification of Armscor from a Schedule 2 to a Schedule 3A entity as
well as the possible legislative changes for the restructuring and
establishment of the DERI, formal approval had not been finalised prior to
the Minister’s resignation. Parliament will be consulted and informed
subsequent to the finalisation of all relevant details and legislative
proposals.

C.    COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS

The Portfolio Committee on Defence makes the following recommendations with
respect of the 2007/2008 Annual Report and Financial Statements of Armscor:


    • Restructuring of Armscor: The Committee notes with concern that it was
      not continually informed and consulted about the restructuring of
      Armscor and the Defence Related Industry; especially as it has an
      impact on the mandate, the funding and the attraction of sufficiently
      skilled personnel, and the operation of the entity. The Committee
      requests Armscor and the Department of Defence to provide a detailed
      report on the restructuring of Armscor and the Defence Related
      Industry.
    • Project Vistula: This is a project to acquire future tactical trucks
      for the South African Army. Armscor indicated that the tender process
      was cancelled and would re-commence by February 2009, pending the
      review of processes and procedures governing the management of similar
      projects. The cancellation of the tender process of Project Vistula
      was due to the non-compliance with Armscor tender processes and
      practices. The Committee recommends that Armscor submits a detailed
      report on the outcomes of internal disciplinary investigations against
      the relevant officials of Armscor, present to the Committee the
      details regarding the cancellation of the tender process and measures
      to avoid similar incidents. Such a report must be submitted to the
      Committee within seven days after this hearing. Due to the fact that
      this report was not submitted to the Committee at the time of writing
      this report, such a report must be submitted to the Committee within
      seven days of receipt of a letter from the Chairperson of the
      Portfolio Committee.

    • Grievances instituted against the Chief Executive Officer:   The
      internal investigation and Armscor Board recommendations on grievances
      instituted by the General Manager of Corporate Affairs against the CEO
      have been finalised. Armscor should submit a report to the Committee
      on how this matter had been concluded.

      Subsequently, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee received a
      letter dated 4 December 2008, from the Chairperson of Armscor.
      Following the consideration of this letter, the Committee has decided
      to call on the Committee of the Armscor Board, Secretary of Defence,
      CEO and CFO to appear before it. The Committee will summon all
      stakeholders to appear before it to discuss this matter. The
      Chairperson will write a letter to the Auditor-General regarding the
      total cost of the grievance case as well as the letter detailing the
      finalisation of the case.
D.    CONCLUSION

The Portfolio Committee on Defence commends Armscor for the clear and
detailed presentation of actual performance against targets in its Annual
Report and for achieving an unqualified audit opinion from the AG. The
Committee further noted that a prior apology for the absence of the
Chairperson of the Board was not received, and recommends that the
Chairperson should attend future presentations of the Annual Report to
Parliament.

Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on the 2007/2008
   annual report of the Castle of Good Hope

   The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having considered the 2007/2008
   Annual Report and the financial statements of the Castle of Good Hope,
   reports as follows:

1.    INTRODUCTION


The Defence Endowment Property Act (Act 33 of 1922) transferred the Castle
of Good Hope to the now Republic of South Africa for the exclusive use of
defence organisations, establishments and land defences. Since then, the
Castle has been governed by the Minister of Defence. The Castle Management
Act (Act 207 of 1993) provided for a Castle Control Board (CCB) to govern
and manage the Castle on behalf of the Minister of Defence and to deal with
the interests of all relevant stakeholders.

The 2007/2008 Annual Report of the Castle of Good Hope was tabled in
Parliament on 30 September 2008.  The acting Chairperson of the CCB, Major
General J.T. Nkonyane, presented the Annual Report to the Portfolio
Committee on Defence on 17 November 2008.

2.    2007/2008 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CASTLE OF GOOD HOPE

   1. OVERVIEW OF PERFORMANCE

The period under review was characterised by the possible transfer of the
management of the Castle from the Department of Defence (DOD) to the
Department of Arts and Culture (DAC) before the Castle Management Act
Repeal Bill was withdrawn.

The following matters regarding the functioning and service delivery of the
CCB were highlighted:

    • The CCB received an unqualified audit report from the Auditor-general.


    • The CCB increased its annual net profit by 14 percent, reporting a
      R1.871 million profit, which reflects a sound financial position.
    • The Good Hope Art Studio has been actively involved in supporting the
      arts through assisting communities for non-commercial purposes,
      assisting the Castle to create a friendly environment for visitors.
    • The CCB co-hosted the Cape Town Military Tattoo with the South African
      National Defence Force (SANDF).
    • The CCB is heavily reliant on the SANDF for the day to day maintenance
      of facilities.
    • The non-essential maintenance was suspended which resulted in a
      maintenance backlog in the Castle.
    • While strides in the filling of vacancies were made, the CFO and CEO
      have not yet been appointed.
    • The CCB spent 10 percent of its annual income on salaries. The entity
      has 18 fulltime employees with seven being remunerated by the CCB, and
      the remaining 11 being remunerated by the DOD.

The following achievements against stated objectives were presented to the
Committee. These broad objectives are stipulated in the Castle Management
Act.
2.1.1 To preserve and protect the military and cultural history of the
Castle.

(a)   Key objectives:

    o To preserve Cape Military Heritage.
    o To maintain, preserve and protect the Castle.
    o To ensure good governance.

(b)   Actual performance:

    o The completion of the exhibition on the Wars of the Eastern Cape and
      the publication of the Military Events at the Cape (1830-1895).
    o The continuous education and preservation of Cape military History.
    o The day to day maintenance of the exterior walls, woodwork and slated
      pathways of the Castle as well as increased security.
    o Systems put in place to improve the governance of the Castle include:
      a) The imminent appointment of an audit committee;
      b) The finalisation and implementation of a Supply Chain Management
         Policy as well as the Conservation Management Plan;
      c) The Department of Defence and CCB intend to identify and clarify
         relations with stakeholders.

2.1.2 To optimise the tourist potential of the Castle.

(a)   Key objective:
    o To create a professional and competent corporate image.

(b)   Actual performance:

    o An increase of 5% in visitors (excluding functions and events) to 130
      000 visitors.

2.1.3 To maximise the accessibility to the public.

(a)   Key objectives:

    o Increase the Castle’s public profile and create a positive perception
      of the Castle across all sectors of the community.
    o Implement additional services to visitors at the Castle of Good Hope.

(b)   Actual performance:
    o A 5 percent increase in visitors’ figures generated from tourists
      (local/foreign) visiting the Castle of Good Hope, including “open
      day” programmes and presenting entertainment through “Horse and
      Carriage” tours in Cape Town.

3.    FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

   1. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

The CCB reported a significant improvement in its financial position
especially its cash position which allows the Castle to cover for
contingencies in the future. The following can be highlighted:
    • A 14 percent increase in the annual net profit mainly due to the
      income generated from the Military Tattoo, ticket sales, and other
      investment income.
    • A 10 percent increase in profits from its operations.
    • Increased expenditure on maintenance. Maintenance is reported as the
      biggest expenditure item, namely 23 percent of total expenditure. A
      543 percent increase in the maintenance costs of buildings and
      properties.
    • While trade receivables decreased by R20 000, payables increased by
      R8000. This means that debt owed to the Castle decreased, while debt
      owed by the Castle increased.
    • Due to an increase in short-term investments, the CCB reported a 35
      percent increase in cash and cash equivalents.

3.1.2 REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

The Castle of Good Hope received an unqualified audit report from the
Auditor-General (A-G). The A-G drew attention to the following matters in
the audit of the financial statements and performance information of CCB
regarding the non-compliance with applicable legislation:

    • No audit committee was appointed as required by Treasury Regulations
      and the PFMA.
    • No internal audit function was in place as required by Treasury
      Regulations and the PFMA.
    • An executive director has not been appointed to the Board as required
      by the Castle Management Act.
    • A vice-chairperson to the Board has not been appointed as required by
      Treasury Regulations.
    • A Chief Financial Officer has not been appointed as required by
      Treasury Regulations.
    • A supply chain management policy has been developed but not yet
      implemented.
    • Five vacancies on the CCB are reported for the period under review. No
      supporting letters for the appointment of the Board members are
      available.
    • No risk management policy exists as required by the PFMA
    • According to the Income Tax Act, the Castle should apply for income
      tax exemption if it receives income that can be of a taxable nature.
      The revenue that is received by the Castle for making its venues
      available for hire, could constitute taxable income.

During the presentation to the Portfolio Committee, the acting Chairperson
of the CCB informed Members of the mitigating measures taken to address
matters raised in the A-G report. These were highlighted as follows:

    • The development of a rectification plan that would address matters of
      non-compliance by the end of 2008/2009 financial year.
    • The establishment of an audit committee.
    • The development of an internal audit charter while the Department’s
      Inspector–General would assist in the establishment of an internal
      audit function.
    • The appointment of a vice-chairperson on 4 April 2008.
    • The filling of certain vacancies on the Board.
    • The establishment of a management directive for the appointment of a
      CEO.
    • The finalisation of a draft risk management policy.
    • All relevant documentation for a tax exemption status will be
      completed for the submission to the South African Revenue Service
      (SARS).

4.    COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS

The Portfolio Committee on Defence makes the following recommendations in
respect of the 2007/2008 Annual Report and Financial Statements of the
Castle of Good Hope:

    • The CCB must address the outstanding matters of non-compliance with
      applicable legislation and matters of governance as raised in the A-G
      Report.


    • The CCB must develop a strategic business plan for the Castle to
      provide strategic direction towards the achievement of the CCB’s
      objectives.


    • In order to achieve financial sustainability, the CCB must explore
      additional sources of funding.


    • The CCB must ensure that all sources of income generated in the Castle
      are reinvested for the daily management of the Castle.
    • Alternative international best management practices must be explored
      by the CCB, including the possibility of a Public Private Partnership
      (PPP).


    • The CCB must consider the appointment of a CEO and CFO as a matter of
      urgency. These appointments should be based on adequate available
      resources, be sustainable, and must add value to the entity. These
      appointments must be made in the next financial year.


    • The CCB must ensure that the necessary supporting documentation
      regarding appointments of Board members by respective stakeholders is
      available. Noting that the representative of the Western Cape
      Legislature to the CCB has not been appointed, the Committee urges the
      provincial legislature to finalise such an appointment as speedily as
      possible.
    • The DoD, with the active cooperation and support of the Department of
      Public Works, should ensure the holistic preservation and maintenance
      of the Castle of Good Hope and related defence endowment properties.

    • The DoD should ensure the responsible management of the Castle and all
      other immovable military heritage resources.

    • The DoD (Minister of Defence) should continue to exercise strategic
      control and management of the Castle, and remain the Executive
      Authority of the Castle and the CCB.

   5. Conclusion

The Committee commends the CCB on the following achievements:
    • Improved management of the Castle
    • An unqualified audit opinion by the Auditor-general, and
    • The healthy financial position of the CCB

Report to be considered.

                           MONDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2009

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      a) Report of the 2008 Youth Parliament.


CREDA INSERT REPORT - T090209e – Insert1 – PAGES 263-285


