---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 07 July 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JULY
month_slug: Jul
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-07-07
---

TUESDAY, 7 JULY 2009
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 09:01.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 33 — Transport:

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Minister, there is a podium here and you can
use it. It is not comfortable to speak from there. Deputy Minister, you may
also use the podium when you speak. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson and hon members, during the
department’s Budget Vote on 3 July, we made the point that a country is
only developed once its people have unfettered access to water, energy,
transport and communications, but of course that should be preceded by
peace and democracy.

Today is an important day because we are addressing provinces. It is in
provinces and municipalities where we can best answer the question of
whether South Africa is a developing or a developed country. It is in
provinces where we will confront the question on how long will we be
satisfied with being a developing and not a developed country. It is
provinces where the issue of uneven development is revealed in all its
starkness. It is in provinces and municipalities that are at the coalface
of service delivery, right up to village and street level.

When President Jacob Zuma delivers the state of the nation address, and
when premiers talk of the state of provinces, someone should be concerned
and talk of the state of the village. Development is national, provincial,
but it is also, and primarily, local. Therefore, someone should speak about
this particular sphere. This government has strengthened its capacity to
undertake long-term development planning. This is to assist national,
provincial and local government, as well as all state entities to better
plan, prioritise and co-ordinate their service delivery programmes.

Consequently, as the Department of Transport, our plans should relate to
the national plan, which in turn links the provinces and municipalities
into the national planning grid. We have started this co-ordination through
our public transport plan, the 2010 Fifa World Cup transport plans,
transport infrastructure development, freight logistics and corridor
development.

In line with President Zuma’s state of the nation address on 3 June 2009,
we have adopted a zero-tolerance stance when it comes to corruption. At the
Department of Transport, we are committed to the reform and tightening of
the regulatory regime and instruments dealing with anticorruption,
particularly with regards to supply chain management, driving licence
testing and the Road Accident Fund. Through this House, as well as
platforms such as the extended Minmec, which includes provincial
departments of transport, municipalities and Department of Transport
agencies, we will instil this culture throughout the transport family. In
this regard, our first extended Minmec and transport family meeting last
Thursday on 2 July 2009 was very promising.

In order to address fraud and corruption in the driving licence system, we
are moving towards computerised testing systems and have rolled out mobile
and fixed stations in parts of the country. KwaZulu-Natal already has 21
fixed stations and two mobile stations; Gauteng has one fixed station and
two mobile stations; and Mpumalanga has three fixed stations and one mobile
station. One of our key focus areas will therefore relate to advancing the
co-ordination, implementation and integration of transport activities
across the three spheres of government.

Just before the elections in April, the taxi industry approached President
Zuma about the bus rapid transit, BRT, system, and he told them to defer
negotiations until after the elections. During the state of the nation
address, hon President Zuma indicated that the Minister of Transport would
resume discussions with the industry by 11 June 2009. Indeed, on 11 June we
met with over 2 000 representatives of the industry made up of taxi
associations and their organised structures at Gallagher Estate in
Johannesburg. At this meeting we announced the formation of a national
joint working group on public transport.

This week we are finalising the names of the representatives for the
working group. From the side of government, the working group will comprise
of representatives from the national and provincial Department of
Transport, as well as the 2010 host cities. We have agreed that members of
the working group, both on the side of government and the taxi industry,
should have a full mandate from their structures because they will be
making binding decisions. We aim that, hopefully, by the end of September,
there will be no outstanding matters with regard to the taxi industry.
There should be a normal relationship with this important economic sector.
You cannot always have a problem.

Government is taking this matter very seriously and therefore it has
received attention from the highest level. We also want to commend the taxi
industry for the serious manner in which they have been engaging with us on
this issue. Both government and the taxi industry are committed to finding
a lasting solution to all outstanding matters. The taxi industry plays a
key role in the transportation of our people. Roughly 65% of our people use
taxis as public transport.

Therefore we have tailored our approach to address real issues in the taxi
industry. The pillars of this engagement are: integrated public transport
networks; implementation of the bus rapid transit system networks; Taxi
Subsidisation and Taxi Recapitalisation Programmes; enterprise development;
and legislation, licensing and regulatory issues. The challenge facing the
taxi industry is to take part in the transport sector in its entire value
chain. As government, we recognise that this industry represents a critical
entrypoint for black people into the mainstream economy of South Africa.
The challenge is to agree on how best this could be done in a meaningful
way within a proper regulatory framework.

In terms of road safety, we would like to focus on the Administrative
Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Act, Aarto, the point demerit system
and improved security features on the card licences. We would like to
ensure that the process to roll out Aarto and the demerit system is fully
under way. In the interim, we will consider certain road traffic amendments
in order to ensure the suspension and/or cancellation of driving licences
as mandatory penalties on a wider basis. It is not really left loose,
depending on the presiding officer in the judiciary.

A birth certificate, identity document, driver’s licence and passport are
the most important documents for an individual. The first two define that
you exist and the other two define your wellbeing. To this end, we have
extended the contract of the current service provider of the smart card
driving licenceses to December of this year, since it lapsed in April. We
will use the tender process to ensure that the latest product is
tamperproof and has improved security features. From next year, you should
not be in possession of a driver’s licence and a death certificate at the
same time. [Laughter.] A death certificate should automatically cancel a
driver’s licence. Once there is a death certificate, your registration as a
voter is automatically cancelled. Today, we have many people with death
certificates, but their driver’s licences are still being used quite
regularly.

Working with Home Affairs, we will ensure that the new driver’s licences
have enhanced security and unquestionable integrity to be accepted in our
country and internationally. This could assist towards ensuring that a
driver’s licence forms part of our primary identification documents. In the
United States, social security documents and the driver’s licences are the
primary identification documents. Here the integrity of the driver’s
licence is not yet accepted, neither at Home Affairs, nor by banks.

Rural development is one of the key focus areas of this government. The
role of transport in this regard cannot be overstated. A number of our
people in rural areas are poor, but one of the characteristics of poverty
is the inability to access essential services of government. Rural poverty
is therefore also characterised by transport asset poverty, where roads and
public transport are not available. We should have a balanced enhancement
of our institutional arrangements for us to achieve increased investment,
job creation, poverty alleviation and sustainable social and economic
development.

We are also planning to extend the rural road maintenance and the
contractor development programme to other provinces using labour-intensive
methods that have been tried and tested, particularly in KwaZulu-Natal,
Mpumalanga, Limpopo and other provinces where infrastructure development
creates thousands of jobs. This will form part of our contribution to job
creation so that we have a significant contribution to what the President
announced as the creation of 500 000 jobs by December this year.

We are going to make the following transport infrastructure investments
during the current Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period: about
R18 billion for passenger rail infrastructure; R70 billion for
infrastructure, the bulk of which is road infrastructure; R20 billion for
airports infrastructure; and R19,6 billion for public transport
infrastructure for the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

Among important projects that are funded by the public transport
infrastructure and systems grant are the following: public transport links
and facilities; public transport interchange facilities; rail
infrastructure and systems upgrade; intermodal facilities; Intelligent
Transport Systems facilities; and nonmotorised transport facilities.

Hon members, we are moving very fast towards an integrated public transport
system. This is necessary to ensure efficiency and to move us closer to the
status of a developed economy. The transport modes should be integrated in
order to deal with the challenge of the last mile. The last mile refers to
people not being able to get home because, for instance, they arrive at a
train station when the taxis and buses have already stopped operating. This
could be avoided through better integration of the various modes. Distances
between these modes must also be cut down drastically.

We are already implementing integrated ticketing to facilitate the movement
of various transport modes in municipalities. In as far as buses are
concerned, the operator of Durban Transport has cited inadequate subsidies
and escalating fuel costs as key to their difficulties. Together with the
eThekwini Metro and the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Transport we will find
alternative operators as a matter of urgency. We will appoint new operators
who will start on 1 August 2009 for a period of 12 months. The city is
finalising discussions with taxi and bus services to provide additional
trips during July to maintain ongoing services. Buses remain part of our
plans to move our people.

During the 2010 Fifa World Cup, all host cities and their respective
municipalities should be able to transport soccer fans within transport
plans. In this regard, in our discussions with Fifa representatives and
Minmec, we agreed to have dedicated officials from national and provincial
departments who would be dealing with matters of transport and who will be
answerable to the department of transport in the cities, provinces and
nationally.

Rea Vaya in Johannesburg is there at a cost of R329 million. Nelson Mandela
Bay has the Khulani Corridor. Inner City Distribution and BRT networks in
Tshwane cost R104 million. There is the BRT on the Klipfontein Corridor
along the N2 Airport City in Cape Town; the Warwick Junction in Durban; and
the infrastructure upgrading projects in Limpopo. We hosted a successful
Confederations Cup and there should be no reason why we should not be able
to do so next year.

Government has invested R25 billion over the MTEF period to upgrade
passenger rail, and this is going well. Part of that includes rail
security. We have already rolled out more than 1 700 rail police who are
currently active in patrolling in the rail environment so that people use
the rail transport in a more secure manner.

On the question of aviation, the Airports Company South Africa, Acsa, is
progressing with its five-year investment programme — O R Tambo
International at R2,65 billion; Cape Town International Airport at
R714 million; Upington at R33 million; Bloemfontein at R43 million; Durban
at R65 million; East London at R91 million; La Mercy in Durban at
R6,5 billion, which is almost R7 billion; and Port Elizabeth at
R52 million.

I hereby table our budget for the 2009-10 financial year which is
R23,7 billion. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon
members of the NCOP and guests, I take this opportunity to congratulate the
Minister and the Deputy Minister on their appointments. Your experience in
transport will ensure that the department is in a good state.

Transport is the heart of any country in the world’s economy. All of us
know that when a country’s transport system collapses, the economy of that
country also dies. Hon Minister, I am afraid that this will cost you and
your department hard work to bring South Africa back on track with a more
suitable and cost-effective policy to save the transport situation in South
Africa.

A well-maintained transport and road infrastructure allows people to get to
work, children to get to school and the population in general to move
around. Over the past years, South Africa lost millions of rands on
collapsing rail infrastructure. That brought about a big increase in heavy,
overloaded trucks on national roads. No one can blame any investor in the
country for making use of road transport, because there are no other
alternatives that are reliable.

A truck that is 10% overloaded causes more than double the damage of a
legally loaded vehicle, amounting to billions of rands per annum.

This brings me to another headache on South African roads. In some of the
provinces, thousands of rands were spent on weighbridges that are not in a
workable condition because of a lack of officials and skilled people. To
close all escape routes on national roads for overloaded trucks, the
department must make use of mobile weighbridges that will be more cost-
effective. The DA wants to know if provinces have policies to operate these
expensive infrastructures. If they were in working condition, there would
be an immediate relief in the strain on already overburdened roads.

The DA strongly supports the idea of Transport putting 20 000km of rail in
the hands of the private sector on a concession base. This will immediately
allow more entrepreneurs to get involved in rail transport and will also
create a lot of new jobs in the more rural areas of the country. This will
also fit into open-opportunity society, where people who want to become
something in life, will be able to provide for themselves and their
families. AgriSA and forestry are very excited about this new challenge
from Transport. This will also create a lot of new sustainable jobs in the
long term for many people in South Africa.

The Minister and the department must look into the problem of shortage of
technically skilled people and engineers to work on road maintenance and
upgrading. To get highly skilled and professional people in the department,
the department should offer market-related packages.

Promises have been made by the department that the taxi recapitalisation
programme will scrap about 20 000 old taxis a year. At this stage, it seems
that only 5 000 taxis have been scrapped per year. If we look into the
budget for this programme, less money is available than in previous years.
It will take the department 15 years to scrap all old taxis. That is not
workable, hon Minister. A serious new alternative must see the light of day
to help the taxi industry to get a face lift. If we look at road accidents
on South African roads, taxis are involved in high percentages of
accidents. Government must see that all taxi drivers undergo training to
get necessary skills on how to drive and manage taxis in all circumstances.

Low-level investment in the infrastructure of our roads contributes to
rising backlogs. Hundreds of billions of rands are needed on road
maintenance. All studies, including those conducted by the department,
clearly show that it is less costly to maintain roads than to rehabilitate
them. I am afraid that the department does not have nearly enough money to
serve all main roads in South Africa to do necessary maintenance.
Therefore, the department must look into other alternatives to create more
funds for the maintenance of roads. For example, they must launch a high
priority road programme to identify parts of the national, provincial and
local road networks with high maintenance. This would bring the backlog
down within the short and medium term with a maximum timeline of five
years.

Lastly, South Africa has less than one year before the 2010 Fifa World Cup
to show the world that we can manage South Africa’s transport to the
benefit of all citizens in the country, as well as to the world. One
excellent example is the upgrading of road infrastructure in Rustenburg, in
the North West province, where four major Fifa protocol routes were handed
over to the Local Organising Committee by the MEC for Public Works, Roads
and Transport for a contract with a value of more than R500 million. More
than 480 job opportunities were created by the four road projects for rural-
based communities, including women from villages around Rustenburg. May
that be the department’s challenge in the short term. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M P SIBANDE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, MEC Ndosi, hon members,
government officials, ladies and gentlemen.

Ngena naye! Phuma naye! Lesi isikhalo esivamile uma kugitshelwa noma
kwehliwa esitimeleni. Ngaleso sikhathi kukhalwa ubumayemaye kubagibeli
abagibelayo kanye nalabo abehlayo esitimeleni. Wo he! ngiyakuzwela wena
mama otete  ingane, ngesinye isandla ubambe enye ingane kanti-ke futhi
ngesinye isandla uphethe umthwalo.

Ngoba uma umkhosi kangena naye, phuma naye usumenyezelwe enhliziyweni yakho
wazi kamhlophe ukuthi kusenokwenzeka ngeshwa ulahlekelwe yingane oyibambe
ngesandla noma kulahleke imithwalo. Yonke lengxubevange ebeyenzeka
ezitimeleni yadalwa umbuso wobandlululo ngoMthetho Wokuhlaliswa
Kwezinhlanga Ngokwahlukene ngokuthi abantu basuswe ezindaweni zabo
zendabuko balahlwe le kude. Izindawo ababekwa kuzo bekuyizindawo zokulala
kuphela “slaap dorpies”.

Ukwanda kwabantu njengaseSoweto yikona okwadala ukuthi abagibeli bonke
bathuthelekele ezitimeleni, njengento ezobathutha ukuya emisebenzini.
Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, singumphakathi waseMpumalanga sithanda ukubonga
ngegalelo olenzile ngeprojekthi ebizwa ngokuthiwa yiMoloto Corridor.
Siyathemba ukuthi lomzila wesitimela oxhumanisa iMpumalanga neTshwane uzoba
nempumelelo emizameni yokunciphisa ukucinana kohide lwezimoto olugcina
ngokudala izingozi ezinyantisa umzimba nsuku zonke emgwaqeni woMoloto.
Nathi-ke siyizakhamuzi zaseMpumalanga sesizokwazi ukuhlabelela sithi:


   Yaduma yaqeda impolompolo
   Ilindele ukusa ishosholoze.
   Igudle izintaba igudle namawa.
   Iqonde khona eTshwane
   Iqonde khona eGauteng
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Push him in! Push him out! This is the common chant when boarding or
alighting from trains. At that time the people who are boarding or those
who are alighting from those trains are crying for dear life. What a pity!
I feel sorry for the mother who is carrying a baby on her back, whilst
holding another child with one hand and carrying parcels with the other
hand.

That’s because you know in your heart that once the “push him in, push him
out” chant begins, two unfortunate things might happen, and that is you can
either be separated from the child you are holding with your one hand or
lose parcels in your other hand. That chaos was created by the apartheid
government through its separate development policies by removing people
from their ancestral land and dumping them in remote places. The areas that
were allocated to them were meant to be for overnight stay and they were
known as “slaapdorpies”.

The increasing number of people living in places like Soweto resulted in
large numbers of people opting for trains as their mode of transport to
work, and that resulted in trains becoming overcrowded. Hon Minister, as
the community of Mpumalanga we would like to thank you for the contribution
you have made with regard to the project known as the Moloto Corridor. We
hope that this commuter rail line, which will connect Mpumalanga and
Tshwane, will succeed in reducing traffic congestion that leads to fatal
accidents every day on the Moloto road. We, as the community of Mpumalanga
will be able to sing the following song:]

   Yaduma yaqeda impolompolo
   Ilindele ukusa ishosholoze.
   Igudle izintaba igudle namawa.
   Iqonde khona eTshwane
   Iqonde khona eGauteng

The ANC, in the recent national and provincial elections, received a strong
mandate to better the lives of all the people by working together with
communities and all development partners. We can therefore not betray the
will of our people, but instead have to restore their dignity and
confidence in this ANC-led government.

The ANC’s manifesto is very clear on the fact that we need to build an
equitable, sustainable, safe and inclusive transport system. The reality is
that our public transport system is fragmented, irrational and
uneconomical. This results in it being unsustainable and unable to drive
the local economic development programme for the purpose of creating jobs
in order to eradicate poverty in our communities. Thus, our public
transport system has to be significantly improved to meet challenges that
our people are confronted with in our endeavours to fully integrate and
transform their lives and ways of living.

Our transport system must be capable of becoming a labour-absorbing sector
that will be a driving force on capacitating small businesses. So, the
integrated transport system must be the main driving mechanism for the
development of a mixed economy, where the state, private capital, co-
operatives and other forms of social ownership complement each other in an
integrated way to eliminate poverty and foster shared economical growth.

A developmental state should maintain its strategic goals in shaping key
sectors of the economy like a national transport system. This means that
the Department of Transport has a responsibility to roll out state-led
infrastructure investment programmes. We need to have a comprehensive rural
development strategy which builds potential for rural sustainable
livelihoods, especially for disabled people and women as part of an
overarching vision of rural development.

Thus, public participation in order to produce integrated transport plans
at local level, as part of the broader integrated development plans, is
highly recommended. Hon members, I am making a call to all the
municipalities to establish, as required by law, transport authorities
involving all the major role-players in this regard.
The taxi recapitalisation programme must be reviewed if we consider that,
as estimated, 64% of all commuters in our country rely on minibus taxis.
Therefore, these taxis are the backbone of our public transport system,
with small profit margins. Drivers are forced to speed, overload, work long
hours and overwork their vehicles, thus causing this sector to have a very
high accident rate.

It is one of the biggest infrastructure investment projects for the 2010
Fifa World Cup and articulates clearly the fact that there will be serious
engagements with various stakeholders that are affected by the bus rapid
transit, BRT, system and will include how all stakeholders benefit from
this initiative.

Our transport system has a responsibility to facilitate transformation in
cities, towns and rural areas in order to build cohesive sustainable and
caring societies with closer access to work and social amenities, including
sport and recreation facilities. We need to realise that rural areas have a
right to roads; we have to ensure training and skills development that
responds to the requirements of the economy to boost human resources
capacity.

Lastly, we have to be tough on drunken driving and pay special attention to
combating corruption and fraud in the procurement and tender processes ...
njengoba ubaba uNdosi enza ... [... just the way Ndosi is doing it ...]

... in terms of the application of driving licences and theft of police
case docket documents. The main goal of our government must be to ensure
that foreign relations contribute to the creation of an environment
conducive to sustainable economic growth and development. We must emphasise
that a developmental state requires improvement of public services that
will strengthen our democratic institutions.

It is important to reflect that the first National Household Travel Survey,
in its findings, reported that 67,9% of South Africans do not have access
to trains, 56% do not have access to buses, and people who don’t have
access to taxis are just a small percentage of 11,22%. So, there is a need
for an intervention programme like the BRT system that will be accessible
to poor communities, especially from the rural areas.

The main challenges in this area are that we need to find out about the
behaviour of the taxi industry; interrogate to what extent transformation
is taking place on both metro rail and buses; consider whether there is any
transport strategy utilised to address the need of the poor in rural areas;
enhance sustainable local economic development objectives of the
developmental state that speaks to the ANC policies and conference
resolutions; and identify loopholes and ensure co-operation among the three
spheres of government on allocation of public transport in our communities.

Ake ngisho lokhu, kancane ngizophinda ngibuye. Sihlalo, ngivumele
ngikhumbuze amambuka ukuthi kumazwe athuthukile afana noBritain kanye ne-
Amerika kuneqembu elibusayo kanye namaqembu aphikisayo kodwa wonke
lamaqembu awadluli kwamahlanu. Abantu baseMzanzi Afrika balwela inkululeko
kodwa hhayi amaqembu-qembu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Let me say this first, and then I will come back to the point.
Chairperson, allow me to remind the traitors that in developed countries
like Britain and America there is a ruling party and opposition parties do
not exceed five parties. The people of South Africa fought for freedom and
not for the formation of many parties.]

Are you free or are you dom? [Laughter.]

Ngibuye futhi. [Coming back to the point.]

There is an interesting relationship between types of settlements and the
number of people who spend nothing on public transport, for example, nearly
a third of metropolitan and urban households spend money on transport. In
rural areas only 14% of households spend nothing. This indicates the
dependency of rural populations on public transport in provinces like
Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, North West and Northern Cape.

The reason why there is a slow expenditure on public transport in the
Western Cape and Gauteng is that household income in these provinces is
much higher and use of public transport is lower. [Time expired.] I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mufumakadzi L MABIJA: Mudzulatshidulo a ṱhonifheaho, Vho Minisiṱa vha
ṱhonifheaho na Mufarisi wavho, vhahulisei vha ino Nnḓu, vhashumeli vha
muvhuso na vho thetshelesaho hanengei mahayani, ndi matsheloni.
(Translation of Tshivenḓa paragraph follows.)

[Ms L MABIJA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and your Deputy, hon members of
this House, government employees and those listening at home, good
morning.]

I believe we are all aware that there is a war outside there. Instead of
buses and taxis working together as part of integrated systems in our towns
and cities, we have minibus taxi organisations fighting one another for
passengers. This leads to minibus taxis competing with buses and trains on
long-distance routes.

Musi hezwi zwithu zwi tshi itea, zwi dzhia na matshilo a vhanwe vha
vhadzulapo vha fhano Afurika Tshipembe. [When these things happen, they
take the lives of South African citizens.]

Therefore, there is a need for intervention in our transport system.

Ndo takala ndi tshi pfa Minisiṱa Vho Sbu vha tshi ri ṱanḓavhudzela nga
nḓila ine vhone sa murangaphanḓa vha vhilaela ngayo uri zwithu zwi
tshimbile zwavhuḓi. Vha dovha hafhu vha ri sumbedzisa zwiimiswa zwo
fhambanaho zwine zwa khou shumana na uri mafhungo haya a zwa vhuendi a
tshimbile nga nḓila ine ya vhuedza vhadzulapo.

Zwino ndi ḓo dadamala kha fhungo ḽa Bus Rapid Transport System, ine nga
kuvhonele kwanga ya vha yone i re ngonani ... (Translation of Tshivenḓa
paragraphs follows.)

[I was happy when I heard Minister Sbu giving us details of how he, as the
leader, is worried that things should go smoothly. He further shows us
various institutions which are involved in ensuring that issues of
transport should benefit the citizens.

Now I shall deal with the issue of the bus rapid transport system, which in
my view is the one that is appropriate ...]

... because this system is based on creating a positive climate for the
formalisation of transportation of the people. Therefore, it will enhance
positive conditions for economic empowerment for the poorest of the poor,
both in urban and rural areas.

We need to specifically look at the fact that it will provide better
services in order for public transport to gain respect for law, create
decent working conditions for all and instil a sense of pride and fair
representation in public transport. This will change the face of the public
transport system. It will be appropriate to highlight that it will upgrade
quality and performance levels of transport systems. In doing so, our
transport system will be capable of becoming a labour-absorbing sector that
leads to the development of sustainable local economic growth.

This will speak to the ANC policies that emphasise the main mandate of the
department which is to ensure that it leads to a massive public investment
programme for growth and employment that will accelerate and expand its
investment in public infrastructure, including expanding improved networks
in public transport.

This will create opportunities, whilst at the same time meeting the basic
needs of our society. The state of the nation address confirms that the
main principle of all government departments must be based on fighting
poverty in order to build better lives for all.

So, we must recall that the fight against poverty remains the cornerstone
of our government focus. As long as there are people who don’t have access
to transport, we need to work together in driving development programmes
with various municipalities to speed up economic growth and transform the
economy to create decent work and sustainable livelihoods. We need a
transport system that will have the responsibility to facilitate
transformation of our cities and rural areas in order to build caring
communities with closer access to work and social amenities.

The ANC articulates clearly that public transport is the main mechanism or
a major instrument benefiting broad sectors of our societies, especially
workers, the youth, women and people with disabilities because it actively
promotes skills development. That is why we need an integrated transport
system that can use a bottom-up approach. Hopefully, it will be sustainable
for development. It will be appropriate to give a full explanation as to
why we don’t see the taxi system as relevant in our societies these days.
One can say taxi drivers are forced to speed, overload, work long hours and
overwork their vehicles, resulting in high accident rates; whilst the bus
rapid transport system is fast and capable of carrying loads of people, and
at the same time it is also cheap for our people.

Therefore, it creates a user-friendly environment in our communities. This
will enhance the co-ordination of transport projects in relation to the
2010 Soccer World Cup. On the other hand, it will develop practices and
norms that will increase access to appropriate and quality public transport
to meet the socioeconomic status of both rural and urban communities.

In conclusion, it must be reflected that many of the achievements in the
past nine years, where we commenced building 1,4 million houses that are in
the same dormitory townships, have compounded our transport challenges.
There is a need to adhere to a philosophy that is based on key principles
of equity in order to promote broader social responsibility, and a need to
serve the interests of the majority of passengers rather than those of
private vehicles.

In fact, there is a need to politicise the terrain of transport such that
the needs of the majority of users, notably poor and marginalised South
Africans, are prioritised. The significance of improving the passenger and
transport system as a contributor to economic competitiveness needs to be
emphasised. Public transport, in particular, is grossly underresourced in
relation to other sectors and in terms of national output and budgetary
revenue streams.

Nga enea maipfi maṱuku ndi na fulufhelo ḽihulu ḽa uri muhulisei Vho Sbu vha
khou ḓo shumisa mugaganyagwama wavho nga nḓila ine ra sala ri tshi khou zwi
vhona zwauri khaedu dzoṱhe dzine ra vha nadzo dzi a fhungudzea, u itela uri
roṱhe ri kone u wana vhutshilo ha khwiṅe. Zwine nda fulufhela khazwo ndi
zwauri ri roṱhe ri ḓo ita zwauri hu vhonale tshanduko, zwi vhonale zwauri
muvhuso wo rangiwaho phanḓa nga ANC u na bono na mbonelaphanḓa. Ndi a
livhuwa. [U vhanda zwanḓa.] (Translation of Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[With these few words I have great hope that hon Sbu is going to spend his
budget in a way that will make us see all the challenges we have are
lessened, so that all of us can have a better life. What I believe in is
that, together, we will bring about developments, so that it can be seen
that the ANC-led government has vision and foresight. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon Minister Manzankosi and Deputy
Minister, hon MEC, ...

Izinhlelo zethu zezezokuthutha kuleli lizwe ziphucuzeke kakhulu, njengoba
sazi ukuthi ezokuthutha kuleli lizwe yizona zinhlelo ezikwazi ukuxhumanisa
bonke abantu basemakhaya nabasemadolobheni ukuze izinto zakhona zikwazi
ukuhamba kahle.

Ngithi-ke, Manzankosi nginokukwethemba ukuthi kukhona ongakwenza kulolu
hlelo lwakithi ngoba kulesiya sifundazwe sobukhosi baKwaZulu-Natali kuningi
owakwenza wathukisa izindawo zethu zasemakhaya. Sayeka ukwemuka nomfula uma
sihamba siwela imifula njengaseSikhwebezi nje siya kwezinye izindawo.
Sasingakwazi ukuwela kahle, sasiwela amanzi ashaya lapha bese sihamba siya
esikoleni iSilanda.

Ngithi-ke, Manzankosi ngiyakwethemba njengendoda eqhamuka kulesiya
sifundazwe ukuthi uzowenza lo msebenzi. Ngiyethemba futhi ukuthi ngeke
usiphoxe ngesikhathi Sendebe Yomhlaba. Uyobe usukulungisile lokhu
okuzintwala okuhluphayo laphaya ezitimeleni njengoba umnawami kade esho
ukuthi uthola omama bethwele kakhulu, kuminyene, bebelethe nezingane, behla
nakabuhlungu ezitimeleni.

Bese ngithi-ke ngizocela ukuthi ubambisane kakhulu noNdosi ezimpini lezi
zamagovu lawa akithi angoSomatekisi ngoba isibhamu sisekhona. Ngoba uma
uhamba ngetekisi uvele wazi kahle ukuthi awuphephile. Ngizocela impela
ukuthi nibambisane njengamadoda aleli lizwe kanye nezakhamizi njengoba
oyihlomkhulu bayilwela le nkululeko, nikwazi ukuthi izigebengu lezi
niziqoqe nizibeke endaweni yazo.

Ngithi-ke isabelomali somnyango wakho, njengoba ufika nje, ngabe ngenza
obukhulu ubuxhwe uma ngingagxeka. Uyafika, ufake izicathulo ezintsha. Lezi
zicathulo ezintsha-ke ngicela ukuthi uzifake Manzankosi, usebenze
ngokwethembeka kuleli lizwe lenkosi, uthasisele kulokhu owawukwenza le
ekhaya, uphinde ukwenze nalapha. Ngithi-ke isabelomali soMnyango wakho
ngiyaseseka egameni leqembu leNkatha Yenkululeko Yesizwe. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Our transport programmes in this country are well developed.  We  all  know
that transport programmes make it easy for people in  the  rural  and  urban
areas to meet so that everything can run smoothly.

Manzankosi, I trust that you can do a lot in this programme because  in  our
province, KwaZulu-Natal, you did a lot in developing places in rural  areas.
We no longer get washed  away  whilst  crossing  rivers,  for  example,  the
Sikhwebezi River, in order to get to  other  places.  It  was  not  easy  to
cross; the water would reach up to here when we  were  going  to  school  in
Silanda.

Manzankosi, I trust that you will execute this  task  as  a  man  from  that
province. I also hope that you will not  disappoint  us  during  the  Soccer
World Cup; and that by that time you would have taken care of  those  people
who are  causing  problems  on  the  trains,  such  as  those  my  colleague
mentioned. Amongst other things is that you find women with lots of  parcels
and children on their backs in overcrowded trains, and  they  also  find  it
difficult to disembark from the train.

I urge you to work  together  with  Cele  in  fighting  crime  in  the  taxi
industry because they still have guns. When you travel in a  taxi  you  know
that you are not safe. I urge you to work together as men  and  citizens  of
this country because your forefathers fought for this freedom, and you  must
be able to put these criminals where they belong.

With regard to the budget allocation of your department, it would be  really
unfair of me to make slanderous remarks because you are still  new  in  your
position. Manzankosi, I  urge  you  to  work  with  integrity  in  your  new
position; do more  here  than  what  you  did  back  home.  I  support  your
department’s budget allocation on  behalf  of  the  Inkatha  Freedom  Party.
[Applause.]]
Mr B H CELE (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister,
colleagues, friends, foes and comrades, the budget is speaking to us
regarding a couple of aspects. Hon Minister, talking to you ...

... kufana nokuthela amanzi emhlane wedada ... [... is a waste of time ...]

... because you understand these things very well, but let us start with
the 2010 and infrastructure budget. Its shortcoming is that it has
concentrated on host cities and developing cities only, and has completely
forgotten the rural areas. That is the problem about the billions of 2010.
I hope that, at a certain given point, we will pick that one up, because it
is very serious.

Where I come from — you know very well where — we have just completed a
process of trying to find out what we can do in the rural areas which are
short of 474 pedestrian and vehicle bridges. We are building a pedestrian
bridge at a cost of R6 million per bridge. If we build 10 a year, it will
take us 43 years to build enough bridges for everybody in that province to
cross a river when it is raining.

Whilst speaking about the province, I am sure that several provinces like
Mpumalanga, Limpopo and Eastern Cape share the same problems as KwaZulu-
Natal where people still postpone funerals and weddings because they cannot
cross the river on the day of the function. They shout out messages,
saying: Ningabe niseza, asisashadi sizoshada ngesonto elizayo. [Do not
come, we are no longer getting married; we will get married next week.]
People cannot cross the river to reach the place where the wedding is
taking place on that particular day.

So, these are the things we need to understand as we enjoy the 2010 Fifa
World Cup; seeing Gautrain and the bus rapid transit, BRT, system and
everything. Life in rural areas for some reason has not been taken up to
speed, like the 2010 furore. So, we need to understand that. Having said
that, we appreciate the infrastructure that is there, but as I am trying to
make everybody understand, it should not just be for the urban South Africa
and the developed areas only, but the rural South Africa should also
benefit from the 2010 infrastructure. We are in danger of completely
forgetting the rural areas where we come from.

We did a check and would like to agree with you on the point of road
safety. I have been accused of exaggerating when it comes to road safety,
hon Minister and hon Deputy Minister. I would love to see road safety
picked up at the same level as HIV/Aids. Sometimes they feel that I am
exaggerating I am not. Imagine that you lose 15 000 people a year, and that
those people you are losing are between the ages of 18 and 35 or 40.
Imagine those people have just finished school and acquired degrees, be it
medical degrees, chartered accountants, etc. Those are the kinds of people
who die on the roads. They die on the roads because they can afford to buy
speedy cars and they die on the roads — 15 000 of them — at an expense of
R56 billion a year, money that no one has budgeted for. Going to the ICU,
you are moving from being healthy straight to the ICU, which no one has
budgeted for. Therefore, we need to pick up on road safety seriously.

Actually, we should move away from the mentality of thinking that road
offences are ordinary and normal road offences. There must be some kind of
an understanding that you are committing a crime, because most of these
accidents are criminal offences rather than traffic offences. You cannot
just go into a bar ...

... unkunke utshwala, unkunke utshwala, unkunke utshwala bugcwale isisu ...
[... and gulp liquor, and gulp more liquor, until you cannot take anymore
...]

... and when you are really drunk and nasty, you get into a car and drive.
And when you kill people everybody thinks that ...

... wenze ingozi.[... it was an accident.]

There is no accident about that. There is no culpable homicide. That is
murder. So, we must begin to understand and treat those things with some
kind of understanding. The countries that we look up to, countries like
Australia, have nothing like road offences. They call it crime. If you
drive at 210km per hour where you are supposed to be driving at 100km per
hour and you kill people, they charge you for culpable homicide ...
“ubulele ngengozi,” [You committed culpable homicide.] When you were flying
on the road ... Roads are not for flying; they are for driving and there
are people who are flying on the roads and we are still arguing that it was
an accident. It cannot be an accident; it is murder.

So, we need to shift our understanding of road accidents. They kill our
people, they kill young people and therefore our economy, because the
people killed either owned these cars and were active in the economy or
were in the buses or taxis going to work or they were school kids. They are
therefore killing the future and not only the present.

Hon Minister and Deputy Minister, there is a programme that we have taken
that is meant for visiting the victims of road accidents. You need to go
and see what happens when people have died on the roads. Some kids have
been going to the best schools, and when they are supposed to go back to
township schools for the first time, because their whole lives their
parents have been driving them to school, they find out for the first time
where the taxi rank is.

Usizi. [It’s sad.]

The pain that engulfs these families when people have died on the roads is
amazing. So, it is important that road safety is really taken care of and
that we pick up on it in the very serious way it deserves and that we are
very serious about it.

Lastly, Minister, I know job creation is close to your heart and I hope
that you will push it very hard. There are programmes like Zibambele that
we need to carry through. When you left the province you had targeted to
create these 40 000 Zibambele jobs for the period 2009-10 and I am sure
that you will be happy when I tell you that we have already created 39 997,
which is only three short to complete 40 000 before the end of period 2009-
10.

There are two important things about these Zibambele jobs. Firstly, they
are permanent; and secondly, they help the most unemployable people, people
whom, even if the country had an upswing economically, would never be able
to get their CVs, because they are completely illiterate. So, even if you
create more jobs, that won’t help them. Therefore, it is important that
these jobs are created for these people. But more than that Minister, the
report is that they have created clubs and managed to get something out of
nothing. These people work three days a week and get about R450 to R490
now. They have saved R12 million amongst themselves with their saving clubs
– R12 million.

What we are trying to do at the moment is that they are saving in different
places and pooling their money together; soon they are going to be creating
what we call Thenga kanye-kanye. This is when they are going to buy their
groceries in bulk and we have calculated that if they buy groceries
together, where they would normally pay R270 per package, they would only
pay R200 with this scheme. And at the same time they will work with one
mode of transport that will deliver rather than paying money to go to town
to buy, but these things will be delivered. I think we can all sit down and
share these ideas together and spread them nationally.

And the last one is Siyazenzela. Through the Extended Public Works
Programme, EPWP, we have formed joint ventures with municipalities where,
instead of giving tenders for garbage collection, the individual household
is contracted to collect garbage and weigh it and then get food of the same
weight as the garbage they have collected. So, we have four municipalities
working on that and we are prepared to sit down and share these ideas
together and spread them through the whole country so that we make sure
that the jobs that the President has spoken about are achieved. That is the
contribution that KwaZulu-Natal is making. We support this Budget Vote and
we hope that all these runs will walk a longer distance. Thank you very
much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M P JACOBS: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, hon MECs, hon
members and officials, let us acknowledge the road that we have travelled
as the Department of Transport over the years to build an efficient,
accessible, cost-effective and trouble-free transport system. An efficient
transport system is the backbone of a prosperous economy.

Minister, your department has been able to bring down the death rate on our
roads. It has been able to boost the economy through transporting goods
from one destination to the other. Your budget is a movement through which
greater transparency and participation in government budgetary decision-
making can be attained. Our emphasis on this budget is to accelerate
economic growth and development; improve the effectiveness of government
intervention; improve the lives of those who have been disadvantaged;
intensify the South-South economic relations; ensure that there is
implementation of energy saving measures; and the 2010 Fifa Soccer World
Cup.

The ANC-led government believes that this sector has the potential to
create sustainable jobs and to grow the economy faster, targeting the 2010
World Cup and beyond. That is why it is crucial that the bus rapid transit,
BRT, system should be brought to finality as a matter of urgency. The
greatest challenge confronting us is that we do not have a well co-
ordinated transport system. The left hand does not know what the right hand
is doing. The taxi industry does not talk to the bus industry and vice
versa; it is similar in the freight, flight and rail industries.

The taxi industry is an industry that can improve our economy tremendously.
Taxi owners must realise that there is life after the taxi industry. There
should be visionaries who should venture into other businesses, like the
bus, car manufacturing, petrol, spares and even the manufacturing
industries. They could create thousands of jobs to improve the lives of our
people.

The sooner we put the house in order, the better for the transport
industry. For the industry to thrive, they must be made aware that
transport is not their exclusive monopoly, but that they are a part of the
industry just like other stakeholders. This reminds me of the words of a
former Lesedi radio announcer, Thuso Motaung, who said, “Taxi owners,
instead of counting rands and cents, are busy counting dead bodies.”

The second challenge is to create an enabling environment for rural people
and black farmers to do business without hindrance. These people should be
assisted and supported to create a transport system that is reliable, cost-
effective and efficient. Their products should easily reach urban markets.
We should inculcate a sense of pride for them to do business in rural
areas. They should not feel neglected. They are entitled to the same rights
and privileges that are enjoyed by people living in urban areas.

In conclusion, we should never again allow a project like the Gautrain,
because the beneficiaries of that project are well-to-do people. We carry
the mandate of the majority of our people. They are the ones who should be
beneficiaries. Mr Minister, we support your Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, Minister Ndebele, MEC Cele,
hon members, Director-General of Transport and your colleagues from the
department, friends and colleagues, a few weeks ago I had the privilege of
addressing the select committee when we tabled the Department of
Transport’s strategic plan.

I would like to use today’s input to just dwell on some of the issues that
I raised in that particular meeting. I know from my 10 years in Parliament
– Chairperson, I know that you’re one of the champions of this – that the
purpose and strategic role of the NCOP is not often appreciated,
particularly by colleagues over in the National Assembly. Maybe, sometimes
also here in the NCOP as well, there’s a sense of “Who are we?” And I think
the NCOP sometimes gets treated as a poor relative.

What I really want to say today is that, certainly from a transport
perspective, the role and importance of the National Council of Provinces
is absolutely crucial. If you are going to deliver infrastructure and
public transport — a range of things — effectively, then your role is
really critical. I really wanted to make that point.

When it comes to road infrastructure, for instance, the hon Groenewald
correctly said that we’ve got many challenges in terms of maintenance,
upgrading and so on. Failure to do that sets us further back. He is
absolutely right.

He then said that the national Department of Transport needs to get more
qualified civil engineers. That may be the case, but a lot of maintenance
and infrastructure development problems lie with provinces and local
government. This is not necessarily their fault, but we need an intelligent
and strategic discussion about how we allocate resources to infrastructure,
bridges and so forth. How do we ensure that those resources are then spent
on infrastructure?

We think that at a national level, the SA National Roads Agency Ltd,
Sanral, is by and large doing quite well in terms of the maintenance and
development of road infrastructure, the N-routes. However, the great
majority of kilometres of routes are actually with other spheres of
government, and there are many challenges.

We think that you have a strategic role to play, one, in terms of
oversight, but also, two, in contributing to the policy debate as to how we
most effectively allocate resources to make sure that we are doing this.

This also applies to public transport. By the way, hon Cele, in the medium-
term budgets for the years 2011-12 the public transport infrastructure
grant envisages some R5,1 billion for infrastructure, and government’s
perspective is that we need then to shift, in that year, to a major focus
on rural transport infrastructure.

We’ve used the 2010 hosting to increase our transport budget quite
successfully. Cabinet has let us use 2010 to make sure that we have a
legacy of public transport, for the first time. This is because we don’t
have decent public transport at all in South Africa. We’ve done quite well
in terms of getting a budget, but, of course, that budget, as the hon Cele
has correctly said, has tended to go to cities. I understand his
impatience, but at the same time we do understand that it’s not just in
cities that there are problems of public transport, as there are also huge
problems in rural areas. Certainly, it is our intention, particularly from
2011-12, to shift the emphasis of infrastructure transport spending to
rural areas.

As we look back on the past 15 years of democracy, we can see that we’ve
done many good things together. Led by the ANC government, all of us as
South Africans have done many good things in transforming our country.
However, there are areas where we seem to have reproduced poverty and
inequality, which is by and large racialised inequality.

One of the problems has to do with this spatial arrangement, the spatial
legacy of South Africa. What happened before the apartheid period is that
the black majority was forced into marginalisation, either into dormitory
Bantustans and reserves, or into peripheral townships on the edges of our
cities.

That means, from a public transport perspective, moving people effectively
and efficiently was hugely complicated. Even today, we have this legacy
where public transport is not public transport that is being used all day,
throughout the day, and so on. It’s one way in the mornings and one way in
the evenings, to dump people back in their dormitory townships. No
resources, no facilities and so on. This poses huge challenges for all of
our cities and towns as to how we have sustainable public transport that
serves people and begins to change things.

What we realise is that we can’t do it alone, as the Department of
Transport; we need to work closely with our municipalities and their
integrated transport plans and development plans. We need to work very
closely with our provinces and the Human Settlements department, which is
no longer just the Department of Housing, because we’re not just thinking
of housing as rows of RDP houses located in the same distant localities.
Let’s start to think about human settlements, where there are resources,
facilities, such as sporting facilities, jobs, and so forth, which are not
far away from where people have historically been dumped.

We need to also work very closely with the Planning Commission in the
Presidency to make sure that we start to change the way in which space is
allocated in South Africa, so that we don’t continue just to reproduce
racialised inequality, which we have done over the past 15 years. When
apartheid ended, the market took over. So, when we built RDP houses, we
built one million in five years — which is an amazing achievement — and
three million now, after 15 years. In order to do that massive expansion of
houses within the space of 15 years, and within the budget, we locate them
in the same low-cost areas in terms of property.

Again, the market itself has reproduced these inequalities of space at a
huge cost to poor people in terms of travel and in terms of time to get
anywhere in order to access their basic rights. So, we’ve got to change
that. Transport itself can also be a catalyst for changing this.

Many speakers have already mentioned the fact that we need to have
integrated public transport systems, including, but not just, Bus Rapid
Transit systems, BRTs. Instead of these sterile freeways congested with
cars, we need decent routes where businesses, mixed-income housing, all
kinds of facilities and so on, are all along the routes. The routes
themselves become democratic spaces where rich and poor, black and white,
old and young use the public transport and contribute to a new sense of
nation-building and solidarity.

So, public transport is very important and, therefore, hon Cele, I hope
you’ll forgive us for spending a bit of money in the cities and towns where
there are big problems of congestion, in order to begin to democratise the
space, time and allocation of resources in order to transform people’s
ordinary lives.

What have been the problems? One of the problems, as we look back, has been
that many of the transport responsibilities have been fragmented into
different spheres of government. For instance, planning, in terms of the
old National Land Transport Transition Act, was primarily a municipal
function, as it should be. Integrated development plans also integrate
transport plans, and the two obviously needed to be linked.

However, when it comes to subsidies, for instance, the bus subsidies have
been a provincial function. The Metrorail subsidy function has been a
national function — okay. The regulatory functions, for instance in terms
of operating licences, have tended to be a provincial function.

This has been the case not necessarily because people were competing for
turf — although sometimes they were — between different spheres of
government. It has been a recipe for a lack of co-ordination: planning in
one place; regulation in another; and subsidies in another place, and
therefore the things not adding up together.

Therefore the NCOP, towards the end of last year – obviously the NCOP of
the previous Parliament – passed the new National Land Transport Act. This
Act said: Let us, as quickly as possible, locate regulation, licensing,
subsidies, where possible, and planning in one place so that you don’t have
things pulling in different directions. In particular it said: Let us begin
with the 2010 host cities. Let us try and locate all of those things like
the operating licensing, the subsidies, the infrastructure spend and the
planning with the host cities and any other municipalities that are capable
– obviously not all would be capable all at once of doing these things.

We need to move towards the implementation of that National Land Transport
Act, which I think will go a long way. We can’t do that unless our
colleagues in the NCOP also play a very active role in oversight over the
provincial executives and over the towns and cities in their areas. So, we
really call upon you to be activists in this process.

The same applies – I see my time is running out – to bus subsidies. My
colleagues will remember that at the beginning of this year, we ran out of
bus subsidies and there was a huge crisis. This year, we estimate that
again we are going to have a similar problem. This year things, from a
provincial point of view, have become more complicated because now the
subsidy doesn’t go via the national department to provinces; it goes
directly to provinces, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act. Therefore,
we call on provinces and yourselves in the NCOP to be very vigilant about
how we are going to use the bus subsidy allocation. From the national
department, we are going to campaign with Treasury to make sure that there
is an improved allocation for bus subsidies in provinces.

At the same time, unless provinces make a good case for how they are going
to be spending that subsidy, it’s going to be very difficult for us. So, in
short, colleagues, thank you for the inputs that I’ve heard so far. My main
message is: We need an activist, vigilant, but co-operative NCOP, if we are
to achieve a major turnaround — as I’m sure we will — in terms of public
transport and transport in South Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Chair, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, hon MEC, hon members,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. It should be
clear to this House that there is something innately wrong with the
transport policy. The policy is premised on the belief that oil supplies
are constant, that demand is level and that climate change is not playing a
factor. No mention is made anywhere of peak oil. The department is silent
on single-passenger cars causing a gridlock on our roads leading in and out
of the cities. The fact that our mode of transport has the biggest impact
on our environment seems to be inconsequential.

Who can argue the fact that motorised vehicles are the largest emitters of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and therefore the largest contributors
of the process of climate change? It is estimated that 160 000 people are
dying of climate change each year. Models developed by the
Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change show that climate change will
threaten health, particularly in the low-income population and
predominantly in tropical and subtropical countries. This means we are
first in the line of fire. Heat-related deaths and illnesses, epidemics of
infectious diseases after storms and floods and the displacement of
population have been forecast. Overall crop yields are predicted to
decrease as temperatures rise, and food prices will rise rapidly.

That is just one part of the problem. Fuel prices are rising again. Last
year, it rose to R10,00 a litre. Where will fuel prices be in two or three
years from now? The increasing demand and the falling supplies, especially
of light crude oil, will intensify the pressure on prices. But then what
about the pressure on our foreign exchange? What if everybody chose to
travel to work in a single car? An individual might afford the cost of
fuel, but what about the economy?

Our people have to travel long distances everyday. This has taken a toll on
their health, as well as on their pockets. It is one thing when taxi
drivers protest. It will be a different thing if the daily commuters begin
to protest. That time is very close. If we don’t have any answers, we will
have big problems. The season of protests is here. The bus rapid transit
system, BRT, still has to get off the ground. The park-and ride system is
only being tested on a small scale at this moment. At the rate which our
government has been going, it will be overtaken by circumstances beyond our
control.

I would like to ask the Minister to come back to this House with new,
revised and forward-looking plans that will allow transport to be
sustainable and affordable far into the future. Peak oil is here; climate
change is here; escalation in the price of fuel is here and pressure on our
foreign exchange is here. None of these will be reversed any time soon, and
some will never be reversed, ever.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chair, on a point of order: we can’t hear, and the member is
busy speaking. Are you going to allow him one minute or two more minutes to
... [Interjections.] No, we can’t hear the member speak. That is the issue.
[Interjections.] No, it’s not. It started now.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): The Chief Whip is attending to
that, hon member.

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes, please.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Cope believes that we cannot afford to be tied into a
transport technology that is of fading utility. Cope also believes that our
policies must be anticipating the future and not perpetuating the past.
What we have in front of us are policies that will plunge us into an abyss.
We need a smarter plan, and we need it now. I thank you.

Mr J J VISSER (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, hon members, I thank you for the opportunity to speak and
represent my province here. It is so, Deputy Minister, that nothing shapes
our cities more profoundly than public transport. Safe, affordable and
accessible public transport carries millions to work every day. It takes
children safely to school; it enables us to visit our friends; and it takes
us to our places of work every day. Transport, in its widest form, carries
the fruits of our labours to their market destinations so that we may all
prosper.

Public transport offers choice and opportunity. It drives the economy; it
shrinks the cities; it softens the scars of apartheid; and it is an
inescapable component of our personal freedom and opportunity. The key to a
successful public transport system is partnerships. We will master skills
of working effectively with a multitude of national departments,
municipalities and other provinces to deliver a platform for an effective
and efficient public transport system. Partnership, at every level, will be
our driving imperative, and it will include the private sector, trade
unions, transport operators, NGOs and the people of the province.

The province and the City of Cape Town will bury old differences, eliminate
duplication and work together in a host of endeavours that will transform
public transport. Within the next year, for example, responsibilities for
public transport will, in terms of the National Land Transport Act,
increasingly switch from the province to the city and other municipalities
capable of managing this function. The province will ensure that it is able
to smoothly transfer public transport functions in excellent working order
and then lend support to the new transport authorities.

In the quest for public transport for all, the DA will deliver in this
province, within five years, the platform of an integrated public transport
system whose operating elements are increasingly harmonised, regulated,
formalised and complementary rather than competitive. Our objective is to
provide excellent public transport, reduce congestion on our roads and in
our ports, maintain and improve all our roads, significantly improve road
safety, cater for passengers with special needs and ease the movement of
freight so that all of these objectives, working together, ensure economic
growth and provide meaningful opportunities, choice and a better life for
all the people. The characteristics of public transport will be
affordability, accessibility, reliability, safety and sustainability.

The minibus-taxi industry is, despite its imperfections, a dazzling example
of what can be achieved by previously disadvantaged entrepreneurs without
black economic empowerment, BEE, handouts or subsidies in the face of a
myriad of difficulties. The DA is totally committed to preserving the
wellbeing of the industry and all its stakeholders. We will continue to
ensure that no fundamental changes are introduced without negotiation and
consensus, and that such changes are always beneficial to the owners and
operators. We will guarantee mobility through the taxi and bus lanes,
improve the efficiency and efficacy of the regulating authorities and seek,
with the industry, for solutions to their most pressing problems. In
return, we expect the industry’s fullest co-operation in our safety and
regulatory campaigns, as well as a significant improvement in service to
their customers.

With regard to the bus rapid transit, BRT, system, the province will
collaborate seamlessly with the City of Cape Town to ensure that the first
three BRT systems are fully operational for 2010. The BRT system will
revolutionise public transport in the Peninsula commuter belt, which
includes the city, Swartland, Drakenstein and Stellenbosch. The first
routes will serve as a working laboratory to point the way forward. Our
Minister, Robin Carlisle, stands shoulder to shoulder with both our
President and our Premier in his commitment to BRT.

For the 2010 event, the best will be in the west. The City of Cape Town is
the host city contracted to Fifa. As such, it has the greatest
responsibility for the success of this seminal event, including public
transport. The city’s Mike Marsden will champion the entire project,
including the important legacy aspects. In the spirit of co-operation and
real co-ordination, all provincial staff working on 2010 will report
directly to Mr Marsden. The province is already working in partnership with
the city, and it has already transferred a number of consultants to the
city. We are confident that 2010 will exceed expectations.

When it comes to roads infrastructure, the physical condition of the
provincial road network, particularly our gravel roads, is a matter of
concern. Roads are usually designed for a normal lifespan of 25 years.
However, about 75% of our roads are already older than this. This has
severe implications on road safety and the sustainability of our roads. The
road maintenance backlog is currently in excess of R1 billion. On the other
hand, the road maintenance budget reflects a declining trend over the
medium-term. Additional maintenance funds supplied to us by Treasury will
run out over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. The average allocation
over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework is less than half of what the
department needs to eradicate the current backlog. The disparity between
the budget for road maintenance and the backlog reveals that the backlog
will increase exponentially unless current budgetary allocations for road
infrastructure are reviewed. This situation is exacerbated by the shortage
of engineers and technical skills.

The department’s road infrastructure directorate currently has a 40%
vacancy rate. Together with the limited funding for road infrastructure,
this poses serious challenges to the capacity of the department to maintain
our roads according to required standards. The budgetary limitations are
reflected in the budget allocations for road infrastructure, public freight
and transport. For example, the road infrastructure has been allocated
R558 million, which is still far from what is actually needed to eradicate
existing backlogs. A large portion of this is dedicated to the 2010 legacy
projects on the N1 and the N2, all of which will be completed timeously.
The public freight and transport category has been allocated R96 million,
amounting to approximately R73 million less than in the previous year. The
reduction is largely occasioned by Treasury withholding funds in an area
where there was very heavy spending previously on consultants ... I thank
you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: House Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, hon
MEC, hon members of this august House, as God was with Joshua when he led
the chosen people to the promised land, he is also with us now as the ANC-
led government in our resolve to better the lives of people and in our
commitment to the five key priorities. These key priorities resulted in the
election mandate that our people gave us when we said “Together we can do
more.”

The ANC-led government operates very strictly along the lines of effective
and efficient accountability from everyone entrusted with public funds.
While the ANC government considers the public transport sector to be the
heartbeat of our economy as it contributes tremendously to the economic
growth of the country, this financial year, this department has been
allocated R23,7 billion, which is 5,5% of the national Budget.

Although the amount is reduced by 3,10% in comparison to the 2008-09
allocation, it is hoped that it will meet successfully and complete the
following transport strategic objectives, namely to, firstly, effectively
manage national innovative research and provide economic advice in respect
of all modes of transport; secondly, create an enabling regulatory
environment for roads, aviation and maritime transport; thirdly, manage
accident and incident investigation in all modes of transport; fourthly,
manage and facilitate integrated planning and intersphere co-ordination for
transport infrastructure and operations; fifthly, manage the implementation
of the transport logistics strategy and the development of freight movement
corridors; sixthly, develop integrated, accessible and affordable quality
public transport networks that meet the needs of both rural and urban
passengers, hence the Moloto Corridor; and finally, develop appropriate
mandates and monitoring mechanisms for public entities.

Chair, our election manifesto, from which our mandate is derived, directs
that an effective public transport system be put in place in order to
address the legacy of apartheid planning, which led to our people
travelling long distances to places of work and spending a large share of
time and income on transport.
This reminds me and most of us here of who we are and where we come from,
and which mode of transport we used to have access to.

Besigibela tinkalishi temambongolo kungako lamuhla kufanele sibone kwekutsi
bantfu bakitsi batfola kwekuhamba lokuphephile.[We used to ride in donkey
carts, and that is why today we must see to it that our people get a safe
transport system.]

Most of the unemployed cannot even afford to pay for transport to search
for jobs. As South Africa moves towards the 2010 World Cup, our government,
through this department, must continue to roll out a public transport
strategy, starting with the host cities. This would address the needs of
the working people. In essence, this budget is expected to do exactly that.


It is pleasing to note the decrease in the allocation for consultancy and
professional services in this financial year. One should take into
consideration the fact that in the previous financial year, R90,2 million
was allocated and spent, while this year only R49,8 million is budgeted
for. We hope that a time is going to come when our government, and this
department in particular, will stop making use of consultants, who charge
exorbitant amounts for a service that can easily be rendered by our public
servants.

In line with the ANC’s key priorities, especially that of achieving an
equitable, sustainable and inclusive growthpath that brings about decent
work and sustainable livelihoods, education, health, safe and secure
communities and rural development, the largest segment of the allocation —
an amount of R8,8  billion — went to the integrated infrastructure and
network development subprogrammes. This caters for the co-ordination of the
needs and requirements of the 2010 Fifa World Cup under the bus Rapid
transit system.

We must note that the 2010 Fifa World Cup activities serve as catalysts for
transport transformation. In conclusion, it is now ideal for us to emulate
Joshua, when God told him to get rid of all the obstacles. We are getting
rid of the delaying tactics in relation to the transformation and delivery
processes of this government of the people. The ANC supports this Budget
Vote. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Deputy
Minister, Comrade Jeremy, MEC for Transport, Ndosi, colleagues from all the
provinces, the director-general and all the speakers present for their
contribution and for what they have added to the debate here today. Your
contributions are very valuable to us as we go forward.

As Comrade Jeremy Cronin has said, we are going to have constant
engagements on matters of transport because transport is one area where we
really want to move in a very co-ordinated fashion. As we engage the taxi
industry, the bus industry, rail, and the commuter organisations, so too
Members of Parliament and members of the NCOP must themselves be engaged in
similar interactions with their communities, so that all of us are really
on the same wavelength.

Provincial experiences need to be fed back to the national department and
the experiences that we pick up as we interact with the communities need to
be shared with everyone so that, when we move, all of us are fully
conversant with all the issues because we have shared knowledge. It’s quite
important for us to share knowledge because knowledge empowers all of us.
Knowledge would thus not have come from one side; it would have come from
our collective experience.

I would like to comment on a few issues. Allow me to start with the issue
of the Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Act. It has
become quite an urgent matter, because this Parliament and the NCOP passed
that legislation and you cannot have legislation that was passed and is
then parked or just shelved. The experimentation that we had agreed on way
back, I think, in 1998, was to start with Johannesburg and Tshwane, and
thereafter roll-out had to occur. One cannot experiment for 10 to 12 years
and thereafter have legislation that is actually not being implemented.

What is also spurring us on is the big story that broke yesterday about the
experiment that Johannesburg has been going through where, because of
administrative hiccups, we had to refund some R32 million to people who
were not properly billed, and so forth. We can’t have a system that works
that way.

The Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Act, Aarto, and
the demerit system are actually quite important for us and we want to make
the best of it. There must be an area in South Africa where abiding by the
law is second nature to its citizens. This should then cascade to other
areas. I am sure that my colleague Ndosi will know that people who abide by
the law in terms of one aspect tend to abide by the law in terms of other
aspects as well. But, once you start breaking the law in one aspect, and
you get away with doing so, then breaking the law could become second
nature.

The demerit system of Aarto is actually meant to ensure that the present
carnage on our roads is dealt with. Like HIV and Aids and other medical
problems, our transport problems are scientific problems, so we can
actually find a cure. But the carnage on our road can’t be put on exactly
the same level as a scientific problem. For example, the UK has more cars
than us, but experiences far fewer crashes. A number of other countries,
with the United States, Germany and Australia being prime examples, have
far more cars with far fewer crashes. In South Africa we have between six
and seven million cars. Anyway, we have a population of 48 million, in a
country that has very wide roads crossing open countryside; people who
drive in much more congested circumstances drive with a greater awareness
of safety.

Therefore we can do something about this problem. Part of our strategy is
to create the understanding that the driving licence a driver might have
one day is not something he might possess the next day. That understanding
is actually the key. Via the demerit system we want to ensure that the
driving licence becomes a document that a person knows can be lost through
their own actions. Some people have been complaining about traffic officers
hiding under and behind bushes alongside our freeways. We will have to look
into that.

Maybe the following will happen: Maybe our traffic officers are actually
going to be giving you a demerit and visiting you at home and saying that
they have been following you. You have got your licence cancelled. Can you
just tell us how you got home? How did you get home today, because your
licence is cancelled and your car was being driven by one person? We were
following you. How is it that you are driving when your driving licence is
cancelled?

This will teach the driving public that what follows on the cancellation of
a driving licence might very well be imprisonment, if they drive in
defiance of a cancelled or suspended licence.

The other area that we need to look at quite seriously — and MEC Cele spoke
about this — is the visitation of victims. Part of what you discover when
you visit those victims is that most of them don’t even know anything about
the Road Accident Fund. Now, as you leave here and fill up your car, 64
cents per litre of the cost of that fuel goes to the Road Accident Fund. It
is supposed to be a very standard insurance. It is an institutionalised
insurance that is supposed to ensure that a person injured on our roads
does get paid compensation. We cannot have a situation where, on the one
extreme, the Road Accident Fund has just paid R500 million to a Swiss
national, while on the other, people cannot get paid R50 000 or even
R25 000. They actually get nothing. There is something seriously at fault
with that. Of the R11 billion that was budgeted for the current year,
R2,5 billion went to the lawyers specifically, and R900 million went to the
doctors that actually attended to the people who were injured on the roads.
So, of the whole R11 billion, only R900 million was actually paid out to
settle doctors’ bills. There is something that we need to correct about
this.

In conclusion, the issue of 2010 is really an opportunity to thank the
members for their contribution and to say that public transport must indeed
be one of the key legacies of 2010. That legacy cannot just be urban; it
must cover the whole country. It is quite an important thing to do. We want
to take the opportunity to thank the portfolio committee and the study
groups. It is clear that we need to continue working the way we have,
because there is so much to be done in this Department of Transport. We
want to assure you that, as we roll it out for 2010, the key feature of our
preparations will be the public participation of as many of ourselves as is
possible. The department wants to ensure that.

One of the key aspects that we will discuss between ourselves and the
provinces is ensuring that every school and every clinic is reachable by
road. By 2009-10 there should be no longer a school or a clinic that can’t
be reached because the road doesn’t reach there. So the construction of
rural roads is one of the main tasks of making this country a developed
country. Thank you very much for the participation. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 10:44 and resumed at 14:02.

                              Afternoon Sitting

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 23 — Agriculture:
Vote No 34 — Water Affairs and Forestry:

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson of the
NCOP, members of the NCOP, the Deputy Minister in absentia — he is away on
an official engagement — and my colleague, the Minister, she is on her way;
members of the executive councils responsible for agriculture in the
provinces; the Director-General of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry
and Fisheries; the heads of departments who are present here — the head of
department of the Western Cape is also here; the chief executive officers
of state—owned enterprises; distinguished guests; other senior managers in
the department; ladies and gentlemen; and comrades, “dumelang, bomme le
borre”. [I greet you all, ladies and gentlemen.]

The 13th ordinary session of the African Union convened under the theme
“Investing in Agriculture for Economic Growth and Food Security” in Sirte,
Libya, where President Zuma reiterated that we should make agriculture a
viable investment. It is this viable investment option that will open more
opportunities for enhanced investment and the growth of African
agriculture. The summit unfolded against a backdrop of a global financial
crisis, high food prices and climate change, which threaten the economic
and political gains that the continent of Africa has achieved over the past
decade. It further reviewed progress and reflected on the commitment to
increase agricultural budgets to meet the Millennium Development Goals with
an objective to address hunger, malnutrition and poverty.

Currently, South Africa is the chair of SADC and also the cluster chair on
agriculture and food security. We are under scrutiny to lead the
continental processes by example.

When the new administration took over after the April elections, our
President announced and pronounced that working together we can do more. In
recognising the critical importance of sustainable rural economies, a
vibrant agricultural activity will be the cornerstone of rural development.
To realise this goal, the mandate of the department has been expanded to
include forestry and fisheries. This approach is shared throughout Africa
where agriculture has been declared a prime sector to turn around the
economic fortunes of the poor in the developmental state.

The department will be the catalyst for converting rural assets into
economic assets. It will convert dormant assets into viable economic
mainstay assets. It will become the cornerstone of building sustainable
livelihoods, creating permanent jobs and producing affordable food. We will
turn around production and reclaim our position as a net exporter of food.

Following on last month’s Budget Vote in the National Assembly, I am
tabling the budget of R2,7 billion, which will be reprioritised according
to the new mandate of the ruling party and the department, allowing us to
fulfil our functions as a catalyst to stimulate the rural economy. The
implementation of the Forest Sector Transformation and Growth Charter will
provide extension support services to forestry entrepreneurs and co-
operatives with specific focus on rural areas, where we will ensure the
provision of fibre and renewable energy supply and develop fuel-wood
strategies to ensure a sustainable supply of wood.

The department will also promote forestry manufacturing activities such as
sawmilling, charcoal production and pole-treatment plants. In addition, we
will also implement community-based fire management pilot projects. To
further improve the accessibility of funding support to emerging farmers
and co-operatives, we will co-ordinate all the funding grants for
agriculture, forestry and fisheries by creating a shared funding facility.
Added to that will be other funds co-ordinated through this facility from
other government departments and external funders.

The equitable share of budget allocation to provinces is R6,4 billion. A
budget of R876,8 million is allocated to the provinces through the Division
of Revenue Act, Dora; the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme,
Casp; Ilima/Letsema; land care; and disaster support. In this financial
year, Casp funds will be allocated to provinces as follows: the Eastern
Cape will receive R125,3 million, and that is the lion’s share of the
budget; Gauteng will receive R72,1 million; KwaZulu-Natal will receive
R36,3 million; Limpopo will receive R113,4 million; Mpumalanga will receive
R75,8 million; the Northern Cape will receive R56,7 million; North West
will receive R96,5 million; and the Western Cape will receive
R63,6 million. In the last financial year, the spending of the Casp funds
stood at 91%. This year we want it to be 100% because every cent not spent
in provinces is an indication of a lack of service delivery.

An amount of R2,5 billion for Casp is budgeted over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period from 2008 to 2011. We will be
implementing 115 projects in all the nine provinces, and the breakdown for
this is available for all hon members. We will commit R51,4 million to
creating 25 000 sustainable jobs just in this category. The overall
coverage of this initiative will benefit 400 000 beneficiaries.

The process to identify and verify struggling land and agrarian reform
projects is currently under way. These projects, which have been identified
as failed projects per province per annum and located within the MTEF, will
receive a funding option in order to revive and resuscitate these projects.
The first batch of projects will be funded within the existing funds, while
the remainder will be covered by the MTEF cycle. The turnaround strategy
includes public-private partnerships with the industry. These partnership
arrangements will benefit both parties in sharing the existing markets,
experience and support.

Subsistence farmers will be supported through targeted programmes to
achieve household food security. Amongst beneficiary groups will be
indigent households. This programme will support communities through
vegetable gardens, limited large livestock, small stock, water harvesting
technology and small tractors, to list but a few in our land and agrarian
reform transformation strategy. The package will be tailor-made to the
environment to ensure maximum success. Implementation partnerships with
prisons, schools, clinics and self-help groups will be encouraged as a
vehicle to ensure broader outreach.

Smallholder farmers, especially those who are beneficiaries of land reform,
will receive specific postsettlement support to ensure that the investment
made by government is converted into productive outputs. These farmers will
be placed in a structured programme which will ensure that all necessary
support systems are developed to turn them into commercial farmers. Key to
this approach will be the utilisation of partnerships and different forms
of arrangements, which the department will develop together with its
stakeholders to ensure coexistence, symbiotic relationships and positive
economic outcomes.

Kommersiële boere of produsente is belangrik in die bereiking van ’n breër
regeringstrategie in die nasionale voedselsekuriteit en groei in die
landbou, bosbou en visserye sektore. ’n Enkele strategie met verskillende
pilare sal ontwikkel word as antwoord op verskeie uitdagings wat hierdie
sektore in die gesig staar. Hoogste op die lys is waterkwaliteit,
kompeterende markte, landboulogistiek, ens. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Commercial farmers or producers are important in achieving a broader
government strategy with regard to national food security and growth in the
agricultural, forestry and fishery sectors. A single strategy with
different pillars will be developed as answer to the various challenges
facing these sectors. Top of the list is the quality of water, competitive
markets, agricultural logistics, etc.]

We have thus far assessed the impact of logistics on moving agricultural
freight across the economy. We will work closely with the Departments of
Public Enterprises and Transport, as well as Transnet Freight Rail to move
agricultural cargo from road to rail, thus reinvigorating those railway
towns that closed down because railway operators were no longer part of
those towns.

Ons landbousektor is werksaam in ’n globale verwronge handelsarena waar
Suid-Afrika se landbouprodukte soms in kompetisie is met gesubsidieerde
invoere. Ons is deeglik bewus van die belange en het proaktief ’n raamwerk
ontwikkel oor hoe tariewe aangewend behoort te word rakende landbouprodukte
as ’n maatstaf op uitbreiding van plaaslike produksie, en terselfdertyd is
gesubsidieerde invoere ook aangespreek. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)
[Our agricultural sector is functioning in a twisted global trade arena
where agricultural produce from South Africa sometimes competes with
subsidised imports. We are well aware of these interests and have
proactively developed a framework on how tariffs should be applied
concerning agricultural produce as a measure to the extension of local
production, and at the same time to address subsidised imports.]

Since 2001-02, the department has always been concerned with high food
prices as this relates to the poorest of the poor and the working class. We
have looked at the impact on food security. In response to this, the
department established a Food Price Monitoring Unit within the National
Agricultural Marketing Council, NAMC, to track food prices across the
country. Due to the work of the Food Price Monitoring Committee within
NAMC, this Food Price Monitoring Unit has now been escalated by the
Competition Commission’s investigations on anticompetitive practices in
different food chains. We will continue to work closely with the commission
to ensure that food pricing is fair and just.

Our water resources are gradually getting contaminated to the detriment of
irrigation in agriculture in some parts of the country and we are
concerned. We are working closely with the Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs, industries and research bodies such as the Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research, CSIR, the Agricultural Research
Council, ARC and other stakeholders to get a sustainable solution to this
challenge.

Ons sal voortgaan om in verbinding te bly en met die geaffekteerde partye
saam te werk aan volhoubare oplossings. [We will continue to stay in touch
and to collaborate with the affected parties to find sustainable
solutions.]

In partnership with the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform,
together with the provincial departments of agriculture and local
municipalities, we will lead delivery in agrarian transformation. Our
involvement will include the following: infrastructure development; the
rehabilitation of irrigation schemes such as the Taung, the Makhathini and
the Vaalharts; the Mokolo River augmentation; and the facilitation of agro-
logistics and access to markets. Processes are already in place to support
the rural development and land reform pilot projects in Giyani and in
Riemvasmaak in the Northern Cape.

The department will continue working together with sector partners to roll
out production massification strategies for grain, livestock, fruit,
forestry, fisheries and cotton. Government will bring agricultural support
through enhanced extension services, training and research to strengthen
participation towards a vibrant sector. To this end, we have committed
R170,7 million to the provinces to, amongst others, supply the farmer’s
green books, where extension services’ monitoring tool can be applied where
farmers, especially emerging farmers, have to sign in the book if a service
has been rendered to them according to a particular standard. So, reports
are no longer just coming from the extension officer. The emerging farmer
has to write comments. If they are unable to write or sign, a proxy is able
to do it on behalf of the farmer. Extension officers should do what they
have been employed to do. They should in fact be focusing on smallholder or
emerging farmers.

Forestry will also make a significant contribution to the Comprehensive
Rural Development Programme through the successful growing of the forest
products industry. This effort will continue focusing on encouraging self-
help groups and co-operatives, streamlining the regulatory environment,
skills development, as well as the implementation of rural incentives for
new providers.

The first wheel of the National Youth Service is turned by our efforts to
expose young people to hands-on experience in the field of agriculture,
forestry and fisheries.

We are close to concluding. I will thank all the hon members properly in
the last ten minutes. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, hon Ministers present, Deputy Ministers, hon
members, colleagues and the guests, first of all I would like to
congratulate hon Minister Joemat-Pettersson on her appointment as Minister
of Agriculture, as well her Deputy Minister, Dr Pieter Mulder. A big thank
you to the department, as well, for briefing the committee on the budget;
thank you very much.

This is a newly formed department, as it was previously the Department of
Agriculture exclusively, but now includes the Forestry and Fisheries
components. The vision of the Department of Agriculture is to strive for a
united and prosperous agricultural sector with the aim of supporting
sustainable agricultural development.

The total contribution of agriculture to the economy increased from
R27 billion in 2001 to R36 billion in 2007. South Africa’s duel
agricultural economy comprises a well-developed commercial sector and a
predominantly subsistence-orientated sector in rural areas.

About 12% of South Africa’s surface area can be used for crop production.
High potential arable land comprises only 22% of the arable land area. Some
1,3 million hectares are under irrigation, which amounts to about 1,5% of
South Africa’s agricultural land.

The most important factor, of course, limiting agricultural production is
the availability of water, as rainfall is distributed unevenly across the
country. Almost 50% of South Africa’s water is used for agricultural
purposes.
Primary commercial agriculture contributes about 2,6 % of South Africa’s
Gross Domestic Product, GDP, and about 8% to formal employment. However,
there are strong backward and forward linkages into the economy so that the
agro-industrial sector is estimated to comprise some 12% of the GDP.

Although South Africa has the ability to be self-sufficient in virtually
all major agricultural products, the rate of growth in exports has been
slower than that of imports. Despite the farming industry’s declining share
of the GDP, it remains vital to the economy, development and stability of
the Southern African region.

The budget for the department for 2008-09 was R2,819 billion and reduced to
R2,792 billion. The major decrease in expenditure are: programme 2,
production and resource management; and programme 5, food supply and viable
security — which are questionable as these programmes are linked to social
reform programmes increasing food security and poverty alleviation.

The DA supports a united and sustainable agricultural sector in South
Africa. Land and agrarian reform requires a well placed, efficiently
managed and adequately funded plan and must be implemented with minimal
disruption to food security.

More field extension officers are required and better training for existing
officers is necessary, as was alluded to by our Minister, particularly as
the “use it or lose it” factor will no longer be applicable. We must
overhaul the failure of our land reform programmes by ensuring that the new
land beneficiaries have adequate financial and other support.

The issue of biofuels, if handled well, could increase income and
employment in rural areas without threatening food security. Possibly sugar
cane could be used for biofuels in certain areas.

The budget allocation for Water Affairs and Forestry was increased from
R7 billion in 2008-09 to approximately R7,9 billion in 2009-10 financial
year, an increase of 12,2% in nominal terms. Some 23% of South Africa’s
rivers are in poor condition and 30% of sewerage plants require immediate
attention. There is a shortage of capital, skilled operational and
maintenance staff at most sewerage and water installations around the
country. Poor maintenance of pipes causes thousands upon thousands of
litres of water to be lost annually. Sewerage continues periodically to
spill into rivers and wetlands causing outbreaks of cholera from time to
time. Is it not time that municipalities are made to allocate a minimum
amount from their budgets for maintenance and replacement of ageing
infrastructure? Some of this funding is supposedly to come via municipal
infrastructure grants, local government equitable share and the capacity-
building grants.

Whilst the basic free water supply programme is well-established, the
eradication of the bucket system has caused problems, especially in my home
province, the Free State. Many people in the rural towns will not accept
the VIP toilets and insists on flush water-borne toilets.

Water is a precious commodity and every attempt must be made to conserve
our water resources, particularly in view of the climate change and our
ever-growing population. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, the Minister of Water Affairs is
out of the country on other deployments, so the Minister of Mining will
stand in for the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs.

The MINISTER OF MINING (on behalf of the MINISTER OF WATER AND
ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS): Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I am speaking here on behalf of the
Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs.

In the manifesto that outlines the programme of the current government, the
ANC has committed to the people of South Africa that we will ensure that
the best quality water resources reach all our people, especially the poor,
and that by 2014, all schools and health facilities will have access to
basic infrastructure such as water and electricity.
In carrying out this mandate, we are mindful of the expectations of the
poor majority in this country and what the ANC stands for in relation to
the fulfilment of that mandate. We are delighted, hon members, to repeat
the achievement made: In 1996, 62% of the population had access to running
water; today the figure stands at 91%.

We are committed to working together to do more to increase access, to
build infrastructure, to improve the quality of our water and to embark
vigorously on a campaign to reform water allocations so as to benefit poor
and emerging farmers, and households. In this regard, the ANC reaffirms our
objective of realising universal access to free basic water, electricity
and sanitation by 2014.

Water management is becoming increasingly complex and demands an urgent
review to ensure sustainable service delivery and contribution to economic
growth to meet present and future needs. Water scarcity and an uneven
distribution and allocation of resources make this difficult.

South Africa faces significant inequities in the allocation of water for
productive purposes. Water allocation is one component of a wider
government mandate to address the inequities of the past. Integrated water
resources management is not an end in itself, but a means to achieve the
objective of efficiency, equity and environmental sustainability in water
resources management. The South African national government, as a public
trustee of the nation’s water resources, is required to give effect to its
legal obligations to ensure equitable access to water.

In accordance with the National Water Act, there is a requirement to
redress the effects of previously discriminatory legislation, while
minimising the impact on existing users and the economy of the country. The
right to water entitles everyone to sufficient, safe and accessible water,
especially the poor. We do this so that, as government, we continue to make
sure that we improve the quality of life of all our people, especially the
rural poor. As a regulator, we will also play our part in ensuring the
capacitating of rural municipalities to meet the required levels of service
quality, as mostly the better capacitated municipalities meet the required
water supply.

We will also not hesitate to act harshly against those who neglect this
responsibility as enunciated in the National Water Act. Our strategic
objectives for these five years are to continue maintaining existing water
resources and infrastructure, and enforcing raw and drinking water quality
standards. It is necessary, therefore, to ensure that we work together with
municipalities in ensuring that they perform optimally in the maintenance
of quality standards of good drinking water.

The role of our water boards, water users’ associations and catchments
management agencies, together with our Water Research Commission, will
remain crucial in this regard. The Blue Drop Certification programme
recognises municipalities whose drinking water quality meets the set
criteria for excellence and enjoins the citizens to monitor municipal
performance, and must be intensified.

Let me once again congratulate those 22 municipalities that have reportedly
achieved 93,3% national compliance in terms of the Blue Drop Certification
programme. I would like to clarify a potential misunderstanding with regard
to those who have not achieved the standard. The 93% national achievement
does not mean that the water in other areas is unsafe to drink; all it
means is that the municipalities have not satisfied all of the technical
specifications. Let me reiterate that our drinking water rates amongst the
best in the world, and most municipalities play a significant part in this
regard. I am sure that working together with municipalities and provinces,
we will maintain that drinking water quality standard.

We are now on a collision course with wrongdoers. The commitment we made
during our address in the National Assembly on the enforcement of “the
polluter pays” principle and the fact that we are adopting a zero tolerance
approach on environmental crimes is not an empty threat. We would like to
add that, to achieve this, we would need to increase our efforts on public
education and awareness to encourage compliance. We will not succeed,
unless we educate, educate, educate.

I would like to repeat the fact that we are in the process of expanding the
mandate of environmental management inspectors to include the water aspect.
Together with the prosecuting authorities, the courts, the police, local
government, and provinces, we’ll step up our effort to clamp down on
illegal activities. The role of members of this House and all our citizens
in supporting us in our efforts cannot be overemphasised. We need you as
partners and fellow activists to curb pollution and associated crimes.

Infrastructure remains an important contributor to the supply of water for
both economic development and domestic consumption. It is also a key driver
in job creation, which helps to improve the living conditions of our
people. The ANC has resolved that we must increase the infrastructure
construction timelines to allow for more labour-intensive construction. Our
infrastructure projects continue to create work opportunities for the poor
and the marginalised. With the new injection and investment into more
construction work, we will contribute positively to these strategic
objectives.

Accordingly, our R500 million investment in the accelerated infrastructure
programme, which is aimed at intervening in high-risk areas where there are
water challenges, will also assist in creating work opportunities. We will
also be investing an additional R2,9 billion over the next three years in
the Bulk Infrastructure Programme in order to increase access for those
localities where there is dire need.

Over the next five to eight years, we will also spend in the region of
R30 billion on the construction and establishment of 15 mega water resource
infrastructure projects. This will increase the capacity of existing water
resources infrastructure to provide water to strategic installations in the
energy sector, namely Eskom; in the industrial sector, namely Sasol; in the
mining sector; and for domestic purposes.

I cannot conclude this address without raising this most important matter
of our behaviour towards water use. It is time that South Africans behaved
appropriately, considering the fact that we are ranked amongst the 30
driest countries in the world. As a water-scarce country, South Africa can
no longer afford water losses. It is imperative, therefore, to focus on
strengthening water conservation and demand management measures, especially
as there is a greater return on investment through water-loss control and
water-use efficiency.

The draft Water for Growth and Development Framework, which was approved at
the January 2009 Cabinet lekgotla, will be finalised before the end of this
calendar year. However, it is important to note that some key aspects of
this framework that will ensure water security initiatives, such as
expanding the water mix to include desalination, expanding the use of
groundwater, and recycling of effluent, amongst others, are being
implemented.

The Working for Water programme has cleared and undertaken follow-up
clearing of over 775 000 hectares of invasive alien plants, with
significant benefits for water, biological diversity, and the productive
use of land and other outcomes over the past five years. It has provided
8,6 million person days of training and employment to over 27 000
previously unemployed people, with a particular focus on opportunities for
women, at 54%; youth, at over 40%, and the disabled, at almost 2%.

The Working for Water programme and other associated programmes still
remains the key vehicle for job creation, poverty eradication and community
empowerment. In the next five years, further work on creation of decent
work, downstream beneficiation and the creation of small-scale industries,
as a contribution to rural development, will be further expanded.

The ANC has committed to the building of the technical capacity of the
state to engage with, understand and lead the development of dynamic and
globally integrated economic sectors. Building the capacity of the state to
deliver on its promises has never been more urgent than now. Accordingly,
the water sector has its own set of challenges with regard to skills and
capacity, especially at municipal level. The sector is hard hit in the
areas of engineering services and other technical skills in water sciences.


The state of our waste water treatment infrastructure as well as our
maintenance capabilities needs serious attention. To try to address this,
we have established a learning academy to develop scarce high-value
technical skills for the sector. Through this academy, we have provided 82
external bursaries for engineering and other scientific fields. We continue
with mentorship and on the job training of graduate trainees and
experiential learners. Going forward, we want to form partnerships with
academic and research institutions to optimise the skills development
initiative. Working together, we can make sure that the much needed skills
are acquired for the performance of the sector.

In conclusion, working together as a nation, we can ensure the provision of
safe drinking water for all South Africans. We will continue to play our
part towards realising the government imperative of alleviating poverty,
growing the economy and improving the lives of our people. I must reiterate
the role of this House, provinces and municipalities in ensuring water
security for the current and future generations. Chairperson, I urge the
House to support this budget policy review. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, the
department and my hon members, I will start with water. There are still
towns, townships and villages in this country of ours that are being
supplied with inadequate and unsafe water. This is a reality that the
Ministry alone cannot address, but we are in this together and we all
should play a role, especially Parliament.

Unclean water has in the recent months conduced illnesses such as typhoid
in the Mpumalanga province, which, along with Limpopo, was hit hard by the
cholera outbreak. The illnesses caused by unclean water killed people and
that is a serious issue. Proper management of water plantations in all
regions is the key to safe and healthy water. Technological advancement
remains a need to be given attention to, since it is an essential part of
cleaning our water if we are to provide the safest water possible to the
society at large.

Municipalities should play an infrastructural and maintenance role and the
department should play a management role. This separation of duties can
assist with a clear focus on allocations and a decrease in the area of
duties to be performed by the local government.

A R1 billion allocation for the bulk infrastructure of relieving backlogs
of sanitation at schools is welcomed. The sustainability of water
management is dependent on building skills and engineering capacity. The
department has, in this regard, shown less consideration, because it has
accepted the Treasury’s decrease in its allocation to the cause and
diverted it to poverty alleviation.

Let me welcome and admire the projected allocation of R8 billion for the
six major water resource projects that are: the De Hoop Dam in Limpopo; the
Berg Water Dam in the Western Cape; the Vaal River East and Subsystem
Augmentation Scheme that supply sufficient water to Eskom power station and
Sasol. The estimated R12 billion for the nine major water capital projects
is also a sign of showing seriousness in infrastructural investment. The
overall budget increase from R7 billion to R7,9 billion in the current
financial year to the departments of water and forestry is however minimal.
Considering the challenges and the plans for completing the new
infrastructure projects by 2014, we will need a bigger allocation, also
considering the forecasted droughts that the country will face in the
future.

Masisibulele isabelo sakho samanzi kuba sihle kwaye siyancomeka, kodwa
zisekhona zona iindawo ezithi zibe namadama babe abo bantu bengakwazi
ukuxhamla kuwo. Umzekelo, eMpuma Koloni kuneLubisi Dam elalakhiwe ngexesha
likaMatanzima kodwa libonelela abantu abakude ngaphezu kweekhilomitha
ezilikhulu babe abantu abafanele ukuxhamla kumlambo babe bengazuzinto.

Ngoko ke ndicela isebe ukuba likhe liyise iso loo nto kuba la ngamanzi aba
bantu kwaye nedama elo lakhiwe kumasimi abo. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Let us welcome your outstanding budget for Water and Environmental
Affairs, but there are still places with dams from which people who live
nearby do not benefit. For example, in the Eastern Cape there is Lubisi
Dam, which was built during Matanzima’s regime, which is providing water to
people as far as hundred kilometres away, leaving the rightful people
without water.

I am therefore appealing to the department to take that into consideration
because this water belongs to these people and the dam in question was
built on their fields.]

We meet at this juncture whilst storms of the global economic recession are
blowing across the globe and onto our shores. As a country, we are
determined to ensure that all South Africans have a share in the unfolding
South African promise of a better life for all.

While we recognise and pride ourselves on the strides and progress made,
there is no doubt that the challenges remain immense, especially where our
people remain without access to basic services, in particular those living
in rural areas.

I welcome the good and visionary plan that the hon Minister of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries has tabulated on the occasion of Budget Vote No 23.
Our role as the committee remains that of ensuring that we strive for the
implementation of the department’s strategy during this five-year term. We
need to ensure that we represent and execute the mandate assigned to us by
the electorate.

Last month the economist Mike Schüssler commented that the agricultural
sector is bigger than the mining sector. It is argued that it is more
likely that the agricultural sector will create more jobs out of every
R1 million of investment than any other sector. The Minister has warned in
her speech on Budget Vote No 23 that as much as agriculture may seem better
off in the global economic crisis, it is by no means shielded from its
effects. For the first time in five years, agricultural imports have
exceeded exports. This is not only unacceptable, but further vindicates our
resolve to support local food production in communities; communities for
communities. Already we are witnessing the blow where other sectors are
suffering huge job looses. It is therefore becoming the primary
responsibility of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries to create jobs and
contribute to poverty alleviation.

I am thrilled by and fully support the move pronounced by our President,
his Excellency, Jacob Zuma, during his address at the World Economic Forum.
He encouraged that there should be a conference of agricultural Ministers
where these Ministers would meet to discuss and formulate strategies on
food production and security. Commercial agriculture has also reacted to
legislation intended to protect the rights of workers and farm dwellers by
sharply reducing their number, resulting in significant job losses and
painful evictions of people living on farms. Currently we have only
succeeded in redistributing 4% of agricultural land since 1994, while more
than 80% remain in the hands of fewer than 50 000 white farmers and
agribusiness. A more equitable distribution of land is necessary, both to
undo the injustices of the past, as well as to ensure higher productivity,
shared growth, employment and sustainable livelihoods.

Voorsitter, die Departement van Landbou, Bosbou en Visserye is die hart van
die land se ekonomie, en daarom mag ons nie fouteer wanneer dit kom by
hierdie aspekte nie. [Applous.]

Ons is verantwoordelik daarvoor om te verseker dat ons mense, veral dié wat
in die armer dele van die land woon, die nodige dienste sowel as werk het.
As ons mense werk en die nodige dienste het, sal hulle in ’n posisie wees
om kos op die tafel te kan sit. Om hierdie doel te kan bereik, moet ons nie
die bydrae van ons plaasboere vergeet nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries is the
heart of this country’s economy, and therefore we may not err when it comes
to these aspects. [Applause.]

It is our responsibility to ensure that our people, especially those who
live in the poorer parts of our country, receive the required services, as
well as jobs. If our people have jobs and receive the required services,
they will be in a position to put food on their tables. In order to achieve
this goal, we must not forget the contribution of our farmers.]

Chairperson, the Minister said that the broader mandate assigned to us is
to ensure that government translates policy statements into practical
business plans. That is why we are proud to welcome the Comprehensive Rural
Development Programme.

Sihlalo, xa ndivala ndiza kucela kumphathiswa ukuba bakhe bazijonge ezi
ndawo zazinamaziko okunkcenkceshela ezingakwazanga kuphila ixesha elide
ngenxa yokunqongophala kolawulo. Sicela isebe ukuba lizame ukuwalawula,
iindawo ezifana nooNcora Irrigation Scheme, Qamata Irrigation Scheme, wonke
amaziko ukuba akhona. Ndiyabulela, siyasamakela isabelo sakho Nkosazana.
Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[In conclusion, Chairperson, I would like the Minister to take note of
these places which had irrigation schemes, but could not survive because of
maladministration. We would like the department to manage places like Ncora
Irrigation Scheme, Qamata Irrigation Scheme and all other schemes if they
exist. Thank you. I welcome your budget, Princess. [Applause.]]

Mr O DE BEER: Chairperson ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: What is wrong when a person speaks Afrikaans?
It seems you are more excited.

Mr O DE BEER: Chairperson, let me also follow the trend of speaking
Afrikaans.

Die Kongres van die Mense wil oor vyf kwessies duidelikheid hê met
betrekking tot die Minister se klassifisering van haar departement.
Eerstens wil die Kongres van die Mense weet of die bateregisters van haar
afdelings ten opsigte van die hergroepering deur die President geoudit is.

Tweedens, wat gaan die departement doen oor klimaatsverandering in Suid-
Afrika?

Die derde een gaan oor die kwessie van vissery. Aan die Weskus sien ons die
visbedryf soos die mynbedryf in Gauteng gesien word. Onder leiding van die
ANC-regering die afgelope 15 jaar, het ons gesien hoe die visbedryf krepeer
het met betrekking tot die feit dat werkgeleenthede in die bedryf gehalveer
is en hoe die infrastruktuur in die visbedryf leeg staan en nie bewerk word
deur gemeenskappe wat daarby moet baat vind nie.

Ons wil ook, onder meer, die volgende weet. In Doringbaai staan daar ’n
visfabriek terwyl die bronne buite die dorp verwerk word. Die jongste
navorsing met betrekking tot werkgeleenthede het getoon dat meer as 39% van
die mense werkloos is as gevolg van die feit dat die bron in Velddrif
verwerk word.

Ons wil ook van die Minister weet wat die departement gaan doen om die
professionele kwotahouers uit die visbedryf te kry en die bedryf weer terug
te plaas in die hande van die gemeenskappe wat ’n bestaan maak uit die
storms van die water. Dankie, Voorsitter. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The Congress of the People would like to have clarity on five issue
regarding the Minister’s classification of her department. Firstly, the
Congress of the People would like to know whether her divisions’ asset
registers have been audited in compliance with the regrouping by the
President.

Secondly, what is the department going to do with regard to climate change
in South Africa?

The third one is regarding the issue of fisheries. On the West Coast we
regard the fishing industry in the same way as the mining industry is
regarded in Gauteng. Under the leadership of the ANC government in the past
15 years, we have witnessed the decline in the fishing industry due to the
fact that job opportunities in the industry have been halved and because
the infrastructure in the fishing industry is standing empty and is not
being utilised by the communities who should be benefiting from it.
We would also like to know, amongst other things, the following. Despite
the fact that there is a fish factory in Doringbaai, the resources are
being processed out of town. The latest research referring to job
opportunities indicated that more than 39% of the people are unemployed due
to the fact that the resource is being processed in Velddrif.

We would also like to know from the Minister what the department is going
to do to rid the fishing industry of professional quota holders and to
return the industry into the hands of the communities who make a living off
the currents of the sea. Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mr G G MOKGORO: Chairperson, hon Ministers present here and hon members,
agriculture is the backbone of nations in the entire world. No nation can
survive without agricultural activities. It is important that our
government has identified agriculture as an essential contributor to the
national gross domestic product, GDP. It is an economic sector that can
absorb the majority of our people to be trained to become successful
farmers.

Even if they do not have a formal education, this is the time that the
department must demonstrate its commitment by supporting the small
commercial farmers. Chair, when I grew up as a small boy, our forefathers
were engaged in ploughing and growing their own crops. They used to harvest
enough to support their families and preserve some for the future. There
used to be no hunger, no famine. The advent of the apartheid system, that
introduced stringent measures under the pretext of a betterment scheme that
was promulgated in 1952, denied our people the right to continue ploughing
for themselves.

An HON MEMBER: Skande! [Disgrace!]

Mr G G MOKGORO: Skande, ja. [Disgrace, yes.]

Thank you. In addition to that, there was also a culling of livestock, and
people were forced to sell their livestock within a specified period.
Failure to do so would mean going to jail. That was followed by devastating
poverty, hunger and disease. That is why our people are still suffering
today.

It is for these reasons that the real Congress of the People, of 1955, came
with a powerful statement and declared that the land shall be shared
amongst those who work it. [Interjections.] This is the time that
government has to come out boldly and allocate land to our people so that
they can start agricultural activities to add to food security in our
country. We are encouraged that rural development is the number one
priority, and it should run parallel with agricultural development.

It is a concern to see the budget allocation of the department decreasing
from R3,47 billion in the 2007-08 financial year to R2,53 billion in the
2008-09 financial year. We appeal to Treasury to increase the budget of the
Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, because it is priority
number one.

Government must support emerging farmers by teaching them modern farming
techniques, soil management, vaccination of their livestock, rotational
farming and the employment of more extension officers. During the preceding
year, farmers in the Northern Cape, in the Campbell-Papkuil area, were
plagued by an animal disease called anthrax and incurred a great loss,
because there were no veterinary surgeons.

Hon members, for one typical example of how our people are really neglected
by the department, you must visit the Vaalharts Irrigation Scheme. It is
one of the biggest irrigation schemes in the whole world, but it serves
only big commercial farmers. Adjacent to it, there is a huge community,
Taung, with almost 300 000 people, and they benefit nothing from this
scheme.

The scheme was built specifically for the white ex-soldiers who
participated in World War II. At the end of the war, in 1945, they were
compensated by being given farms, implements, houses, schools for their
children and finances to start farming. It is this scheme to which our
people can only sell their cheap labour during the harvesting season. I am
sure that we all know that our fathers, who took part in World War II, were
only given a bicycle and a big, heavy solalaphi. [Laughter.]

Not far from this beautiful irrigation scheme, there is the big Spitskop
Dam. The dam stretches from the front stoep of the villagers’ houses, but
they do not even drink water from the dam. It is built on the side of the
land which was, or still is, occupied by the villagers, because it is where
they used to plough their fields.

Government must build more agricultural colleges, because there is an acute
shortage of skills in the department. There is a shortage of veterinary
surgeons, as well as extension officers. More land should be given to those
who want to farm. Women and youth must be encouraged to pursue agriculture
as a career. Farmworkers must be upgraded by being allocated pieces of land
so that they can become emerging farmers.

In conclusion, Chair, we call upon the department to fulfil its
responsibility to assist our people and develop agriculture so that they
enjoy a better life for all. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr K A SINCLAIR: Voorsitter, vir die eerste keer sedert 1994 het die Noord-
Kaap twee nasionale Ministers. Een van hierdie Ministers is vandag hier
saam met ons, en namens die Noord-Kaap wil ons haar gelukwens en sterkte
toewens. Die Noord-Kaap het ook die president van AgriSA en die boer van
die jaar, so dit sê baie van landbou in en die landbouers van die Noord-
Kaap.

Ek wil nie vandag oor landbou praat nie. Ek wil oor iets praat wat veel
belangriker is, en dit is water. In die toekoms van die wêreld gaan dit
uitgewys word dat water die nuwe goue standaard gaan word. Water gaan in
die toekoms die middel word waarmee welvaart en rykdom gemeet word. Juis
daarom, Voorsitter, is dit nodig dat Suid-Afrika, as ’n droë en
woestynagtige land, sy waterhulpbronne moet beskerm en uitbou.

Daarom wil Cope, as ’n alternatiewe regering, voorstel dat die
Oranjerivierstelsel verder uitgebrei word met die twee damme wat reeds in
die vooruitsig gestel word. Die een dam is by Douglas, wat bekend staan as
die Torquay-dam, en die tweede dam is tussen Suid-Afrika en Namibië. Saam
daarmee, agb Voorsitter, is dit nodig dat die Doringrivierstelsel tussen
Ceres en Calvinia verder ontwikkel word om ook te dien as ’n ekonomiese
inspuiting vir daardie deel van die wêreld.

Ten slotte is dit nodig om te sê dat die Uitgebreide Openbare Werke-program
se tweede fase kan dien as ’n ekonomiese instrument om hierdie
dambouprojekte en kanaalstelsels te bevorder. Ek dank u vir die
geleentheid. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, for the first time since 1994 the Northern
Cape has two national Ministers. One of these Ministers is with us here
today, and on behalf of the Northern Cape we want to congratulate her and
wish her all of the best. The President of AgriSA and the farmer of the
year also hail from the Northern Cape, and this says a lot about
agriculture in and the farmers from the Northern Cape.

I don‘t want to talk about agriculture today, I want to talk about
something that is far more important, namely water. In future it will be
shown that water will become the new gold standard globally. Water will
become the means whereby prosperity and wealth are measured in the future.
For that very reason, Chairperson, it is necessary that South Africa, as a
dry and desert country, should protect and develop its water resources.

Therefore Cope, as an alternative government, wants to propose that the
Orange River system should be extended further, in addition to the two dams
that are envisaged. One dam is near Douglas and is called the Torquay Dam,
and the second one is situated between South Africa and Namibia. Coupled
with that, hon Chairperson, it is also necessary to develop the Doring
River system between Ceres and Calvinia further, in order to serve as an
economic injection for that part of the world.

Lastly, it is necessary to say that the second phase of the Extended Public
Works Programme could serve as an economic instrument to promote these
projects for the building of dams and canal systems. I thank you for the
opportunity. [Applause.]]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Mabhoko, Sihlalo waleNdlu, amaLungu aleNdlu
ahloniphekile, abaHlonishwa oNgqongqoshe beMinyango yomibili, abanewethu
abaphathiswe iMinyango yesifundazwe saKwaZulu-Natali nalabo abaqhamuka
eNtshonalanga Kapa naseGauteng uma bekhona.

Dadewethu, uMnyango Wezolimo yiwona mgogodla wezwe lakithi
njengezakhamizi.Uyazi ukuthi umhlabathi uma ulimile uyiyona ngubo yakho,
uyingubo futhi noma usuya koyihlomkhulu. Lokhu ngikushiso ukuthi abantu
bakithi ukuze babhekane nendlala ngazo zonke izindlela kuzomele uMnyango
Wezolimo ukwazi ukuhlinzeka abantu ngezinsiza zokulima ezinjengogandaganda.


Njengoba udadewethu waseMpumalanga Kapa ilungu elihloniphekile, kade
likhuluma ngalezo zinnhlaka ezazakhiwe, noma zazakhiwe ezinhlelweni
zobandlululo kodwa zazisiza. Njengakithi oSuthu Emkhontweni kwakulinywa
ngabo labogandaganda. Kwakukhona abeluleki, ababeyizifundiswa kwezolimo,
ezazeluleka abantu ukuthi lo mhlabathi ukulungele namhlanje ukutshala
amaklabishi, otamatisi nokuthi namhlanje kungatshalwa ummbila. Yilezo
zidingo-ke eziyokwazi ukufeza izidingo zabantu bakithi eNingizimu Afrika.

Sengigoqa ngithi-ke kuleMinyango kahulumeni ekulezi zifundazwe lapha
ezikhona nina ningoyise beMinyango kufanele niyibheke ngoba asinabo
ohulumeni bezifunda zwe abazimele lapha. Lokhu kudliwa kwezimali kanye
nokungasetshenziswa kahle kwezimali yinina belusi bayo esizonifaka
isibhaxu. Kufanele ukuthi nibeluse nina uqobo ngoba kufanele kusizakale
abantu bakithi abanyama baseNingizimu Afrika.

Sengibuyela kuwe dadewethu kudaba lwamanzi, mina njengomzukulu kaSolomoni
ngikuthola kungemukelekile ukuthi abantu baseNgwavuma bangawatholi amanzi
ngoba amanzi alaphaya eJozini ehambe ayonikezwa abathile. Ngithi amanzi
ayimpilo futhi awumgogodla wesizwe kufanele ukuthi abantu bakithi abansundu
bakwazi ukuzuza ngalokhu ngemuva kokuvota ngobuningi babo ngo-1994,
baphinda futhi banivotela ngobuningi babo ngo-2009. Angeke sakuphika ukuthi
izigidi eziyishumi nanye zazivotela kona ukuba zibe nempilo engcono
eNingizimu Afrika. Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Mabhoko, Chairperson, hon members, hon Ministers of  the
departments,  and  senior  officials  from  the  provincial  departments  of
KwaZulu-Natal, as well as those from the Western Cape and Gauteng,  if  they
are present.

The Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries  is  the  backbone  of
this country. As a community we know that  when  you  grow  crops  the  soil
becomes your blanket, and it  becomes  your  blanket  again  when  you  have
passed on. I am saying this because people must know that in order to  fight
poverty the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries must  be  able
to provide people with resources such as tractors.

As the hon member from the Eastern  Cape  said,  the  structures  that  were
formed were very useful, even though they were formed during  the  apartheid
era. OSuthu, at Emkhontweni, where I come from, we were using  tractors  for
ploughing. There were advisers, specialists in farming, who  advised  people
with regard to the condition of the soil and the type of crops that  it  was
good for at that time; for example whether it was good for sowing  cabbages,
tomatoes or mielies. Those are the  resources  that  will  provide  for  the
needs of our people here in South Africa.

In closing, I would like to say to the  representatives  of  the  provincial
departments present here today that they are the heads who must monitor  the
departments because we do not have independent  provincial  governments.  If
there’s any embezzlement and misuse of funds, you will be  held  accountable
for it because you have to monitor them so that the black  people  of  South
Africa can be assisted.

Coming back to the Department of Water and Environmental  Affairs,  as  King
Solomon’s grandchild I find it unacceptable that the people of Ngwavuma  are
not getting water because water from Lake Jozini is supplying  other  areas.
Water is the life and the backbone of our nation; black people must  benefit
from this after voting for you in their numbers in 1994 and again  in  2009.
We cannot deny the fact that 11 million people voted for a  better  life  in
South Africa. Chairperson, I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms B P MABE: Chairperson, Chief Whip, House Chairs, hon members, Minister,
Deputy Minister, MECs and departmental officials. This afternoon it gives
me great pleasure to debate some of the policy priorities of the Department
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries as presented by Budget Vote No 23.

“Let us make agriculture a viable investment option that will open more
opportunities for enhanced investment and growth of African agriculture.”
This statement was made by the Commissioner for Rural Economy and
Agriculture of the African Union, on Monday, 29 June 2009, whilst
addressing journalists at a press conference at the 13th ordinary session
of the assembly of heads of state and government of the African Union in
Sirte, Libya, under the theme: Investing in Agriculture for Economic Growth
and Food Security.

Agriculture and, more specifically, food security is on the minds of
everyone. Globally, with the economy in recession, countries are looking at
internalising rising food costs by maximising food production within the
limited resources that are available. Currently, Africa’s food import bill
is at US$33 billion. This implies that there are opportunities for South
Africa to export to other African countries.

The policy issues highlighted in the department’s Budget Vote include the
need to increase agricultural support to emerging farmers and land reform
beneficiaries whilst striving to transform the agricultural sector for the
benefit of all South Africans. The inclusion of forestry and fisheries as
economic drivers to develop sustainable livelihood in rural areas is an
excellent way to focus on developing the economy while increasing the
sector’s contribution to the GDP.

This is paramount to achieving success and transformation within the
broader agricultural sector, while securing an income for the rural poor.
The areas of agriculture, disease control, disaster management and soil
conservation are concurrent areas of competence for national and provincial
authorities. Therefore, I will focus my debate this afternoon on the policy
priorities that have been identified by the executive for implementation
with this Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

The allocation of agricultural grants, according to the Division of Revenue
Act, to the different provinces and the spending of this grant will be
closely monitored and evaluated by this committee. The department will be
held accountable for depriving our communities of these services if these
grants are not used properly and returned unspent.

This first programme I would like to speak about is the Comprehensive
Agricultural Support Programme. Expansion and provision of agricultural
support services to promote and facilitate agricultural development, but
targeting subsistence emerging commercial farmers, are aligned with the
strategic prioritise of our government. This policy priority of the
department is fully supported as it speaks to achieving one of the
strategic priorities of this new government.

The allocation of 60% of the department’s budget for this programme is
excellent; this indicates that there is a real increase of 12% after
factoring in inflation. The support that was previously insufficient for
land reform beneficiaries must now be prioritised and linked with the
comprehensive rural development strategy of the Department of Rural
Development and Land Reform to achieve the goals set in the President’s
state of the nation address.

The agricultural disaster management programme that provides relief to
farmers from the effects of drought, veld fires, cold spells, hail storms
and flood via grants to the provinces is fully supported. These grants are
vital for the success of the emerging farmers and land beneficiaries who
need to buffer themselves from the effects of climate change that can occur
in the form of these disasters. This committee is concerned about
expenditures and transfers that are not made in time to the communities and
will hold the department accountable on these issues. In order for the
sector to be productive, grants and support need to be provided to the
people and in time within growing season.

The Letsema programme provides universal access to agricultural support
service and the amount allocated to the provinces will be scrutinised to
ensure that the required funds are transferred to the communities that need
them most. KwaZulu-Natal, Northern Cape and the Free State have the highest
allocation of this grant and these provinces need to show success in the
sector by increasing production and ensuring food security for the people.

The support that the department provides to the beneficiaries in the form
of extension services and capacity-building to ensure productivity will be
closely evaluated. The committee also intends to monitor the implementation
of grants that provide for infrastructure development and agricultural
support as the provision of these services to our communities is important
for success.

Sufficient postsettlement support should be provided for land reform
beneficiaries so that farms which are productive are able to make a
significant contribution to decreasing poverty in rural households and are
able to provide food to urban households. These linkages between rural and
urban areas must not be lost and closer partnership should be forged
between the spheres of government to ensure this happens. The rural divide
should be decreased and the dependence on each other should be clearly
illustrated.

The Mafisa Fund, a financial mechanism to provide access to funds to rural
communities for agricultural projects, is commendable, but it has high
interest rates, and timeous transfer of funds to the beneficiaries is
required in order for the sector to grow sustainably and be productive. The
Minister is urged to address the high interest rates and the transfer of
funds so that emerging farmers can start contributing actively to the
economy.

The focus on the youth, women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture is
imperative. The committee is very supportive and excited about the
department’s women in agriculture and rural development and youth in
agriculture and rural development programmes. The time has come for our
forgotten youth and women from the rural peri-urban areas to rise and fight
for their rightful place in the sector and economy of South Africa.

In conclusion, the department is commended for consolidating all the
national funding schemes into a one-stop shop to facilitate the transfer of
funds to beneficiaries and to be more cost-effective. We are looking
forward to seeing innovative ways of implementing the current and new
agricultural policies that the department has developed. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I just want to say this as a
lesson to every one of you. I know that most of us are new in this House.
When a member is addressing us from the podium, you do not walk in front of
him or her. That disturbs the member. You should rather walk at the back
or, if you walk on this side, you walk at the back and go and take your
seat. Don’t walk in front of the member. Those are the rules. I’m beginning
a workshop right now, which I will do in August, actually.

Cllr C JOHNSON (Salga): Hon Chairperson, hon Joemat-Pettersson, hon
Shabangu, the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs in absentia, I
think we are ready as Salga to partner with the Department of Agriculture
to ensure that the implementation programme as envisaged by the Minister is
being effected. We would also like to call upon the Minister to, as soon as
possible, investigate labour practices and the use of labour in the
agricultural sector, because, invariably, it makes of our citizens domestic
refugees in the use of that labour.

We would also like to highlight to the Minister the fact that there are
triple bottomline requirements being implemented currently, and local
government is looking at the code of good practice set by the UN, the
sustainable use of natural resources within the context of climate change
and food security challenges at local level.

Section 27(1)(b) of the Constitution defines water access as a right to
every citizen. We could not agree more with the hon Minister of Water and
Environmental Affairs in respect of this. Another important right relevant
to this debate is indeed the right to an environment that is not harmful
and protected for the benefit of the current and future generations, found
in section 24 (a) and (b). And local government, in terms of the objects of
local government, also has a responsibility to create a safe environment.

I must indicate that in this charging with the above-mentioned rights Salga
and its member municipalities have been working closely and have benefited
from the support and leadership provided by the Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs. As an outcome of this co-operation, the recently
released community survey by Statistics South Africa in October 2007
indicated that over 88% of households had access to piped water compared to
just less than 85% in 2001.

Over 60% of households had access to flushing toilets compared to just
under 52% in 2001. The R500 million set aside to intervene in high risk
areas to deal with aging infrastructures, sewage spillages and acid
management is welcomed. This is very important to local government as it
addresses two political matters: Firstly, when municipalities were
established and assigned with the water services function, we inherited old
infrastructure — some of which was way overdue for replacement. This
required huge investments. In a sense, municipalities inherited a liability
rather than an asset, because by taking up the water services authority
function, we accepted an alienable responsibility of replacing and
refurbishing old infrastructure that was associated with the function. This
infrastructure had been servicing or was consumed by a fraction of the
population, which was mostly white.

The policy thrust of the new democratic government was to extend services
to those not served rather than refurbishing and replacing infrastructure
that benefited a minority. The effect of this was to postpone investment in
infrastructure, refurbishment and replacement and further load this old
infrastructure. In a sense, infrastructure replacement liability was
transferred to local government without a policy solution as to how this
liability was to be financed.

The absence of such a policy solution is now playing itself out in the
public domain through the spectacular collapse of infrastructure in many
municipal areas. Formulating this policy solution can no longer be
postponed and it will be inappropriate to leave it to local government
alone to solve this policy problem.

The second issue — and I’m happy that the Chairperson of the Standing
Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, Madam Qikani, addressed this
issue — is that when water services infrastructure predominantly servicing
the rural areas with high levels of poverty was transferred to
municipalities from the national government, there were agreements that the
operation and maintenance would be financed from the national fiscus for a
maximum of three years and thereafter the receiving municipalities would
take over.

There are two problems that are related to the implementation of these
agreements. The first one is that when the infrastructure was transferred,
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Dwaf, transferred only
labourers together with it and retained the relatively skilled staff and
then subsidised the salaries of labourers and not the technically skilled
positions. This has led to a situation where municipalities could not have
the required resources to employ the required skills in addition to the
difficulty of attracting skills, even in cases where some municipalities
are able to finance these technical positions.

The commitment to spend R30 billion in the next five to eight years to
build 15 mega water resource infrastructures is important to ensure water
security and availability at all times. Increasingly municipalities have
been facing bulk and rural water shortages. There was not much that
municipalities could do about this as our mandate and related financing
does not include the construction of dams. With the attention focusing on
big national projects, small medium-sized towns that were dependent on
small to medium-sized dams suffer water shortages.

Recent engagements with Dwaf and water boards around bulk water tariffs had
indicated that there is a need to discuss the financing of the sector as it
is apparent that the country may not be making adequate provision for
infrastructure development, maintenance and rehabilitation in the water
sector as a whole. There is a need to develop a medium- to long-term water
sector funding and pricing model.

In the context of the above, there is an apparent untenable relationship
between the role of the department as a regulator of the sector on the one
hand and as sector leader on the other hand, a supporting institution to
local government and a supplier of bulk, raw and purified water by virtue
of being a sole shareholder of water boards and the owner of dams. The
whole issue of being the regulator, or the referee and being the player at
the same time is the cause of this untenable situation. This must be
resolved as matter of priority.

The policy changes raised above suggest a need for a mutually supportive
relationship and closer co-operation between the Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs and local government. Salga would like to work with
the department to find solutions to these policy challenges. Salga is very
optimistic that the future in terms of infrastructure creation, especially
in these bad economic times, will lead to job creation and we believe that
when there is a turnaround, there would be infrastructure that has been
created for us to capitalise on growth and development of mutual benefits,
both in agriculture and in the water sector.
As Salga we support the Budget Vote as submitted. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J VISSER (Western Cape): Chairperson, I am thankful that I still have
the privilege to be here and address this House.

When comparing the hon Minister Joemat-Pettersson’s budget speech on
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries to the Western Cape’s budget speech on
agriculture and rural development, one cannot help but notice the many
similarities and correlations between the two presentations. The hon
Minister Joemat-Pettersson said that the national department will broaden
and strengthen our partnership with organised agriculture and those
components that still need to be organised.

Since the Western Cape contributes a significant 20,8% to the national
agricultural output, this is a welcome message for organised agriculture in
the Western Cape.

Hon Minister Van Rensburg – that’s the provincial Minister for Agriculture
– said agriculture should be a profitable occupation. His statement,
together with the national Minister’s hand of friendship towards commercial
agriculture, bodes well for the future of agriculture in South Africa.

The hon Minister spoke of agrarian transformation, and the drive to
consolidate all the national funding schemes. She included black economic
empowerment in agriculture, AgriBEE, the Comprehensive Agricultural Support
Programme, Casp, Ilima-Letsema and Land Care programmes in this regard.
This is good news, as a consolidated approach could curb the co-ordination
problems that are sometimes experienced when communication is lacking
between individual funding schemes.

The Western Cape is eager to work together with the national department in
this regard. The Western Cape Department of Agriculture has allocated 28%
of its total budget towards the support and development of new farmers.

Minister Joemat-Pettersson mentioned the Comprehensive Rural Development
Programme that is aimed at enabling rural people to play a meaningful role
in an inclusive economy, thus dealing with rural poverty. The Western Cape
has added rural development to the Ministry of Agriculture, as it believes
that agriculture can play a significant role in the development of our
rural areas.

Minister Joemat-Pettersson highlighted the need for young people to be
attracted to the agricultural sector, and envisaged a national youth
service for agriculture. The Western Cape Department of Agriculture is
equally committed to attracting young talent to this sector, and Minister
van Rensburg said in his provincial budget speech that, and I quote:

   Landbou benodig dringend talent om die uitdagings wat voedselproduksie in
   die oë staar, aan te pak. [Agriculture urgently needs talented
   individuals to tackle the challenges around food production which are
   staring us in the face.]

The national department’s mandate now also includes fisheries. The Western
Cape already has a strategic aquaculture plan, which is supported by civil
society, business, labour and government. In this regard, we, as a
province, are looking forward to working together with the national
department.

The national department plans to train 1 000 extension officers and recruit
another 1 000 in the near future. This is excellent news for all farmers,
and is another point mirrored in the Western Cape’s budget, which aims to
increase its extension officer corps to 119 well-trained officials.

It seems that the table is set for good co-operation between the National
Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries on the one hand, and the
Western Cape Department of Agriculture and Rural Development on the other
hand. I thank you.

Mr C J DE BEER: Chairperson, hon members, hon Minister, I also extend my
congratulations to the Minister on her appointment as Minister of
Agriculture. Coming from the Northern Cape — a province we share — shows
that she knows her business, because she was nominated as number one MEC
for Agriculture in South Africa for the past two years. I also extend my
congratulations to the other Ministers on their appointments to their
respective positions.

I am honoured to be part of a developmental state that is committed to work
with and for its people to do more and create a better life.

Nietzsche said, “He who has a why to live for can bear almost any how.”

In terms of the agricultural programmes, we must give our people hope to
live a purposeful and dignified life.

Agricultural land and agrarian reform have an historical significance in
the struggle for freedom and find expression in the Freedom Charter, which
says the people shall share in the country’s wealth, and the land shall be
shared among those who work on it.

The Freedom Charter became, not only in principle but also in practice, the
charter of the people, the content of which has its source in their homes,
in the factories, in the mines and in rural services. Hon Sinclair, hon De
Beer – the other De Beer – and hon Bloem are not here; you must listen.
One of the key performance areas and priorities must be to transform rural
livelihoods to enable smallscale farmers to use land more productively.
Improved support to farmers is important, but access to long-term finance
is a critical ingredient.

Tans is die grootste uitdaging om nuwe landbouers se boerderye
lewensvatbaar te maak as hulle op nuwe grond gevestig word. Dit is dus
noodsaaklik dat daar ’n deeglike ondersoek gelas moet word om vas te stel
waarom sekere boere wat deur die staat op grond gevestig is onsuksesvol
was. Deeglike opleiding van sulke nuwe landbouers is deel van die antwoord.

Ek stel voor dat landbouhoërskole, in die Noord-Kaap spesifiek, maar ook
landwyd – soos die Hoër Landbouskool Noord-Kaapland in Jan Kempdorp en
Hoërskool Martin Oosthuizen in Kakamas –  plus die navorsingsinstellings in
die gebiede, doeltreffend aangewend word om nuwe landbouers op te lei.

Al die nodige opleidingsgeriewe en landbougereedskap is daar om ons
landbouers vaardig te maak, vaardigheidsontwikkeling te gee, en ook om
kommersiële landbouers op te lei.

Landbouondersteuningsdienste beslaan die grootste deel van die departement
se begroting en het toegeneem sedert die vorige finansiële jaar. Die doel
van hierdie program is om nuwe landbouers toegang tot die landbousektor te
gee. Verskerpte monitering ten opsigte van die besteding van die fondse sal
toegepas moet word. Tydens die begrotingsvoorlegging is aangedui dat R60
miljoen uit die CASP-fondse nie bestee is nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[At present the biggest challenge is to make farming by new farmers
feasible once they have been settled on new land. It is therefore essential
that a thorough investigation is undertaken to establish why certain
farmers who were given land by the state were unsuccessful. Thorough
training of such new farmers is part of the solution.

I propose that, especially in the Northern Cape, but also throughout the
country, agricultural high schools – like the Northern Cape Agricultural
High School in Jan Kempdorp and the Martin Oosthuizen High School in
Kakamas – together with research institutions in the areas, be used
appropriately to train new farmers.

All the necessary training facilities and agricultural implements are
available to produce skilled farmers, to offer skills development, and also
to train commercial farmers.

Agricultural support services make up the biggest part of the department’s
budget and has increased since the previous financial year. The purpose of
this programme is to provide access for new farmers to the agricultural
sector. More stringent monitoring, with regard to the spending of the
funds, will have to be exercised. During the submission of the budget it
was indicated that R60 million from the Casp funds were not spent.]

The departments of Social Services, Health and Education give bursaries to
students to study in those fields. What assistance, in terms of bursaries,
is given to students to study - not only at university, but also at the FET
colleges - in the field of agriculture, in the context of government’s
policy to empower our young people, to give them access to opportunities to
improve themselves in order to enter the economy?

The Kalahari Kid project is a project in the Northern Cape and an excellent
way to get our new farmers into farming with goats in order to produce good
quality red meat. They must grow and expand their business to not only
supply the domestic market, but also to export to eastern countries like
the Emirates, China, India, Bangladesh and Malaysia, etc.

We call on the department to inform this House on the progress made in this
regard, not only in the Northern Cape, but across the whole of South
Africa.

We note the objectives of the Land and Agrarian Reform Project to
redistribute five million hectares of white-owned agricultural land to
10 000 new agricultural producers. The question is: How is the department
going to do this and what are the contingency plans to keep these new
farmers on the land?

We thank the department for its financial assistance to the Vaalharts
Revitalisation Programme, will run over several years. We are also thankful
for the assistance of the present Minister who was then the MEC for
Agriculture in the Northern Cape who assisted us with that programme. This
committee and this House will monitor that project.

We request the hon Minister to ensure that the irrigation scheme starting
from Groblershoop to Kakamas also be added to this programme. It is not
just about the commercial farmers, but also about the new farmers and
farmworkers who are responsible for producing vegetables and fruit for
markets. It has an economic effect on all people along the irrigation
scheme.

I believe that the lower part of the Orange River can be utilised better,
from Vioolsdrift to the mouth of the river into the Atlantic Ocean. At
Alexander Bay is a dairy which, many years ago, excelled in producing milk,
yoghurt, cheese and butter. Today, the milk cows have been reduced because
of a lack of food. No crops are produced on the banks of the river at
Alexander Bay.
The point is not the dairy. The point is that the extension officers did
not do their work. The department will have to monitor the work done by
these extension officers in each province because it affects the progress
we want at grassroots level.

We call on the department to engage seriously in aquaculture farming with
fresh fish. This is a food commodity that is ideal for our poor people as
it is rich in protein and cheaper than chicken.

The hon Minister indicated that attention would be paid to our fishermen
and quotas issued to them, specifically in the Northern Cape at Hondeklip
Bay and Port Nolloth. Presently these fishermen are registered as
indigents. There are 39 of them in the Kammiesberg and Richtersveld
municipality. I was part of the registration process.

I believe the same situation can be found at towns along the South African
coast. If fishing quotas are a problem, then bring these fishermen without
quotas into mariculture, seeing that the mariculture plant at Port Nolloth
is not progressing as it is supposed to. This is also an opportunity to
utilise Casp funds for this purpose.

Hon De Beer, the fishing population is declining. That is why you see less
activity. [Interjections.]

There was a conference in Libya a few days ago. If you had listened to the
radio and television or read the newspapers you would have seen this. This
department, with the departments in African countries, will have to look
holistically at the fishing industry in terms of who is going to fish
where. That is the point.

Dit gaan nie net oor die leë geboue nie. [It’s not just about the vacant
buildings.]

We believe in “one household, one vegetable garden” giving our people
access to good food.

The department has to ask itself: what can we do better and how can we work
smarter? The department will have to align its strategic plan and budget to
address its priorities as well as to finalise the BEE strategy.

The department will have to anticipate challenges over the next 15 to 30
years. There must be better co-ordination between the national and
provincial departments.

We wish the new Minister well in her position as Minister. This House and
its committees will perform its oversight role vigorously so as to get
service delivery at grassroots level. The ANC supports this budget. Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF MINING (on behalf of thr MINISTER OF WATER AND
ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS): Deputy Chairperson, thank you for the privilege to
respond to the Budget Vote. Firstly, I would like to thank the members for
supporting this Budget Vote. Chairperson of the committee, hon Qikani, I
want to assure you that issues raised by you are a reflection of the past,
and we cannot afford to continue in that way. Issues of people seeing water
passing through their own areas while they have no access to it will have
to be corrected. This is part of the mandate for the current five years.
The department of Water and Environmental Affairs will make sure that this
happens; hence we are currently talking about it being multipurpose,
including supply to communities in various areas. The matter you raised
will be taken on board. It includes areas like the Northern Cape, where
people were talking about the Taung Dam. Those issues will be addressed.
So, we are on board, hon members, in making sure that we address these
issues.

Mhlonishwa Bab’uZulu ngempela sivumelana nawe ngeke kwenzeke ukuthi abantu
baphile ngokuthi ngaso sonke isikhathi bahlala belangazelele amanzi kodwa
abe ebadlula nje engakwazi ukufinyelela kubona. Lezi ngezinye zezinto lo
hulumeni kaKhongolose ozama ngakho konke ekusemandleni ukuthi zibhekwe
ukuze amanzi afinyelele kubantu.

Lokho okushilo kwaseNgwavuma ngezinye zezinto ezizobhekwa uMnyango
wezaManzi ukwenza isiqiniseko sokuthi wonke umuntu ngaphandle kobandlulula
akwazi ukuthi athole amanzi ahlanzekile, ukuze izimpilo zabo zibengcono.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)
[Hon Mr Zulu, we fully agree with you that the people should not always
wish to have access to water when it passes through their areas and they do
not have access to it. These are some of the issues which this ANC-led
government is trying its best to address so that the people can have access
to water. The issue you raised about Ngwavuma is part of some of the issues
that will be dealt with by the Department of Water and Environmental
Affairs to ensure that everybody can get clean water so that they can live
better.]

I want to say to you, hon Sinclair, that the point you raised about water
scarcity is a definite issue for this country and for this government;
hence we raised it and want to deal with it. I agree with you fully.

But what I don’t agree with is the fact that Cope is a government in
waiting. That will never happen. [Laughter.] [Applause.] That is a dream
that you will never fulfil in your lifetime. So, just stop entertaining the
idea of being an alternative government at some point, because it will
never happen. Just abandon that idea.

Hon Johnson, the issues you raised are issues that the government is
looking into. We agree with you fully. As you know, currently there has
been an issue through the new Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, where workshops or summits were held with the SA Local
Government Association, Salga. These programmes and task teams which have
been set up will need to be taken on board, and we need to make sure that
co-operation between you and the national government becomes a reality in
ensuring that we address issues affecting our communities. This is the only
way in which we will succeed as this government. There is no way in which
we can work in silos. So, it is very critical to make sure that there is
always engagement and partnerships with all relevant stakeholders,
including Salga. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Madam Deputy
Chairperson, South Africa’s agricultural trade values were, for some
months, disturbed by increased imports of rice, wheat, oil cakes for animal
feed manufacturing industries and also imports of whisky.

We know who the whisky drinkers are. When Cope lost the elections there was
a sudden rise in imports of whisky. [Laughter.] They really tried to drown
their sorrows with whisky but, as the ANC celebrated, there was an import
of malt whisky. You can understand that there is a big difference between
importing malt whisky and importing cheap whisky. [Laughter.]

So our trade balance is positive and we aim to maintain this and improve
our positive tariff balance. We are convinced that by the end of the year
our country will be a net exporter of food again, and that this situation
would have been stabilised.
We need to seek a balance between crops used for biofuel productions and
those used for food security. That is why, in 2007, Cabinet took a decision
that maize will not be used for biofuel production. Biofuel is used for
alternative renewable energy and not for food security. But when farmers
grow fuels, it also secures an income from the land and can create jobs, as
well as improve their livelihoods. It therefore requires a balancing act
and a structured sensitive approach to develop biofuels vis-à-vis food
security.

South Africa has approximately six million households that spend more than
60% of their income on food alone, but do not have enough to eat. As part
of the response, we are bringing in interventions, which will expand the
coverage of the integrated food security and nutrition programme from
70 000 to 140 000 additional beneficiaries.

The programme will deliver through the provision of agricultural starter
packs for the production of vegetables, livestock, milk and poultry. These
initiatives were tested in line with the implementation of the regional
indicative strategic development plan and the Dar es Salaam Declaration
Plan of Action on agriculture and food security.

We should not overlook the contribution of women in food security and their
role in securing livelihoods, particularly in rural areas. Forty-one per
cent of South African women live in rural communities with the balance of
the population in these areas made of up of children, the infirm and old
people. Women have kept these poor marginalised communities afloat and they
will continue to do so.

We will be convening in Polokwane again. This time the Polokwane tsunami
will be about the fourth biennial National Landcare Conference and the
African Regional Landcare Committee meeting with the theme: Together,
caring for our land and caring for our future.

We invite members from especially Cope to get a sense of where Polokwane is
actually taking this country, because that is where all their woes started
when they lost hopelessly and couldn’t accept defeat. [Laughter.] This time
we are inviting you to a landcare programme from 12 to 16 July 2009. There
will again be an overwhelming win.

South Africa has a well-established fishery sector and this is currently a
net exporter of fish and marine products. South African fisheries are
considered to be fully utilised and high value fisheries such as abalone,
prawns and linefish are largely overexploited.

At the African Union Summit we agreed that the allocation of fishing quotas
will be done throughout the continent and in Africa as a whole, instead of
only allocating fisheries per country like South Africa. I think this is an
important new development for us on the continent.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the Deputy Minister responsible for
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, the Director-General and the entire
staff complement of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. I wish to thank
the Minister of Mining for her insightful vision and comments on water
development.

I also wish to thank the members who have participated in this debate. We
wish to collect all the copies of your speeches, because you have made
valuable contributions, which we will listen and respond to.

We are looking forward to working with the chairperson and the members of
the NCOP. Thank you very much, Madam, for your visionary leadership. We are
convinced that, with your leadership, we will be able to take the sector
forward. We respect the kind of comments you have made as well as the
guidance you are providing us with.

I would also like to thank the staff members and heads of departments as
well as MECs and politicians in their provincial departments. I did not
know that there was another Minister for Agriculture in the Western Cape. I
thought that there was only one Minister at a national level and one Deputy
Minister, but nonetheless, it seems we have the united states of the
Western Cape and the independent states of the Western Cape.

I also want to thank the state—owned entities in the sector for their co-
operation and support to ensure that programmes that are delivered will be
successful. I depend on your oversight and know that you will call us to
order and to account. We depend on you calling us to order. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 15:45 and resumed at 15:58.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 14 — Health:
Vote No 16 — Social Development:

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, colleagues, MECs of Health from
different provinces, hon members of the House, distinguished guests, and
ladies and gentlemen.

I am presenting this budget under circumstances of serious challenges in
health care in our country and around the world; namely, the H1N1 influenza
and the global economic crisis. During economic crises, social outcomes are
usually the first to suffer and the last to recover. Health is usually on
the forefront of the social outcomes to suffer, because countries may be
tempted to cut all social spending when faced with financial crises.

Let me start this presentation by reminding this House what His Excellency,
President Jacob Zuma, said concerning health during the state of the nation
address:

   Fellow South Africans, we are seriously concerned about the degeneration
   of the quality of health care, aggravated by the steady increase in the
   burden of disease, in the past decade and a half.

This statement by the President is a clarion call to the Minister of Health
and the MECs of Health in the provinces to put their heads together and
decisively deal with the state of affairs. I’m therefore calling on my
colleagues – the MECs from different provinces – to help me to deal with
these issues without fear or favour.

In order to make a good start, we need to accept and acknowledge upfront
that among the myriad of factors the following played a significant role
and need to be carefully and urgently looked into: First, lack of
managerial skills within health institutions; second, failure to act on
identified deficiencies; third, delayed response to quality improvement
requirements; fourth, unsatisfactory maintenance and repair services of our
institutions; fifth, poor technological management; sixth, poor supply
chain management; seventh, inability of individuals to take responsibility
for their actions; eighth, poor disciplinary procedures and corruption;
ninth, significant problems in clinical areas related to training and poor
attitude of staff; and last, inadequate staffing levels in all areas.

I call upon provinces to note that, while some of these problems need a
systemic approach, others are quite urgent and can be partially solved.
That is, some problem areas need urgent impromptu solutions.

Let me take this opportunity to commend the Gauteng province on launching
Operation Kuyasheshwa La. [Applause.] I wish to see such operations in all
the provinces. At the same time, I want to share with the House our 10-
point plan, which has been translated into our programme of action. The
ruling party noted that there are problems within the health and education
systems during their watershed conference in December 2007 and, hence,
adopted and passed far-reaching resolutions. The binding resolution passed
expected us to prioritise the health and education systems of the country
in the next five years and beyond. The resolution was not just rhetoric,
but a realisation of problems that we are faced with.

Since then, the ruling party came up with the 10-point programme, which has
been officially adopted by the Department of Health as a programme of
action. First is the strategic leadership and the creation of a social
compact to better health outcomes. It is self-evident that if we don’t
provide leadership at all levels, including in the society, our health
outcomes will never improve.

Second is the implementation of the National Health Insurance, NHI, which,
unfortunately, has already been debated in the media even before the
document was tabled.

Third is the accelerated implementation of the HIV and Aids Plan and the
increased focus on tuberculosis, TB, and other communicable diseases.

I attended a session two weeks ago at the United Nations called by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director-General of the
World Health Organisation, Dr Margaret Chan. It was called because they
worry about what governments around the world may do to health budgets when
they are beaten by this global crisis, and they wanted to stop that. It was
during that session that I was told, especially by leaders within the
United Nations, that if South Africa failed to take the lead on the issue
of HIV and Aids, the continent wouldn’t be able to move. They were saying
that, as the continental power house, South Africa needs to take the lead
in the fight against HIV and Aids. For that reason, we need to be equal to
the task and know that whatever leadership role and programme we take on
HIV and Aids, it’s not only for our country, but for the whole continent.

Fourth is the overhauling of the whole health care system and the
improvement of its management. In this case, we will need to evaluate all
hospitals’ chief executive officers, CEOs, to ensure that they meet the
minimum requirements for effective management of the set facility when
instituting corrective measures where indicated that may include retraining
and or redeployment of people. We are also doing a feasibility study for
the establishment of a leadership academy of health managers.

In further overhauling the system, we’ll evaluate and strengthen the
district health care system and primary health care, which is not doing as
well as expected. I want to remind the House that when we took over in
1994, the hallmark of the whole health care system and the central issue in
our strategy was primary health care, which means the improvement of health
right where the people are, in their homes and at clinics. At the moment, I
think we are relying too much on hospitals, which is why there is so much
overcrowding. So, we are going to have to look into that.

Fifth is the improvement of human resource planning, development and
management. In this case, as I spoke about the shortage of staff, it is
quite evident that when it comes to doctors, nurses, pharmacists and other
related health workers, we are one team as a country. One of the most
urgent things we are going to do is to open all the nursing training
colleges to make sure that as many nurses as possible are trained.
Presently, the training of nurses takes place at universities only. That is
wrong and will not take us anywhere because it’s like training an army with
generals and no foot soldiers, and that needs to be changed as soon as
possible. We also need to speak with our vice-chancellors from medical
schools. The fact that only 1 200 doctors are produced by our eight medical
schools, yearly, for the past eight years, needs to come to an end because
we won’t be able to move as a country if that doesn’t change.

The sixth factor is to improve the quality of health care services.

The seventh factor is the revitalisation of the health care infrastructure.

The eighth is mass mobilisation for better health for the population.

The ninth will be the reviewing of the drug policy, which has been causing
running battles between government, the pharmaceutical companies,
pharmacists, etc. In this case, the fact that we have been able to bring
drug prices down is a good starting point, but the whole policy on drugs in
our country needs to be reviewed.

Last is to strengthen research and development in our country.

Let me indicate that by implementing this 10-point programme we will pay
keen interest to the following four issues: Firstly, on the whole issue of
financial management, whether at institutional, provincial or national
government level, we are going to pay urgent and immediate attention to it.


Secondly, there is the issue of infrastructure or engineering services,
including maintenance of health facilities, rather than to continue
building new ones.

Thirdly is the issue of human resources for both the management and its
development is something that we will keenly look into, because, as a
country, I don’t think we are doing very well in that regard.

Last is the issue of information communications technology, ICT, because in
this modern world you cannot run a sophisticated department like the
Department of Health unless the IT and ICT systems are up to standard.

These are the four main causes of the failures within the public health
care system and there’s no way we can implement the 10-point plan without
looking at them. Our programmes of accelerating HIV/Aids are well catered
for in our 10-point plan and when we get an opportunity we would like to
expatiate on it.
To conclude, if enough time was available, one would have liked to appraise
the House about the present contemporary issues of the occupation-specific
dispensation, OSD, because I’m sure that at some stage this House will need
to know and understand what is happening. It doesn’t help to get issues
from the media because most of them have been distorted, misquoted and
misdirected. It’s puzzling because one won’t exactly know what is happening
in our country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Ministers,
members of the House and guests, it is with utmost dismay and shock that I
participate in this debate today. The primary reason for my statement is
that these two Budget Votes are separate from each other and have the
integrity and status to be handled as such. They both have the character of
importance to assure a standard and quality nation, but I think this is
nullified by the notion to club them together. This is wrong, although they
are in a single cluster or in a social services committee.

Herrangskikking en regstelling ten opsigte van debatvoering moet gedoen
word. [The debating process should be rearranged and rectified.]

The Department of Social Development has good structured planning,
monitoring and evaluation and other mechanisms to manage it very well.

The 2008-09 financial year recipients for aid in grants total 13 137
million beneficiaries. This will grow by about 9% in the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, MTEF, years. KwaZulu-Natal is the province which is
the most vulnerable for the support of grants. It is understandable that
government must assist where poverty is hampering the integrity of
communities. That we must treasure.

We must eventually pose the question: ...

Is dit doeltreffend en effektief om ’n kindersorgtoelae te bestuur, veral
indien dit die grootste deel van hierdie ondersteuningsmodel uitmaak? Het
dit die beoogde uitwerking op die kinders en gemeenskappe? Sal
werkskeppingsinisiatiewe nie beter doelwitte bereik om die menswaardigheid
en integriteit van gemeenskappe te bou nie?

U weet die toelaestelsel skep liewer ’n goeie bron van inkomste vir
gewetenlose geldskieters en onwettige drankhandelaars wat vet katte in die
samelewing word. Die departement sê dat dit moeilik is om die “AllPay”-
kaarte en identiteitsdokumente in hierdie mense se besit te polisieer. Dit
is egter onwaar, want wanneer daar op die begunstigde se dokumente beslag
gelê word, kan die begunstigde geïndentifiseer word. Streng optrede en die
intrekking van sodanige toelaes sal baie begunstigdes dan verhoed om hulle
aan sulke wanbesteding skuldig te maak.
Selfs kommersiële besighede is aan hierdie wanpraktyke skuldig. Dit moet
gestop word, want aan die einde van die dag probeer die regering armoede
verlig, maar die armes bly arm en slegs ’n klein persentasie raak skatryk.

Kindersorgtoelaes spoor net mense aan om meer en meer kinders te kry en die
las en druk op die regering raak net meer. Hierdie stelsel sal hersien en
heroorweeg moet word. Om die familie te ondersteun, is ’n baie beter vorm
van armoedeverligting. Met ander woorde, ’n kleiner familie met min geld
het ’n beter kans om ’n beter lewe te lei as ’n groot familie.

Ons moet ons bejaardes in ouetehuise en inrigtings en kinders wat in
inrigtings is beter versorg. Werkgeleenthede moet nooit vir toelaes
ingeboet word nie. My tyd is te min en daarom gaan ek nou oor na
gesondheid.

’n Goeie gesondheidstelsel is van kardinale belang vir die voortbestaan van
’n nasie. ’n Mislukking voorspel die verval en vernietiging van ’n land.
Ons verstaan dat die land in ’n ekonomiese smeltkroes beland het. Daarom is
dit moeilik om die begroting met die gevraagde behoeftes te balanseer.

Die begroting is egter besig om gevaarlike tekens te toon en dreig om in ’n
krisis te verval. Ek sê so omdat die voorafgaande jaar se verpligtinge in
die volgende jaar aangespreek moet word. Hierdie tendens eskaleer en kan
nie goedgepraat word nie. Die begrotingsaanbod op meeste van die lynitems
was baie meer, maar die Tesourie het baie minder gegee, wat dreig dat die
geld kan opdroog voor die jaar eindig. Ek wil veral die Huis se aandag
vestig op ’n dokument wat almal gekry het, naamlik die Strategic Plan 2009-
10—2011-12. Op die een bladsy word daar baie duidelik die volgende gesê:

   Funding needs and pressures for 2008-09 which could not be funded are as
   follows: data capturer project, R10 million; vaccine purchases, R15
   million; and health information system, R70 million.

So gaan dit aan. Die volgende bladsy gaan oor die “estimates” [begrotings]
vir 2008-09:

   Budget bids for occupation-specific dispensation, OSD, is R2,5 billion.
   The actual allocation for OSD is R1 billion. HIV and Aids is allocated R1
   billion.

Wat ons gekry het, is R300 miljoen.

   ... Child mortality vaccines, R315 million ...

Wat ons eintlik gekry het, is R50 miljoen. So gaan die situasie aan. Dan
word daar baie duidelik gesê dat:
   ... the implication for underfunding is that ARV programmes cannot be
   rolled out as intended.

Dit sê vir my dat mense wat hierdie gevaarlike siekte onder lede het, die
gevaar loop dat hulle kan sterf as hulle nie die middels kry nie. Dit sê
vir my baie duidelik dat daar nie goeie bestuur in die departement en die
regering is nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Is it efficient and effective to manage a child support grant, especially
when it comprises the biggest part of this support model? Does it have the
intended effect on the children and communities? Would job creation
initiatives not achieve better results in fostering dignity and integrity
within communities?

You know that the grant system is actually creating a good source of income
for unscrupulous moneylenders and illegal liquor traders who become fat
cats in society. The department claims that it is difficult to police the
“AllPay” cards and identity documents that are in these people’s
possession. This is, however, untrue because it is possible to identify the
beneficiary when his or her documents are seized. Firm action and
withdrawal of such grants would prevent such misappropriation by many
beneficiaries.

Even commercial companies are guilty of these malpractices. This has to
stop, because at the end of the day government is trying to alleviate
poverty, but the poor remain poor and only a small percentage becomes very
wealthy.

Child support grants are just encouraging people to have more and more
children and increases the burden and pressure on the government. This
system should be reviewed and reconsidered. Providing support to the family
is a much better form of poverty alleviation. In other words, a small
family that is poor has a greater chance than a bigger family to live a
better life.

We should also provide better care for our elderly in old age homes and
institutions, and to children who are in institutions. Job opportunities
should never be jeopardised at the expense of grants. My time is limited,
so I will now proceed with health.

A proper health care system is crucial to the survival of a nation. Failure
predicts the decline and destruction of a country. We understand that the
country has landed in an economic melting pot. Thus, it is difficult to
balance the budget with the needs in demand.

However, the budget is showing dangerous signs of a looming crisis. I am
saying this because the preceding year’s obligations have to be addressed
in the year that follows. This tendency is escalating and cannot be
justified. The budget bids for most of these line items exceeded the actual
allocation made by Treasury by far, which could pose a threat in the sense
that the funds could run out before the end of the year. I would especially
like to draw the attention of the House to a document that we all received,
namely the Strategic Plan 2009-10—2011-12. On the one page the following is
stated very clearly:

   Funding needs and pressures for 2008-09 which could not be funded are as
   follows: data capturer project, R10 million; vaccine purchases, R15
   million; and health information system, R70 million.

It continues like this. The following page deals with the estimates for
2008-09:

   Budget bids for the occupation-specific dispensation, OSD, is R2,5
   billion. The actual allocation for OSD is R1 billion. HIV and Aids is
   allocated R1 billion.

We received R300 million.

   ... Child mortality vaccines, R315 million...

What we actually received was R50 million. This is how the situation
carries on. Then it is stated very clearly that:

   ... the implication for underfunding is that ARV programmes cannot be
   rolled out as intended.

This tells me that people living with this dangerous illness stand the risk
of dying if they do not receive these drugs. To me this is a clear
indication of poor governance by the department and government.]

The OSD and the problems running with the situation are a concern.
Government has been sitting with this system from 2007. Due to infighting
and sectional fighting in the ANC, government was not able to carry on with
governance and government responsibilities. Now the ANC government wants to
blame the medical doctors and their union for letting patients down, when
the ANC government must actually take the blame. Why can’t the people see
through the wheeling and dealing of the ANC government? Just say the
following words, “We are sorry. Give us more time to solve the problems.”

Dit is baie, baie eenvoudig. Dit is verkeerd. [Tussenwerpels.] [Tyd
verstreke.] [Applous.] [It is very, very simple. It is wrong.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Ms M W Makgate: Deputy Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, MECs
present here and members of this House, I just want to indicate that I’m
standing in for the Chairperson of the Select Committee on Social Services.

The legacy of apartheid mismanagement continues to be with us and will be
with us for some time to come. [Interjections.] We should not lament the
past, but use our history to insure the future. It is impossible to correct
the disparities and contradictions we have inherited in the short space of
15 years, but we do need to speed up delivery to our people.

Health, being a fundamental basic human right, compels our government, led
by the ANC, the party that received the support of the overwhelming
majority of South Africans, to fulfil this basic right. Hence we are
beginning the process of implementing the National Health Insurance or NHI,
as it is more commonly referred to.

There has been a great deal of speculation from various quarters, mostly
negative. But what is it based on? We are still waiting for the tabling of
a document that will guide the process to a conclusion that, hopefully,
will satisfy all stakeholders.

The recession that we are now experiencing makes the NHI even more urgent
in order to provide health care to the most vulnerable in our society. Some
may continue to argue for a free market in health, but this cannot be
justified when it hampers the fulfilment of a basic human right which our
people are entitled to.

Through NHI we can achieve equity in health care as the current disparities
cannot be allowed to continue. Also, through the consultation process, we
will address the fears and confusion of the general public.

The process of developing the NHI will require reaching consensus with all
relevant stakeholders on a few key elements, namely a basic benefit
package, national health fund and the role of private funders and
providers. The above will naturally follow the normal democratic process of
in-depth discussion and engagement, with a view to finding the best
solution that is practical and affordable.

In addressing the health care inequities and as a key component of the NHI,
we also have to address the issue of human resources. Retention of staff is
critical if you want to succeed, particularly in rural and remote areas
where staff experience lack of equipment and, more critically, lack of
support. It is critical for government to review the incentives it offers
to attract health care professionals, but it is equally important to
address the issues of equipment, structural deficiencies and support.

It is most unfortunate that health care professionals found it necessary to
strike in order to make their point. I am, however, delighted that they
have decided to return to work. I hope that government and the trade unions
will resolve the issue of the occupation-specific dispensation, OSD,
without any further disruptions in services.

Another key priority in this programme is hospital revitalisation, which
also incorporates preventative maintenance to ensure good maintenance of
our health facilities in the provinces. I am glad to note that five
tertiary hospitals, when completed, will render T1 services and serve as
provincial referral hospitals. Construction is intended to start at the end
of this MTEF, Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, period, and will cover the
new Nelspruit, new Limpopo Academic Hospital, the King Edward VIII
Hospital, Kimberley and Rustenburg hospitals.

The ANC believes that poverty is created by society and it can therefore be
eliminated by society. We believe that people are the fundamental resource
of the country since they have the capacity to develop personally and are
central to the development of the economy and the nation as a whole. The
ANC’s social development policy will accordingly pursue both the
development and social services aspects in the context of social
reconstruction, development and affirmative action.

ANC policy goals are aimed at the attainment of basic social development
rights for all South Africans, irrespective of race, colour, religion and
gender, through the establishment of democratically determined, equitable,
just and effective social delivery systems; the redressing of the
imbalances of the past through a deliberate process of affirmative action
in respect of those who have been historically disadvantaged, especially
women, youth and rural communities; and the empowerment of individual
families and communities to participate in the process of deciding on the
range of needs and the issues to be addressed through the local, regional
and national initiatives.

ANC policy is based on the belief of human dignity of all in South Africa.
We acknowledge that the state has a major role in meeting the legitimate
and realistic expectations of all, especially the poor, disadvantaged and
other vulnerable groups. We do not encourage the handout approach to social
welfare provision, because it does not address the root causes of social
problems. We believe in the importance of the family as it is understood
within the social and cultural norms in South Africa, in the context of a
normally functioning society. Special attention will therefore be given to
promoting the reconstruction of family life.

In conclusion, the ANC commits itself to the following national social
security system: Social insurance financed through contribution by
potential beneficiaries and subsidised by employers, and social assistance
for those who cannot provide for themselves because of circumstances beyond
their control.

The 51st national conference of the ANC held in 2002 called for care and
support for families to be elevated. As a result, care and support services
to families experienced increases over the medium-term. At the 52nd
national conference of the ANC in Polokwane, concern over the negative
impact of poverty on our society was deeply debated.

The following priorities emerged as imperatives for social development from
the conference: Firstly, a comprehensive social security net that provides
a targeted and impeccable approach in eradicating poverty and unemployment;
secondly, establishing a mandatory retirement fund and ensuring that
retirement provisions cover low-income groups; thirdly, the child support
grant should gradually be extended to the age of 18 years; and fourthly,
our co-ordinated national drug campaign must be intensified to combat
substance abuse. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr O DE Beer: Chairperson and members of this House, Minister of Social
Development, I read a story this week about Acacia Park being moved closer
to this institution. I would like to see a situation where Acacia Park is
moved to Philippi so that our people can benefit from the development that
is going to take place at such a high cost for the sake of these members
who are sitting here.

This department also has to rectify the perception that exists amongst the
people out there that this is the most corrupt department. Every financial
year, you will always find a report that reflects corruption involving
grants in this department. Secondly, how many of these grants actually
reach the beneficiaries? Most of these grants go to the loan sharks and the
drug lords. We have to deal with those challenges as well.

Cope also supports the extension of the grant to 18-year-olds, but it must
reach the beneficiaries; that is, it must go directly to the people. Thank
you. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, hon Minister of Health, hon
Deputy Minister of Social Development, hon MECs of various provinces,
colleagues from the National Council of Provinces, distinguished guests and
our management from the departments, ladies and gentlemen, and all guests
who are here with us, good afternoon.

Chairperson, before getting into the substance of this Budget Vote, I would
like to take this opportunity to say, on behalf of all of us here, that we
really appreciate the work that was done by my predecessors, Dr Zola
Skweyiya and Dr Jean Swanson-Jacobs, for the able leadership that they
provided in this department and in this portfolio, in particular.

Social Development is tasked with tackling daily challenges afflicting
society’s most poor and vulnerable people. South Africa’s poor, like their
counterparts in most parts of the world, face additional challenges on
account of the current global financial crisis, which is resulting in a
humanitarian crisis, because, indeed, whichever way we look at it, the
crisis that we are facing now is a humanitarian crisis. During these past
few months, hundreds of thousands of jobs have vanished and hundreds of
thousands of houses and other properties were lost, and consequently, the
living conditions of the poor and the most vulnerable have indeed worsened.


The additional challenges being visited on the poor necessitate that we, as
hon members gathered here today, deployed here in this Parliament and this
National Council of Provinces, must deepen our socioeconomic responses,
particularly as government responses to this crisis and, thereby, keep us
steadfast in the pursuit of the goal of creating an inclusive and a caring
society. As stated by our President in his state of the nation address, “We
shall not rest; we dare not falter in our drive to eradicate poverty”.

Before elaborating on our responses to the current humanitarian crisis,
Chair, and also providing some details of our programmes and interventions,
I wish to reaffirm the need for the social development sector, inclusive of
all the national departments, our public entities and civil society
organisations, to work in partnership. Partnership is indeed necessary, and
I’m also referring to our nongovernmental organisations, NGOs, who are up
there in the gallery.

Chairperson, last week I met with the MECs responsible for Social
Development; some of them are here in this august House. In that meeting we
assessed the progress made and also appreciated the tasks that lay ahead
us. Collectively, we agreed that we need to work together and much harder
as a single unit towards the fulfilment of the hopes of all South Africans
to enable them to realise their own ambitions.

Social Development is a concurrent function, as we all know, which is
performed by national and provincial departments. On the one hand, the
national department, in line with its constitutional mandate, provides
policy direction and oversight for service delivery. On the other hand, the
provincial departments are responsible for service delivery, mainly in
partnership with civil society organisations, hence this necessity for us
to become one unit.

It is the policy of our department to ensure that we provide policy
leadership and lend support to our provincial counterparts to enable them
to improve service delivery in a manner that attains our policy and
programme objectives. This commitment, Chairperson, can be seen in the
increase of the expenditure on the number of new policy initiatives that
speaks to our goal of creating a caring society and, indeed, also creating
a better life for our people.

Our close co-operation with the provinces in the past few years has seen
marked improvement in the provision for developmental welfare services, the
diversification in the methods used to deliver such services, as well as
the enhancement of quality. We will continue to accelerate the
implementation of key pieces of legislation such as the Children’s Act, the
Older Persons Act, and the Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse
Act, amongst many others.

The impact of the financial crisis that I spoke about earlier on has been
much deeper than expected, highly devastating indeed to many, and very
destructive in its severity in respect of those who are on the margin in
particular. We all must rally to the President’s call for a decisive
response. Drawing on the National Economic Development and Labour Council,
Nedlac, framework agreement, on the response to the financial crisis,
Social Development is rolling out a package of interventions.

At present, we do know, as a matter of fact, that over 13 million South
Africans receive social assistance benefits, and of these beneficiaries,
nine million are children. Whilst concerns may remain about the
affordability and sustainability of this particular programme, it is
undoubtedly government’s most effective poverty alleviation intervention,
no doubt about that. It is important, therefore, to remember also that
section 27 of our Constitution makes the provision of social assistance an
obligatory function. It makes it obligatory. The state can’t look away from
that; we are obliged to help those who are needy.

We have increased the age of eligibility for the child support grant to
children up to 15 years in January this year, as was announced, and 70 000
men have benefited from the old-age pension as a result of our phased
process towards equalisation of pensionable age between men and women at 60
years. At present it is from 61 years, those who are eligible for the old-
age grant. We are moving towards that, and next year men and women will all
be eligible for the old-age grant at 60 years of age. [Applause.] Over the
medium-term, we will gradually extend the child support grant to children
up to 18 years as it is policy and a requirement.

As from April this year, the values of grants were increased to ameliorate
the impact of inflation. The old-age grant and disability grants were
increased from R960 to R1 010; the child support grant from R230 to R240;
the foster care grant increased from R650 to R680 and the care dependency
grant from R960 to R1 010, obligatory measures.

In order to intensify the fight against child poverty, we will register an
additional 20 000 children under 15 years by the end of August 2009. We
will soon table a plan for the phased extension to 18 years of the child
support grant to be implemented over the current Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework, MTEF, cycle. I don’t hear what you are saying; you will have
your chance to stand here, please. [Laughter.]

The budgetary allocation for the provision of social relief of distress was
increased fivefold by means of a special allocation in November 2008 as
part of government’s response to rising food prices and the resultant
adverse socioeconomic circumstances that our people face. The special
allocation increased the social relief budget from R124 million to R624
million. The rapid distribution of this additional fund, that allocation
that we received, bears testimony to the positive co-operation between the
national and provincial Departments of Social Development. The R624 million
enabled us to reach a good number of 765 347 people through cash and in-
kind benefits, particularly those not covered by the social assistance
grants. These are needy people who have nothing.

From November last year to April this year, 568 909 food parcels and
vouchers were issued to eligible poor households, 128 746 school uniforms
were issued to eligible learners from poor households and 35 679 cash
payments were made to other eligible beneficiary households while 32 013
eligible individuals received other forms of in-kind assistance in the form
of blankets and so on. We will seek to augment to our resources and enhance
our abilities to reach people who suffer undue hardships not of their own
making.
In partnership with the provincial departments of social development, we
will explore working with faith-based organisations and NGOs, all in good
standing also, to assist in the distribution of social relief to those in
distress. This year we will introduce into Parliament a new Bill which is
intended to amalgamate various relief programmes, being administered by the
Department of Social Development. Of course, relevant consultation will
take place, and this Bill will provide for the delegation of the
administration of such relief programmes to the provincial Departments of
Social Development, which will support and exercise oversight over it. We
will also exercise support and exercise oversight over this programme.

Chairperson, with respect to improving the livelihood of the poor, our
department will support community-based organisations and institutions that
work towards the overall wellbeing of our people. This includes supporting
community foundations and organisations which are involved in advocating
for women’s rights, women’s protection and safety, as well as their
inclusion in the economic activities of our country. And I want to say,
whilst I’m here, that I may not say lot about issues of welfare, but the
Deputy Minister will allude to those issues.

The department is also working with the Community Food Bank Network of
South Africa and the Global Food Banking Network to pilot the food bank
concept in our country. Four community food banks, which are already in
place situated in Durban, Port Elizabeth, Johannesburg and one in the rural
village of Umkhanyakude District are being supported through this
initiative. I welcome the private sector’s contribution to complement
government’s efforts towards the war on poverty, and I take this
opportunity to appeal also to other sectors of our society to partner with
us in this campaign.

Chairperson, clearly the antipoverty strategy and its concomitant war on
poverty campaign are part of government’s overall attempts to improve the
livelihood capabilities of our people, and I hope somebody from Cope is
listening, especially the speaker just before me. [Interjections.] Here
too, our department has specific contributions to make. Our task in this
respect is to collate information on the needs of households and
communities in 150 wards so that government can respond to those needs
adequately and systematically. And it is not only needs about grants, but
also needs about what we can do to alleviate poverty and to actually make
people able to fish for themselves instead of us, government, fishing for
them. This we will do in partnership with provincial Departments of Social
Development as well as, relevant civil society organisations and the
Independent Development Trust, IDT, working through community development
workers and Masupatsela Youth Pioneers, and I will speak about this
Masupatsela later, in a few minutes’ time.

The second phase of the Expanded Public Works Programme is important to our
efforts in creating job opportunities for the poor. Our department will
continue to co-ordinate training of an additional 1 500 community
caregivers and over 25 000 early childhood development practitioners for
our home-based or community-based care and early childhood development,
ECD, programmes.

Chairperson, the issue of early childhood development may be one of our
department’s most important contributions to the challenge of promoting
sustainable livelihoods and reducing intergenerational poverty over time. I
hope also that the hon member from Cope understands that we are working on
dealing with intergenerational poverty, even when we are providing food
parcels. Early childhood development is indeed part of government’s long-
term goal on investing in human capital, which is pivotal to any society’s
efforts to beat systemic poverty. We will accelerate the registration of
ECD sites from the current 13 743 to 14 401 and increase the number of
children in registered ECD centres to 758 000. These goals, Chairperson,
are informed by the ideal that everyone counts and everyone has a purpose
in life, and, yes, everyone is significant.

We need to pay attention to developing our youth. The most critical aspect
of our work with young people is to empower them, to instil the spirit of
patriotism in them and also to ensure that they achieve citizenry. It is
for this reason that we are implementing a programme called Masupatsela
Youth Pioneer Programme as part of our broad national service programme. To
date, 2 114 youth pioneers were recruited into the programme, while over
1 780 of them took part in the war on poverty initiatives throughout our
country. We will support provinces in the creation of programmes and
directorates that are specifically dedicated to youth matters and ensure
that their concerns are treated with the attention that they deserve.

Chairperson, we are embarking on strategies to improve our institutional
capabilities to better respond to, and indeed also to protect the poor from
the adverse effects of poverty. This includes improving the capacity of the
South African Social Security Agency, Sassa, as a key service delivery
institution. A thorough business process re-engineering initiative will be
implemented here in Sassa in order to, amongst other things, ensure that we
improve the turnaround time for processing grant applications. I am saying
amongst other things; we will do many things through this business process
re-engineering, BPR.

We are working with the Post Office as well, on measures to reduce the cost
of grant payments. My time is up. Unfortunately, I still wanted to talk
about occupation-specific dispensation, OSD, but I’ll find a way of dealing
with those issues. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms B P MABE: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Ministers of Health and Social
Development, hon Deputy Minister of Social Development, MECs from different
provinces, hon members, special delegates, ladies and gentlemen, good
afternoon.

As you know, 11 days from now Mr Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela will turn 91.
People of the world and our country will celebrate the life of this great
leader, the icon of our struggle, a legend, a trendsetter par excellence, a
true patriot and a hero of our people. It is therefore correct that all of
us should join hands and heed the President’s call to celebrate 18 July as
Mandela Day. It will indeed be a fitting tribute to this great leader of
our people.

I am indeed privileged and humbled to participate in this Budget Vote
debate of the Department of Health. The Minister’s speech refers to
continuity, innovation and decisiveness on the urgent steps we need to take
to improve our country’s health care system. As the Free State province we
are combat-ready to implement the issues, as continually raised by the
Minister on different platforms, in the aftermath of this global economic
meltdown. To us this means the application of new methods of doing things
without compromising our priorities.

Our people have overwhelmingly renewed our mandate and they have understood
the call that together we can do more. They also believe that together we
can create decent work and sustainable livelihoods, that together we can
implement a comprehensive rural development strategy, agrarian reform and
measures of food security, and also that together we can create a health
care system which promotes a healthy nation able to participate in a
developing society.

As the Free State health department, we are a service point for 364 589
patients in our district hospitals. Over six million patients visited and
were treated at our primary health care facilities. We have progressively
expanded accredited locally based sites to provide comprehensive care and
treatment for HIV and Aids patients. We have surpassed the 90% national
average on immunisation. Our province has the second highest TB cure rate
and the lowest TB default rate in the country. All our districts have fully
functional governance structures with health plans linked to IDPs.

Whilst preparing for our Budget Vote, which is scheduled for 22 July, the
following areas will remain at the top of our agenda this financial year.
These are sustainable medicine and antiretrovirals, ARV, roll-out;
revamping our health care infrastructure and medical equipment for our
facilities; revamping our emergency medical services; reorganising our
nursing college and recruiting new ones; promoting primary health care;
improving our patient information management system; and improving access
to rural health care, including building and consolidating our relationship
with traditional healers through the traditional health practitioners’
forum. We will articulate our plans clearly when we present our Budget Vote
on 22 July, as I indicated earlier.

It would be unfair of me to leave this podium without setting the record
straight on what has been an element of entertainment by opposition
parties, especially Cope, when they took part in the Budget Vote debate in
the National Assembly. This was with regard to an issue that has been in
the public domain: the provision of ARVs in our province. We do acknowledge
that there were challenges, but despite the negative publicity that was
given, we can say proudly that the target of 27 000 we set for ourselves
was achieved far beyond ...

Mr K A SINCLAIR: A point of order, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON (Ms T C Memela): Just hold on. Yes, hon member, what
do you want to say?

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Hon Deputy Chairperson, in terms of the Rules of the
House, the hon member is not allowed to refer to a previous debate or a
debate in another House. Thank you. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON (Ms T C Memela): Okay. That’s fine. Continue, hon
member.

Ms B P MABE: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. Despite their negative
publicity, we can say proudly that the target of 27 000 we set for
ourselves was achieved far beyond our expectations by the financial year-
end of 31 March 2009. As the financial year was drawing to a close, more
than 35 000 people were on our programme and many thanks go to our national
Department of Health and our ANC-led government, not forgetting our donors,
for lending a hand during difficult times when the provincial department
was faced with a financial shortfall in coping with the numbers that were
on the ARV programme, while striving to serve those who were in dire need.

We are determined to maintain this record and make our contribution towards
the achievement of reaching 80% of people in need of ARVs by 2011. Our own
Operation Hlasela, launched by our premier during his state of the province
address, will be our battle cry in achieving our objectives for better
health care services — from overhauling our supply-chain management to
auditing skills in supply-chain management. With this we will indeed also
be looking at the efficiency of our management and personnel in responding
to the call that laziness will not be tolerated this time around.

I would also like to extend our appreciation to those doctors in my
province and other provinces who stood by their oaths and declarations as
the department and unions deliberated issues of salaries. We are humbled by
their humane gesture by continuing to serve our people with dignity.
In closing, allow me to quote Madiba:


  The time comes in the life of any nation when there remains only two
  choices — submit or fight. That time has now come to South Africa. We
  shall not submit and we have no choice but to hit back by all means in
  our power in defence of our people, our future, and our freedom.

Our time has arrived to fight for optimal quality health care services for
those living under the South African sun and the Free State as a province.
I thank you. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Mgcinisihlalo, amaLungu ahloniphekile ale Ndlu,
abahlonishwa oNgqongqoshe namaPhini abo, oNgqongqoshe bezifundazwe abakhona
ikakhulukazi abasekhaya uMkhabela nawe Bhungane - enethunga ayisengeli
phansi. Bafowethu ngiqale lapha eMnyangweni Wezempilo ngoba kuyiMinyango
ecishe ihlanganiswe noma ihlukene nje. Ngithi uMnyango Wezempilo
ungumgogodla ngoba welapha bonke abantu abagulayo ngazo zonke izindlela.

Ngithi kuMhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe laphaya ezindaweni zethu emakhaya, abathi
eMpumalanga Koloni kusezilalini, kuyofuneka ukuba uMhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe
abhekisise ukuthi imitholampilo ikhona yini kuzona zonke izifundazwe. Ngoba
asikho isifundazwe esizimele esingeke silawulwe nguwe njengoNgqongqoshe
ophathiswe lo Mnyango. Ngoba uma kukhona okonakalayo siyobe sesifaka kuwena
isibhaxu njengoNgqongqoshe ophethe lowo Mnyango, wena-ke bese usifaka
ezinganeni zakho.

Bese ngibuye ngithi Mkhabela angisho ukuthi ngithini. Inkiyankiya owangena
phezu kwayo eMnyangweni owuphethe ngokutholakala kokuthi kukhona
okungahambanga kahle ekukhishweni kwamathenda, ngiyocela ukuba uNgqongqoshe
akubhekise ngoba okuyihlazo nje singeze sakuvuma ukuthi kuqhubeke ezweni
lakithi. Ngoba uma singaqhuba amahlazo ezweni lakithi ngabe siqonde ukuthi
leli phupho elishiwo nguMongameli wezwe lingafezeki.

Ukungena-ke kwabahlonishwa kulezo zinto lezo angikuthandisisi kahle ngoba
siyabahlonipha basuke beqokwe ngokwamakhono abo bahambe bayosihola khona.
Bese ngithi kuMnyango Wezokuthuthukiswa Komphakathi, Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe
eMnyangweni wakho ngiyazi ukuthi ungene ezicathulweni lapho bekuphethe
khona indoda umhlonishwa uDokotela uZola Skweyiya.

Namanje-ke ngiyasho ngithi laphaya kwesikababomkhulu isifundazwe -
angithengi amehlo ngoba mina angiyena uthengamehlo - uBhungane ubesawuqhuba
kahle umsebenzi kulezi zinsuku esikuzo ondla labo bafelokazi nalezo zingane
ezashiywa ngabazali bebulawa yisifo socansi ingculaza kanye nezinye-ke
izifo kubantu abasuke bekhathazwe yizifo ezisuke zibaphethe ngokwenyama.

Ngithi-ke lo Mnyango wakho kulesiya sifundazwe ngokwami nje
njengoMuntukaphiwana kaBantubathini kaSolomi kaDinuzulu ngikubona
kusewumsebenzi oqhubeka kahle angeke ngaqamba amanga ngoba ngikolunye
uhlangothi bese ngithi umsebenzi awusetshenzwa kahle. Bese ngithi-ke kodwa
okufanele kubhekisiswe yilabaya bantu abakwizikhungo eziholelayo. Kufanele
nibanikeze phela Ngqongqoshe noNgqongqoshe abakwizifundazwe ithuba lokubeka
imibono yabo ngalezo zikhungo ngoba zisebenzisa izimali zomphakathi,
ziphakela umphakathi egameni likahulumeni. Ngiyathokoza. (Translation of
isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon members of this august House, hon
Ministers and their Deputies, the MECs who are present here today,
especially those who come from my province, namely Mkhabela and you,
Bhungane – we should not suffer because we have the resources. Gentlemen,
let me start with the Department of Health because it looks like an
integrated department, although it isn’t. The Department of Health is the
backbone because it treats everyone who has any kind of illness.

Hon Minister, you must check if all the rural areas in each province have
clinics, especially in the rural areas where some of us come from, which
are referred to as ezilalini in the Eastern Cape. Because no province is
independent from you as the Minister in charge of this department. If
something goes wrong, we will hold you accountable as the Minister who is
in charge of this department and you will also hold your subordinates
accountable.

And coming to you, Mkhabela, I don’t have much to say because you were
placed in a department that was in a mess when it was discovered that there
had been a scandal with the awarding of tenders. We will therefore request
the hon Minister to look into that because we cannot allow such things to
go on in our country. If we allow such scandals to go on in this country,
we would be responsible for causing the President’s vision not to be
realised.

I don’t like the involvement of Ministers in such scandals because of the
respect we have for them, and they were also appointed to those positions
because of their expertise so that they can lead us. And when coming to the
Department of Social Development, hon Minister, I know that you stepped
into the shoes of a man among men, Dr Zola Skweyiya.

In my grandfather’s province - I am not merely putting in a good word for
him here, because I am not like that — Bhungane is doing his tasks well so
far by taking care of the widows and those orphans who lost their parents
due to Aids, as well as other illnesses which attack people physically.

I am therefore saying that according to me, Muntukaphiwana, the son of
Bantubathini of King Solomon, the son of King Dinuzulu, your department in
that province is doing well so far and I cannot just tell lies because I am
from a different party by claiming that the job is not done. But I wish to
say that you need to look into those structures which are paying out state
grants. Hon Minister, you must also give the MECs a chance to air their
views with regard to those structures because they use public funds, and
they also render a service to the community on behalf of government. Thank
you.]

Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Hon Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, MECs
from various provinces, good afternoon. It is true that the Department of
Health has to promote the health of all the people of South Africa through
an accessible, caring and high quality health system based on the primary
health care approach. This aim must be achieved.

With the budget allocation of R17,5 billion for the 2009-10 financial year,
we want to see the department ensure that its 10-point plan is implemented
without any excuse, such as lack of capacity and human resources.

I heard during his presentation here that the Minister is very serious
about seeing his department implement the 10-point plan. We’d appreciate
it, hon Minister, if you could ensure that that happens, for the sake of
South Africans.

Let me just highlight some aspects that have been reflected in the 10-point
plan which we will ask the committee to pay attention to. Of course the
Minister has touched on other aspects, such as the finalisation of the
National Health Insurance and the implementation plan and improving the
quality of health services which, of course, in terms of the 10-point plan,
will focus on 18 districts.

We will also pay attention to the strengthening of community-based
leadership structures in health through the training of hospital boards. If
we don’t have hospital boards that are trained - that know what to do and
what their responsibilities are — then we are in for it.

We will also pay attention to the establishment of a well-capacitated
office of standards compliance. We will also focus on strengthening
management by enrolling 150 chief executive officers of hospitals into the
hospital management training programme, as well as the revitalisation of
infrastructure.

We will guard against shoddy work by most of our building contractors. We
will pay attention to that and we will ensure that your department supports
provinces in implementing and reporting on the health lifestyle strategy in
all 52 districts.

With those few words, we support the Budget Vote of the Department of
Health.
Bjalo ke tla go Kgoro ya Tlhabollo ya tša Leago. Modulasetulo, ntumelele ke
thome ka go tsopola baswana ge ba re kgomo ga e latswe namane ya e šele; e
ka seke. Na se se ra goreng? Ke kgopela gore mohlophegi Tona, ge a ka
kgona, a hlalose taba ye moragonyana ge a efa phetolo.

Hlogo ya Naga ge a bolela le setšhaba sa Afrika-Borwa le lefase ka bophara
mo matšatšing ao a fetilego, o boletše a ahlame ebile a sa metše le mare, a
laetša boitlamo le boikgafo bja mmušo go hlabolla le go kaonafatša maphelo
a badudi bja wona, kudu ba dikobo di magetleng. O tšwetše pele ka gore,
gome ke a mo tsopola:

  Le ge re ka tšwela pele ka seemo sa go hlola dikgoba tša mešomo le tša
  kgwebo, re swanetše go tseba gape gore go na le badudi bao ba tlago tšwela
  pele go nyaka thušo ya tšhelete ya go iphepa mmušong. Thušo ye ya tšhelete
  ya go iphepa ke mokgwa wo o ikemišeditšego go fediša le go fokotša bodiidi
  setšhabeng sa ga borena. Kgweding ya Hlakola – Matšhe- ka di-31 go be go
  šetše go na le batho bao ba fetago dimilione tše 13 bao ba amogetšego
  thušo ya tšhelete ya go iphepa, gomme gareng ga batho ba, ba go feta
  dikete tše 8 ke bana.

Ke mo tsopotše. Monatsebe a kwe a kwele ruri.

Lehono re eme mo pele ga setšhaba gomme re begela Ntlo ye ka ditekanyetšo
tša thuš o ya tšhelete ya go iphepa. Re re di fetišwe gomme di ye go šomela
setšhaba sa rantsho go ya ka lenaneo la kgoro morago ga gore lenaneo leo le
begwe ga komiti. Lenaneo le le hlalosa ka bophara ditekanyetšo tša ngwaga
wa ditšhelete wa 2009-10 le lenaneokgoparara la go fihla ka ngwaga wa 2014.
Komiti e tšweleditše dintlha tše di latelago go kgoro: Go kgaotšwa ga thušo
ya tšhelete ya go iphepa balwetšing ba bangwe; go se šome ga dikliniki
diiri t še 24; go hloma diboto tša maokelo; le thušo ya go bala ditšhelete
tša batšofadi mafelong a go lefela, fao e lego gore batšofadi ba ga borena
ba a lla gore ditšhelete di na le go se balwe gabotse.

Re le maloko a komiti, re thekga ditekanyetšo tša kgoro tšeo di fihlago go
R64 milione. Re tla lebelela tšhomišo ya ditekanyetšo tše ka leihlo le
ntšhotšho. Re na le lehutš o la go feta legonono.

Ge ke feleletša, ke rata go tsebiša ba mekgatlo ya kganetšo gore taba ya
dimilione tše 13 tša batho bao ba filwego thušo ya tšhelete ya go iphepa ga
se nke e diragale mmušong wo o fetilego – mmušo woo ba bego ba o thekga. Ba
be ba godiša batšofadi ba ga borena ka morago ga kgwedi tše tharo. Lehono
batšofadi ba ga borena ba gola kgwedi-ka-kgwedi. Ke a leboga, mohlomphegi
Modulasetulo. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Now I would like to touch upon the issues in the Department of Social
Development. Chairperson, allow me to start by quoting a proverb of the
elderly which says that a cow does not lick a calf which does not belong to
it; it doesn’t. What does that mean? I would like the hon Minister, if she
can, to explain this later on in her response.

During his state of the nation address a few days ago, our Head of State
spoke loudly and clearly, indicating government’s commitment and dedication
to develop and improve people’s lives, especially those of the poor. He
went on to say, and I quote:

   While creating an environment for jobs and business opportunities,
   government recognises that some citizens will continue to require state
   social assistance. Social grants remain the most effective form of
   poverty alleviation. As of 31 March 2009, more than 13 million people
   received social grants, more than 8 million of whom are children.

I have quoted him. The message is loud and clear. Let it be borne in mind.

Today we stand before the public reporting to the House on the budget
allocated for social grants. We request that the budget be approved so that
the public can get assistance according to the departmental programme after
it has been reported to the committee. This programme explains in detail
the appropriation of funds for the financial year 2009-10, as well as the
major programme up until 2014. The committee has raised the following
points to the department: Termination of social grants for certain
patients, non-operation of clinics for 24 hours, establishment of hospital
boards and assistance with regard to counting the old-age grant monies at
various paypoints where our elderly usually complain that their monies were
not counted properly.

As members of the committee we support the departmental budget of R64
million. We will monitor how it is used, but we are very hopeful that it
will be used appropriately.

In conclusion, I would like to inform the opposition parties that the fact
that 13 million people are receiving social grants is something the
previous government could not achieve - the very same government they were
in favour of. The elderly only received their grants after three months.
Nowadays they get it on a monthly basis. Thank you, hon Chairperson.]

Mr S H PLAATJIE: Chairperson, hon members, Ministers present here, Cope
acknowledges that departments have to contend with the fact that funding
for health services and social development can never be sufficient to match
the demand for quality health services and social support systems.

We accept that government’s policies on social development and health care
are well intentioned but misguided. For many years, tax revenue ran ahead
of targets. This emboldened government to expand social grants. Now that
the tax revenue has fallen, government has to fund expenditure from
borrowings. When this is projected forward, it means that borrowings will
have to be serviced; grants payments will have to be increased; and costs
will exceed revenue by larger and larger margins.

There has been a public outcry that many women become pregnant purposely in
order to access grants. [Interjections.] We said that the Minister should
actually develop a strategy to look into this matter because it’s a very
serious matter.

Every weekend, people abuse alcohol and drugs, and many end up as
casualties in hospital wards. Encouraging a healthy lifestyle has never
been a key plan in the government’s policy framework.

Cope believes that a strong and cohesive community will prevent many of the
problems with which the taxpayer is burdened. A healthy community is less
taxing on the health system. A socially cohesive society is less taxing on
the social support system. By fixing communities, government gets to fix
the cause and effects of a multitude of problems all at once.

The Department of Social Development has a constitutional obligation to
respond more effectively to the material and social needs of the poor. This
is highly commendable. However, ordinary people don’t want to hear what the
department’s key priorities are. They want to see actual delivery. They
want details in respect of the number of youth and ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms Q D MAHLANGU (Gauteng): Deputy Chair, good afternoon. It’s good to be
back here, colleagues. I want to greet the Ministers respectively: The
Minister of Health and the Minister of Social Development, the Deputy
Minister of Social Development, my colleagues from the different provinces
and members of this august House.

I think it is silly to suggest that the young women who get pregnant do so
because they want the R240 child support grant. You must find out what it
means to raise a child and what it means for a woman to fall pregnant,
instead of coming here to make uninformed political statements.

We speak to a number of these women at the paypoints where they get their
grants. One of the things that we have committed ourselves to doing in the
province is to engage these women by putting them through skills
development programmes to help them get out of the system.

It is important to get hold of the missing fathers. The state is not the
father of these children; they have their fathers. We understand where men
are not employed, the state must take responsibility, but where fathers are
employed, maintenance courts must look for them and make sure that they
maintain their children; it is not our responsibility to do so.

The ANC election manifesto is unequivocal about the tasks that are supposed
to be undertaken to ensure that health outcomes in South Africa benefit the
poorest of the poor. The commitment made in the 2009 election manifesto is
informed by the consultation we’ve had with different stakeholders. Indeed,
we have a mandate from the people of South Africa to say the sort of things
we are saying.

When the hon Minister spoke in the National Assembly on 30 June 2009, he
tried to deal with some of the problems that bedevil the health system in
the country as a whole. Therefore, I will not bore you with some of those
details, which are the same across all provinces.

However, we’ve begun a process of having a strategic partnership with DPSA
and service providers from the private sector, and those are Netcare,
Medscheme and Lifecare, to bring them on board regarding what we’re trying
to do in the province. I can guarantee you that in the next two years
you’re going to see significant changes in the province. When people go to
clinics and hospitals, they will be given good quality health care. They
will no longer stand in long queues at pharmacies, because the systems are
going to change for the better.

We acknowledge that resources are not going to be enough. What is important
is for us to make sure that the resources allocated to the department of
health and social development in the province are used for the benefit of
the citizens of our province.

Again, in terms of the manifesto, we committed ourselves to dealing with
the issues of management and provide leadership in the health care system
through Operation Kuyasheshwa La, for instance, which we launched about two
weeks ago. According to the programme, we must stabilise and improve the
health care system, and we must make sure that it is sustained. If we do
not stabilise, improve and sustain it, we will simply be working backwards.

We are committed to making sure that the issues that are identified, such
as linen management, equipment, maintenance of infrastructure and the
distribution of medicine, form the core of the work of providing health
care. These issues further include the personnel: doctors, nurses and
allied health workers across the board. The province is committed to this.

However, the fact that citizens generally prefer to be treated in hospitals
rather than in clinics or in the community health care centres is also our
continuous concern. To that end, we have introduced family physicians in
the district health system to make sure that we strengthen the primary
health care system in the province.
Many people, as I said earlier, believe that when they are sick they must
be seen by a doctor. The introduction of the family physician is to ensure
that when people present themselves at these facilities, there will be a
doctor that will see them 24 hours a day. We are extending hours in many of
these community health centres and in some clinics, particularly where the
volumes are high.

We are also looking into making sure that the hours of operation are
extended and that clinics do not close at 15:00 in the afternoon. Instead,
they must close at 19:00 or 21:00 in the evening, and open some Saturdays.
We believe that, by doing so, we’ll be giving the citizens in the province
better health care.

We’ll continue with our efforts to strengthen the prevention of mother-to-
child HIV transmission. I think it is also relevant to indicate that when
we came to power we were aware that the issue around mothers who didn’t get
the baby formula was a big story. It is important to note that the systems
have been stabilised and that we are in the process of making sure that all
key service providers in the province are paid, so that we don’t end up at
the same point as when we began our term.

The programme is being implemented across the province and we are planning
to increase the numbers in the province from the current 185 000 adults and
15 000 children to about 250 000 people by the end of this financial year,
that is March 2010. We’ll accredit 10 more sites for antiretroviral
treatment and increase the total number of sites from the current 66 to 76.

In terms of the election manifesto, we are also committed to decreasing the
new infection rate by 50%. We are working with all municipalities to make
sure that the resources allocated to municipalities in the province go to
the programmes aimed at creating awareness around testing so that people
can continue to test for HIV.

Throughout the province, testing is done in any government facility. On
Monday we were at Thembisa, at one of the paypoints for old-age pensioners.
We provide health care services there. Old-age pensioners can now test for
blood pressure and so forth. We intend extending these services to shopping
malls, particularly at the end of the month because there are many people
who pass through those shopping malls.

If we were to extend those activities, we would be in a position to make
sure that people know their status, not only for comfort purposes, but also
to be able to get the necessary treatment.

Chair, I have a few more issues to deal with. As I said at the beginning in
response to Cope, as social development, we have committed ourselves to
making sure that all the young mothers that receive the child support grant
are linked to the Department of Labour. This is done through any EPWP,
Expanded Public Works Programme, in the province and is aimed at making
sure that these young mothers are given skills and are in a position to get
jobs on their own, without relying on the state.

We are also working very closely with professional women’s organisations
and the private sector, which came forward and offered to work with us. We
are in the process of finalising our plan for these women, including
exploring an arrangement in terms of which we let them handle some of the
services provided in hospitals, such as doing the laundry, catering,
running the kitchen and cleaning services.

Maybe we should be establishing co-operatives. We’ve begun work with a
number of women in the province, and they should be travelling to KwaZulu-
Natal to learn what that province has done in terms of running hospitals.

We are well in advance in terms of the public-private partnership projects
that we want to implement in the province. These relate to hospitals in
particular, as well as making sure that all the hospitals that are in
operation in Gauteng are in a good state of functionality wherein patients
can recuperate.

We are conducting a feasibility study in the province with the aim of
making sure that the hospitals that were closed some time ago are reopened.
Currently, we are running short of space, particularly for ICU beds and for
other general admission purposes. Hence the headlines about Gauteng from
time to time; we are trying to manage space.

We are a province that is friendly to children, from Grade R up to the age
of 14. The province has a programme called Bana Pele under Social
Development. That programme is meant to assist the most vulnerable
children. We provide school uniforms for those who get to Grade 1, as well
as a nutrition programme. Children also have access to free health care. As
you know, former President Mandela introduced this programme in 1994.
Government provides scholar transport for those who live more than 5km from
school.

Lastly, the other important issue that is going to be a major focus for us
in the next five years is making sure that care for the elderly in the
province is not left to chance. The majority of senior citizens to date is
not cared for properly in our society.

We have clear programmes, and we have worked with different organisations,
including the veterans’ league. We want to ensure that old-age pensioners
who are currently on the waiting list are admitted to the old-age homes
that are currently available. Thank you very much. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]
USEKELA NGQONGQOSHE WEZOKUTHUTHUKISWA KOMPHAKATHI: Mphathisihlalo,
Ngqongqoshe Wezokuthuthukiswa Komphakathi, uNgqongqoshe Wezempilo,
ozakwethu abaphuma ezifundazweni, Abahlonishwa bethu, izihambeli zethu
ikakhulukazi omama ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, Minister of  Social
Development, Minister of Health, colleagues from the provinces, hon  members
as well as our guests, especially the women ...]

... I would like to join the hon Minister in extending my gratitude to our
predecessors, the hon Dr Zola Skweyiya and Dr Jean Swanson-Jacobs. The ANC
recognises that poverty, unemployment, violent crimes against women and
children, and the increasing number of orphans and vulnerable children, as
well as the increasing level of substance abuse in our communities remain
areas of major concern.

Our work during the current Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period
is geared at addressing many of these challenges. Today, through unity of
purpose, we must prepare to implement our progressive social policies
embodied in the provisions of various pieces of legislation that were
passed over the last 15 years in order to realise the goal of creating a
caring society.

The scourge of substance abuse constitutes a great threat to the wellbeing
of our society. Only last week, law enforcement authorities intercepted a
large consignment of illegal drugs with a street value of more than
R10 million. Had those drugs reached their destination, they would have
destroyed countless lives, especially those of young people, leaving
families shattered and in need of reconstruction services.

Two weeks before that, police shut down a number of illegal drug
manufacturing sites in and around Cape Town. There is no doubt that our law
enforcement agencies are growing equal to the challenge. There is, however,
a great need for more work to be done to bolster the provincial substance
abuse forums and community structures: in this case the local drug action
committees.

Today dagga, alcohol and methamphetamine are still the most abused
substances in South Africa. Methamphetamine is what they call tik. And, as
I stated during the debate in the National Assembly a few days ago, our
focus will be on reducing the demand for drugs and support for treatment.
And in this regard we will continue with our effort to strengthen the
implementation of our drug prevention initiative known as Ke Moja – I am
fine without drugs - campaign, which targets young people through arts,
sport and the transfer of critical life skills.

Equally important is the prevention of substance abuse in the adult
population and, in this regard, we are developing a prevention model
specifically targeting adults. Research shows that alcoholism and multiple
drug abuse have been associated with the alarming rate of crime and
exposure to violence. If we can deal with this problem successfully, we
will simultaneously address associated problems such as crime, unwanted
teenage pregnancies and HIV infections.

The 52nd conference of the ANC in Polokwane recognised that children are
the future of our country and that, accordingly, mergers to invest in their
development have to be given priority. Our contribution to this commitment
is geared towards tackling child poverty and the provision of child
protection services. The department will implement the new Children’s Act
which introduces the fundamental changes with regard to the protection of
the constitutional rights of children in South Africa.

The increasing number of children who are orphaned in this country requires
us to utilise all available options and resources to provide for these
children not only with alternative care, as in the form of foster and
residential care, but with a stable permanent home environment through
natural adoption by South Africans themselves.

We know that the numbers of adoptions remain very low, at an average of 2
000 per annum, compared to the number of foster care placements, which
stand at more than 450 000. We also know that there are large numbers of
children, approximately 15 000, who are moved away from home to residential
facilities at any given time, and that many of these young people have been
away from home for over a year and are unlikely to be able to go back.

We are rightly putting these children at the centre of our work and we will
make several suggestions to improve the handling of orphans and the
vulnerable children in this country. We will among other things go out on a
campaign to encourage South Africans to adopt children who need permanent
placement, and develop a register of adoptable children and adoptive
parents. This will ensure that all children who are vulnerable and eligible
for adoption are known and matched with prospective parents in South
Africa.

We are also undertaking research to determine reasons for the low interest
of South Africans in adopting children. I should emphasise that we do not
see adoptions as replacing foster care—foster care should remain part of
our legal system as it provides a uniform of security with the best
outcomes. Through these interventions, we are therefore putting the family
at the centre of our strategies to deal with challenges facing children and
the society as a whole.

The protection of orphans and vulnerable children is of great significance
to us. In this respect, we will continue working with our partners through
the National Action Committee for Children Affected by HIV and Aids to
improve the quality of our services to children affected by HIV and those
living with Aids. We will also develop strategies which outline the kind of
support we will lend to child-headed households.

The Minister had spoken about the impact and progress we made in increasing
the number of children who are receiving the early childhood development,
ECD, services. And we need to improve on the accessibility of this service
to children in rural areas. Our plan is to mobilise rural communities in
order to support them in the establishment, the registration and the
subsidisation of the ECD centres and programmes, because rural children’s
rights are equal to those of urban children.

The rate of child abuse, neglect and exploitation in this country is
disturbing. To this end, the department will contribute to efforts of
mobilising communities to take a firm stand against violence and other
crimes committed against children. Our society needs the full involvement
of our young people in its remaking. We therefore need to develop
strategies of taking children away from criminal activities that put them
in conflict with the law.

We agree with the hon Mahlangu that caring for older persons and the
protecting their rights is important. During this financial year we will
expedite the implementation of the Older Persons Act of 2006 to improve
delivery of social services to older persons and develop programmes that
are designed to ensure that our elderly are not alienated from their
communities. They still have a role to play in our communities and they
still have a role in transferring or transmitting positive cultural values,
which contribute towards social cohesion in families and communities.

It is encouraging to see that some provinces, like the Western Cape, are
setting up recreational activities for older persons. We want to see all
provinces embracing the concept of Golden Games and making this an annual
campaign solely to honour senior citizens ... I still have 20 seconds,
Chairperson ... Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

Ms B V MNCUBE: Hon Chairperson and all protocol observed, it is a privilege
to address this House on the occasion of the Budget Vote for Health. We
have made a great deal of progress, but much still has to be done, and the
ANC-led government is determined to deliver on its election promises. In
this regard, we will be working harder to deliver on the mandate the
majority of South Africans gave the ANC.

Our health reform strategy aims to improve performance, efficiency and
optimal quality of service. To achieve this it requires improvement in
management, performance monitoring and accountability.

As part of the 10-point plan for health there will be a review and refining
of the department’s human resource plan for health that is due for
completion by March 2010. The Department of Health will then assist
provinces with finalising their plans.

We welcome this commitment, which is in line with the research commissioned
by the Department for Public Service and Administration, DPSA, in 2005 and
also the research undertaken by the National Labour and Economic
Development Institute, Naledi, on behalf of Nehawu, which was titled,
“Transforming Chris Hani Baragwanath into a people’s hospital.” Chris Hani
Baragwanath is the biggest hospital in the southern hemisphere and, as a
test case, is plagued by staff shortages, lack of funding, resource
mismanagement, low staff morale and poor accountability.

If the 10-point plan is implemented, it will address the issue of doctors
leaving patients after operating on them without stitching them up — as
happened at Chris Hani Baragwanath in March of this year — because of a
lack of drips and other resources.

The department has produced a draft disaster management plan during the
2008-09 terms and, over the next Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period,
will produce an integrated disaster management plan as prescribed by the
Disaster Management Act. The plan will be phased in, with the first phase
being implemented during the 2009-10 period by the national Department of
Health and all nine provincial departments.

Phase two will also be implemented during 2009-10 and will involve 45
preidentified hospitals for 2010. An additional 200 hospitals will
implement the plan by the end of the MTEF period. We commend the department
for budgeting zero for consultants and hope that provinces will copy this.

I am concerned that the emergency medical service plan will not be ready in
time for the Fifa World Cup that will take place in our country in 2010.
Once again, progress is being hampered by the lack of resources,
particularly in rural areas and townships. The problem lies with the
inadequate funding of health. I have to emphasise that health, as a key
priority for this administration, has to be given particular consideration
with regards to funding.

Of concern, as well, is the scarce skills problem that prevails in our
health care facilities. We have recently experienced the strike by doctors
over unfavourable working conditions and salaries. I am grateful that we
are now returning to normal and our people can once again enjoy the service
of our health professionals.

The occupation-specific dispensation, OSD, has been implemented for nurses
and the 2009-10 period will see the turn of the doctors, dentists,
pharmacists and emergency services staff. I hope we will see a speedy and
amicable solution to this issue come 25 July 2009.

It is interesting to note that the department introduced some mid-level
categories such as pharmacy assistants and physiotherapy assistants who are
being categorised as subprofessionals. This, I believe, will go a long way
towards relieving the burden of work on our health professionals.

Cuban doctors, who are here serving in a government-to-government capacity,
received a three-year extension on their treaty permits, as well as their
registration with the Health Professionals Council of South Africa, HPCSA,
in 2008. This is most welcome and offers some relief to our problem of
scarce skills.

Thirty-six Tunisian doctors were also appointed and deployed to five
provinces in 2008. We welcome the refinement of the HR plan for health and
the specification of staff shortages and training targets for the next five
years that would contribute towards the creation of jobs and the filling of
vacancies.

Opening up colleges to train nurses is ongoing and will assist in
alleviating the scarce skills shortage in the long term. In the interim,
the government will have to continue to enter into treaty agreements with
countries that have surplus health professionals. As outlined in our
manifesto, this will contribute towards ensuring that there are no long
queues at our hospitals. The challenges remain huge and complex, but we
cannot be distracted by the enormity of the task at hand.

In conclusion, I refer to an article in today’s Sowetan, which claims that
close to 40 million people in South Africa do not have medical aid. A case
in point is the one that happened last week, when a domestic worker was
knocked down in Sandton by a car driven by a soccer player. The paramedics
phoned Charlotte Maxeke hospital, but were told that it was full and too
far from the scene of the accident. They phoned Baragwanath hospital, and
were told that it, too, was full. They then decided to call Morningside
clinic, which was just a stone’s throw from where the accident had
occurred.

Had the soccer player needed hospitalisation, the paramedics would not have
hesitated to phone Morningside, as the soccer player would have been able
to pay the medical bill. The domestic worker, however, was made to wait
until the paramedics could phone all the public hospitals, because she did
not have money at hand or access to medical aid. Those paramedics thus
violated the constitutional rights of the patient. We hope that the Gauteng
province and the Department of Health will bring the culprits to book.

I want to close my presentation by saying this: We welcome the
implementation of the National Health Insurance system. We hope that it
will contribute towards access to quality public health by all the working
class. We are awaiting the speedy implementation of the National Health
Insurance system and of the Private Patients’ Plan, PPP. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, all protocol
observed. Speaking in three minutes on two budget speeches is impossible.
[Interjections.] It is not fair. It will never be fair.

Let me just say that I would like to congratulate the Minister of Health on
his recent appointment to what is an extremely challenging position. Let me
congratulate the Minister again for his honesty when he spoke about the 10
points he has found to be wrong. He said that that is what he has found
out. At least he is honest. When a man is honest, he can get somewhere.

Inequalities in health care have always been a major concern to us, and
this is why we have advocated for a national health insurance. We cannot
continue to have a situation where only 35% of doctors cater for 35 million
people in public health facilities, while 65% of doctors cater for
7 million people who are covered by private medical aid.

However, it is crucial that this mammoth task is performed carefully and
with the best interest of our people at heart. The Freedom Charter that was
adopted by the people says, “There shall be houses, security and comfort
for everybody.” [Applause.]

Let me speak about social development.

The role of the Department of Social Development is crucial in a country
where millions of our people are unemployed, live in poverty and are caught
up in a daily struggle for survival.

During the current and ongoing recession, however, it is absolutely
imperative that we extend the reach of this department to provide a safety
net for all the vulnerable people in our society, especially our children.
[Interjections.] No, there’s no conclusion yet! [Laughter.]

The department also needs to run joint programmes with the Department of
Home Affairs to ensure that vulnerable households are able to access
identity documents and therefore the grants to which they are entitled.

We also call on our President, the hon Jacob Zuma, to sign the Children’s
Act urgently, which would ensure the provision of money to cash-strapped
civil society organizations providing services to children. The Children’s
Act itself was passed in 2005, its amendments were passed in 2007, and the
full regulations were approved by Parliament last year. So, we call on the
President to sign that Act.

Let me say this in conclusion: Let us be fair to the people and also vote
for the opposition parties, so that their voice can be heard in Parliament,
so that we can have chance of debate. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S M DHLOMO (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Ministers present, Minister
of Health and Minister and Deputy Minister of Social Development,
colleagues, MECs from various provinces, Director-General of Health, Mr
Thami Mseleku, and Director-General of Social Development, Mr Vusi
Madonsela, on 30  July, I will get an opportunity in the province from
where I come to expand on the budget that I will announce as an allocation
for our province. It suffices to say that it will be R17 billion.

It is the second highest budget allocation in the province, the highest
being the education budget. It is also worth mentioning that 60% of that
budget will go to personnel, since health care service delivery in any
country, including ours, is a labour-intensive process. However, programmes
must continue to be done within those constraints, despite that challenge.

Our Minister has expanded on the 10-point plan, and I will speak about one
of the 10 points later in my contribution. It is worth mentioning that at
the 14 hospitals that I have managed to visit over the past few weeks since
I was deployed to be the MEC for Health in that province, I have met
various management leaders in those hospitals, and it is true what the
Minister has said: The most common problems you pick up in those hospitals
are in finance management; infrastructure and procurement services and
processes; recruitment and retention of staff; revitalisation programmes
that have been delayed and health information systems.

In my previous deployment as a brigadier-general in the SA National Defence
Force, SANDF, it was very humbling to notice that our SANDF has a very good
health information system. A soldier in the Western Cape can travel the
whole country and be picked up in Limpopo, and you can tell their health
profile by just pressing a button. We are humbled to know that our Minister
of Health has tasked us to look into these issues in our various provinces,
and we will take that responsibility.

The Minister has spoken about the 10-point plan, and some of these points
touch on the Millennium Development Goals. I would like to refer to some of
them in relation to my province. KwaZulu-Natal has the highest HIV and Aids
prevalence and incidence, and we, therefore, probably need to do more than
other provinces. Therefore, there is a priority that this department must
work in a militaristic approach in the province.

Why do we need the militaristic approach? Because there is evidence that
our former MEC for Health, who is now a premier, Dr Zweli Mkhize, once had
control of malaria in the areas of Indumo and Ingwavuma. It was a door-to-
door campaign identifying those who were infected, spraying homes, giving
people treatment and supplying them with bed nets. From over 30 000 people
who were infected and more than 1 000 deaths, death controls were achieved,
and they had zero deaths in a year. We are, therefore, confident that if it
worked on this, we will also be able to achieve that.

Maybe I should indicate what our militaristic approach will be. It will be
to deal with the following: It will focus on the 10-point plan called
Accelerated Implementation of HIV and Aids. It will zoom in mainly on
infant mortality. The number of children who are born, but do not celebrate
their first birthday, is unacceptably high. All these deaths are related to
preventable diseases which are largely infectious.

We know that there are pockets in the country that are doing well and
others that are not. For instance, in my province, Durban North is one of
those suburbs that have a low infant mortality as opposed to Inanda,
Amawoti and other areas like those. It is not a pleasing picture that
children under the age of five die in our country. The highest
contribution, again, is related to infectious diseases.

TB is one of the problems that we still have to deal with. There is
evidence that if people are tested early and put on treatment, we can
prevent HIV progressing to Aids. We also have evidence that if people start
treatment with a very high CD4 count of about 200, we then have a low
mortality rate amongst those. Therefore, now that we know it works, we need
to give it to them.

Sifuna ukubelapha besesesimweni esigculisayo. [We want to treat them before
their health deteriorates.]

We would like to also scale up, as an honour to our women in the country,
cervical cancer screening in the province. Such screeening is unacceptably
low.

With regard to maternal mortality, in some villages in South Africa, giving
birth has ceased to be a happy experience. Either the mother or the child,
or even both, die before they go home. The highest common causes of these
deaths are HIV and Aids, hypertension in pregnancy, and mothers not
attending clinic sessions so these can be picked up very early.

In our province, within a month, my colleague, the MEC for Education, and I
will be launching a campaign called Siyafunda Sakha Isizwe Esinempilo. As
an answer to one hon member from Cope, we will be looking at adolescent
health; we will be promoting the “no drugs and no weapons in schools”
campaign while we are also putting up the programme of health.

We know that the success of this programme is pivotal to what our province
has taken as a point of departure, being agriculture. We want to talk about
one school, one garden; one clinic, one garden; one hospital, one garden;
and one church, one garden. Those who may not need these gardens must do it
for the sake of those who do. We would like you to do this even if you may
have to donate this to other people. Food supplements are, strangely, now
part of medication. Patients cannot be started on TB and HIV treatment
unless they have food parcels. We want to do away with this, and get them
food parcels from other sources rather than it becoming part of medication.


Lastly, we hope that doctors in our community will take up government’s
offer and stay there and work. In my province, one of the leading doctors
had just lost in the by-elections where he was standing as a Cope
candidate. [Applause.] We are very mindful that improving patient care and
delivery in our hospitals is necessary prerequisite for the National Health
Insurance, NHI. Thank you.

Cllr C JOHNSON (Salga): Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Minister,
what is important to Salga is a strategic planning process and the family
agenda, which we build up from ward-based planning into municipal
integrated development planning, IDPs, that informs provincial planning. We
also welcome the fact that here we see two important strategic departments’
Budget Votes being dealt with by the NCOP. The SA Local Government
Association, Salga, is very honoured and pleased to participate in the
first Budget Vote debate on Health and Social Development.

The question of the family agenda that I referred to earlier on is that
social problems, social issues and social conditions prevalent in the wider
society are experienced to varying degrees at community level: within
houses, within streets, within towns, and so forth. The local sphere is the
space where the day to day lives of people are lived, where there is the
direct interface between the personal, the household, the family, the
neighbourhood and the community.

It is here where the social, economic and political processes take place
and where there is the greatest potential for action and interaction
between government and the different role-players who can pool their
resources, knowledge, experience and understanding of local conditions to
meet the needs, build community assets and enhance social cohesion.

It is noteworthy that the department has given priority to the building and
strengthening of the civil society sectors as active partners in
sustainable development. This is a process supported by Salga, who views
this sector as a critical element in the enhancing of service delivery,
building social cohesion, assisting with job creation and focusing
attention on issues of social and economic justice.

We would urge the Minister to enhance the funding flows to local level for
the specific coverage of processes that build cohesive communities. Issues
of migration, urbanisation and xenophobia are placing pressure on local
resources and require a strategic and intergovernmental level response.

If we were to address the issue of poverty alleviation, it is important
that mainstream poverty alleviation programmes and poverty must be viewed
as a national challenge requiring a multisectoral approach. It is vital
that there is ongoing co-ordination and attention to building coherence in
implementation processes at all levels.

We propose that the following is needed for the effective implementation of
poverty alleviation programmes: Firstly, policy coherence and the
integration of different types and levels of policies, for example macro,
sectoral and spatial policies.

Secondly, the co-ordination of implementation by different actors and
spheres of government.

Thirdly, clear delineation of roles and responsibilities for different
dimensions of the policy process from policy initiation and formulation
through to implementation. This point in particular raises the question of
what is guiding the party political issues within government, but we will
get to this when we deal with health.

The fourth proposal is that of coherence and consistency in targeting
beneficiaries, and lastly the issue of effective monitoring and evaluation.

Whilst the devolution of developmental responsibilities to local
authorities is an important element in furthering community development
efforts, there is likely to be little progress on the ground until there is
more local and national financial support, together with a concerted
capacity-building initiative to enable efficient delivery. Examples that
support this need to be given to nongovernmental organisations is important
so that together we can do more. We invite the Minister to work more
closely with Salga in the furtherance of the department’s aims, and we
would encourage greater flows of funding to the local level to better
enable effective implementation of social development related efforts.

When we have to turn to the Budget Vote on Health, Salga remains committed
to working closely with the department to create an enabling environment in
which all South Africans can enjoy accessible, caring and high quality
health care. We realise and recognise the importance of an integrated and
rationalised approach to delivery of health.
On the question of primary health care, the 2005 resolution that triggered
the issue of provincialisation of primary health care is something that we,
as Salga, feel involved limited consultation and poor communication. Local
government and the national government must find a process to ensure that
this confusion and the fact that staff are demoralised are attended to.

At Salga’s national members assembly held in June 2009, it was proposed
that Salga could opt to support provincialisation on the basis that there
must be progressive decentralisation of primary health care to
municipalities that have the capacity to fulfil the function.

This position is in line with the constitutional framework for the division
of powers and functions. If it is accepted that primary health care is a
Schedule 4A function and the provincialisation is therefore supported, the
Constitution, section 156(4), instructs national and provincial government
to assign the function to municipalities that have the necessary capacity.

Ons raak siek by die huis. Ons raak nie nasionaal of provinsiaal siek nie.
[We fall ill at home. We don’t fall ill nationally or provincially.]

Furthermore, this position is in line with section 32(2) of the National
Health Act, 2003, which provides that the provincial executive must assign
such health services to a municipality in his or her province as
contemplated in section 156(4) of the Constitution. The National Health Act
thus provides that provinces must assign primary health care services to
those municipalities that have the capacity to perform the function.

There are a number of practical issues. A full cost analysis of the
assignment must be done, but this we can discuss with the National Treasury
and the Financial and Fiscal Commission, particularly on the future
division of revenue raised nationally between the spheres of government as
required by section 214 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is there a point of order?

Mr F ADAMS: On a point of order: Yes, Chair. I just want to know whether it
is parliamentary for a member to read a newspaper in the House, and if it’s
parliamentary for a member to take photographs with his cell phone in the
House, as the ID and DA membersare doing. That is why they are asking all
these funny questions, because they don’t listen attentively.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I think it would be extremely
unparliamentary for members to behave in such a manner. We tried to address
this matter last week, particularly with regard to the way in which members
must behave in the House, and so forth. We said there is nothing wrong with
engaging and interacting, but behaviour that is distracting and not in line
with the intention or the objective that we want to achieve, is out of
order and unparliamentary. Members should desist from doing that, if it did
indeed happen. Thank you very much. You may proceed.

Cllr C JOHNSON (Salga): In particular, the issue of emergency medical
services needs to be addressed. While the provincialisation of emergency
medical services has been put on hold until after 2010, it is recommended
that a similar approach be taken with that of primary health care.
Essentially, what is also required is an approach which promotes the co-
ordination and implementation of services at local government level, with
sustainable funding arrangements and not through grants.

In the 2008 national members assembly, the following were raised by local
governments as factors which impacted on effective functioning: Firstly,
insufficient funding for ambulances and emergency services. Municipalities
had to provide for the financial gap and this in essence translated to
municipalities funding provincial government.

Secondly, there is a need to approach fire, ambulance and emergency
services with adequate funding as integrated services. This will allow for
the provision of a critical and co-ordinated response, and efficient,
effective rendering of the service as they are all interlinked.
A third factor was that of the location of fire services and emergency
medical services closest to communities for effective response turnaround
time.

Lastly, we have to assign ambulance services to local government with
sustainable funding through the appropriate delegation and agreement
process.

We are very pleased to note that the delayed audit of the primary health
care service and infrastructure in all nine provinces has now been
highlighted as a priority for this year’s budget. We would urge that the
Minister include an analysis of capacity within this audit and an
assessment of the communication and representation processes within the
district health councils, where these are established at local levels.

Municipalities need information in order to define their parameters of
action, and communities need to have clear mechanisms for raising their
health issues and concerns. To this end, we welcome the department’s
prioritisation of strengthening the district health information system and
other monitoring tools for the delivery of primary health care in all
provinces.

Salga is also committed to working closely with the department and the SA
National Aids Council on combating the scourge of HIV/Aids and we support
the two Budget Votes tabled. Thank you. [Applause.]
Dr B M RADEBE (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, thank you. May I lodge a
complaint that the microphone is a bit short; it needs to be extended.
[Laughter.] Deputy Chairperson, Ministers present, Deputy Ministers, my
colleagues from other provinces and members, I just want to start by saying
that I’m a bit disturbed, because sometimes we, as the ANC, unveil or
discover fraud and corruption, but the opposition will jump up first to
announce that as if they are the ones who have found the corruption.

I am not responding; I’m not the Minister, I’m just an ordinary MEC. A
member of Cope spoke about corruption, but they can’t tell us the first
corruption which they have committed ...

... bashintsha amagama beyobhalisa kwa-IEC. [... they changed names when
they registered with the IEC.]

That is the highest degree of fraud and corruption when, once you are given
a list to submit to the Independent Electoral Commission, IEC, then you
change the list on the way. But you are not talking about that, you are
talking about us.

I am standing here to support the budget speech ...

... ka-Minister [Ngqongqoshe] wethu but [kodwa] ngifisa ukuthinta lezi
zinto ezibalulekile ... [... of our Minister, but I wish to touch on these
important issues ...]
Still talking about corruption as public representatives, there is no
pension. All pensions are paid in wards where there are councillors and
Members of Parliament deployed in those particular areas. What then are you
doing to stop that, rather than coming to make a big noise here? What are
you doing?

There are no criminals who fall from the sky. They are within the
community. What are you doing, other than making a big noise in this House?
I think this is an embarrassment; we are elected because people trusted us,
then we come here ...

... thina sizokhuluma nge-corruption [inkohlakalo] ...[... we are going to
speak about corruption ...]

... as if we are living in the sky. Let me make an example because this is
already public knowledge. One of the spokespersons of my predecessor is out
on bail of R30 000 for fraud and corruption. We have inherited ...

... i-corruption [inkohlakalo] ebikhona ... [... corruption that was
already in existence ...]

... in the previous government. But because we are revealing this
corruption, then it’s us.

Izono zabazali ziyokwehlela kubantwana. [Uhleko.] [The sins of the parents
fall on the children. [Laughter.]]

That is my problem. I can tell you, Chairperson...

Ukuthi... [that ...]

... I was appointed in November 2006. I only served 28 months in the last
term. But this department, which one DA member was saying is corrupt, is
not corrupt. I never even fired one chief-director in the department, but
we were able to turn the department around. It is one of only a few
departments that is respected in the KwaZulu-Natal province.

Not only did we do that, we came up with ...

... ama-ideas [imibono], ama-one stop development centre ... [... ideas
such as, one-stop development centres ...]

The Deputy Minister was present when the President opened one of the one-
stop development centres in Nkandla. In one shelter, Home Affairs, the SA
Social Security Agency, Sassa, the Department of Labour, Education and the
Saps gathered. Under one roof, you could apply for your ID, social grants,
disability grant and all the other grants. I finalised with the Minister of
Home Affairs on Saturday that they are going to deploy ...
... abantu ... [... people ...]

... in those areas. For the first time ...

... abantu baKwaZulu-Natali eNkandla ... [... people from Nkandla in
KwaZulu-Natal ...]

... are able to walk in, apply for an ID and go back home without paying a
cent for transport. It’s for the first time ...

... abantu KwaNongoma, Mtwana, eSkokonko ... [... that people from Nongoma
at Skokonko, Prince, ...]

... are able ...

... ukukhipha izinkomo bazibeke ngaphandle ... [... to take their cows to
the grazing fields ...]

... and go to apply for a grant, and come back without paying a cent. It’s
the first time in Mboza that ...

... abantu bakhona ... [... the people from that area ...]

... are within walking distance from where they can go and apply for social
grants, IDs and everything, and go back without paying a cent. What were
they doing before us?
Yini ekade beyenza yonke le minyaka? Yini ekade beyenza yonke le minyaka?
Kukhuluma abantu abenza umkhonyovu emaphepheni okubhalisela ukhetho,
bazotshela thina nge-fraud and corruption. [Ngomkhonyovu nenkohlakalo.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[What have they been doing all these years? What have they been doing all
these years? Then they come here and tell us about fraud and corruption -
the very same people who committed fraud on the voter registration papers.]

It’s an embarrassment. It is really an embarrassment.

I also want to say to the Minister that I’m happy about your stance in
trying to assist us at provincial level, especially with the working
relationship between us. Our head of department, HOD, and the Sassa
Executive Manager are meeting on Friday. They are now fine-tuning the
working relationship in our province, and I can tell you that it will be
one of the best.

We have already deployed our social workers to these one-stop development
centres, which should cost us R56 million. For ...

... abantu bakithi ... [... our people ...]

... as I said, for the first time.

... umuntu waseNkandla ... [... a person from Nkandla ...]

... will never walk 96km again in order to go and make applications ...

... abesegwaziswa; futhi okunye ... [... and have to pay a bribe. Another
thing ...]

... is that as public representatives we need to create a good relationship
with the business sector.

Iphini likaNgqongqoshe ... [The Deputy Minister ...]

... will know an area called Ofafa. There was a disaster. We went to
address and ask the business community to assist. They did not build four-
roomed houses, but fully furnished five-roomed houses, free of charge. We
handed over those houses ...

... kubantu. [... to the people.]

The same thing happened in Gobandlovu; the hon Gamede was present. People
were sleeping in water, not ...

... ukuthi kumanzi ... [... that these houses were damp.]

We went and approached the business community. He was there when those
houses were handed over – five-roomed houses with furniture and digital
televisions, not the old-fashioned ones. [Laughter.] Again, this Thursday,
we are going to Umkhanyakude to hand over a house to a nine-year-old child
who lives with her aunt because her grandmother was burnt beyond
recognition.

It was not through our competence, but if you create a good relationship
with the business community, you can do more because our department cuts
across almost all departments.

One initiative ...

... esiyithathile njenge KZN, ukulekelela abafelokazi. [... that we
undertook in KZN, was to assist the widows.]

They are caught in the crossfire in the sense that they don’t qualify for
pension because of their age. At the same time, nobody is employed. They
have children. I gave the example ...

... kwi-Minmec mayelana nomndeni wakwa wakwaMyeni ePaulpietersburg. [... in
Minmec of the Myeni family from Paulpietersburg.]

An eight-month-pregnant woman who had three other children decided to kill
herself with that child in the stomach because she could not take the pain
of her children crying to her almost everyday, going out into the streets
to beg, and yet she knew they had nothing to put on the table. She left a
note that said that maybe when she’s dead, the government would take care
of her kids.

They are now forming co-operatives to make sure that, once people like her
are mentored, they will be handed over to economic development to be able
to survive, because the majority of them are HIV positive. The previous
speaker, Dr Dhlomo, spoke about HIV and Aids. It’s rife in any province.

We are hoping ...

... ukuthi sisazofika sizokhala kuNgqongqoshe. Ngoba sizocela ukuthi
selekelelwe ngemali siyisifundazwe. [... that we are going to go and plead
with the Minister. We are going to ask for financial support as a
province.]

We have also started...

... uhlelo lukaMasifundisane i-Abet. Ngoba inkinga ekhona kulaba bantu
bempesheni ... [... an Abet programme called Masifundisane, because the
problem that the pensioners face is that ...]

... they go and collect their pension and get 50% of their pension. The
rest will be taken away by ...
... yilabo-stick sweet abakhona. Abakwazi nokuthi bazibalele ukuthi
yimalini imali ekufanele iye kubona esandleni. [... the fraudsters who are
there. They even calculate the amount that they will steal.]

So I’m saying with my colleague ...

... ubaba uDlomo ... O! Ngigoqe baba? [... hon Dhlomo ... Oh! Should I
conclude?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Yebo. [Yes.]

Dr B M RADEBE (KwaZulu-Natal): Oh, okay.

In conclusion, I want to call on Cope to set an example. If they talk about
corruption, they must be the ones who must publicly apologise for forging
...

... amaphepha ayofakwa kwa-IEC. [... voter registration papers at the IEC.]

I thank you.

Mr I MEYER (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister of Social
Development, hon Deputy Minister, hon MECs in the House, hon members of the
NCOP, guests, ladies and gentlemen, in the tradition of the West Coast,
good afternoon.
I want to congratulate the Minister on her appointment and that of the
Deputy Minister to the portfolio of Social Development. I also want to
express my gratitude for being part of a team whose mandate is to
contribute to the fulfilment of the ideals enshrined in the Constitution of
the Republic of South Africa.

To the hon Minister and the Deputy Minister, thank you for your leadership
during our first Minmec meeting last week in Johannesburg. In her budget
speech, the Minister outlined the government’s programme for the next
financial year.

It is important that we embarked on a road that has, as a commitment, our
dedicated service to the people of our country, especially, in the language
of the Minister, the poorest of the poor.

Our commitment in this House should be not as a slogan of government, but
as a deep personal commitment of people first. Whilst the global economic
recession has affected us immensely, we should pull our strings together to
ensure that all South Africans have a share in the unfolding of the South
African promise, a promise of opportunities for all.

In complementing the work of the government’s programme of action in the
Western Cape province, we are deeply concerned about the current state of
abuse against children in this province. It has reached crisis proportions,
and we are currently mapping out a strategic government response to the
abuse of children. The nature, the magnitude and the depth of this problem
requires an intersectoral and intergovernmental approach with clear targets
to create a safe environment for all children in South Africa.

A report from the Human Sciences Research Council has also revealed that
most of these things happen in the presence of family, friends, neighbours
and people living on the same land where children are abused.

The Western Cape government has already accorded the establishment of an
office for a commissioner of children as its top priority. In line with the
Western Cape provincial constitution, we are planning to appoint a
commissioner for children. The Department of Social Development in the
Western Cape’s key deliverables for 2009-10 moves from the premise that to
realise a self-reliant society, opportunities need to be created for all
citizens of the Western Cape who are poor, vulnerable and have special
needs.

For 2009-10, the department received the total budget of R1,1 billion. Of
that budget 59,4% goes for payments for nongovernmental organisation, NGOs.
This represents 4% of the total provincial budget.

This will be cost-effective and efficiently spent to create social economic
opportunities for all, but it is a deep concern for me. If you have a
budget of R1,1 billion and you spend 59% of that budget towards NGOs and
faith-based organisations, you must ensure deep quality control over the
allocation of this money.

Since accepting office, the Western Cape government has outlined four broad
strategic objectives: Firstly, is to modernise service delivery. This goal
will address service delivery challenges at the service delivery points, at
district offices and facilities under the management of this department.
They will be subjected to effectiveness and efficiency audits in this
financial year. This goal is closely linked to the theme “people first”.

Later this month, the Department of Social Development will also sign a
service level agreement with the SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, to
ensure effective and efficient service delivery. I am glad that the
Minister referred to this in her budget speech when she spoke about
business process re-engineering to improve service delivery within Sassa.
You can only modernise service delivery, colleagues in this House, if you
appoint the right person into the right job. Therefore, in the Western
Cape, every manager will undergo a compulsory competency assessment to get
the right mixture of competencies to serve the people of the province.
[Interjections.] Customer satisfaction surveys will also be conducted in
this financial year to ensure that the department is responsive to the
needs of the people of the Western Cape. There will be no cadre deployment
in my province. [Applause.]

Finally, the modernisation programme will also allow the department to
measure its performance through a provincial-wide dashboard system.
Officials are already preparing to migrate from the current management
information system to a province-wide dashboard system to monitor the
performance of government.

The second objective of this department will be to improve financial
governance. Part of this governance is to make sure that every one of the
1 800 organisations that our department is funding from the department will
comply with the highest standards of corporate governance.

This province has already published live on the Internet for anybody in
this House to click and see which organisations of these 1 800 are
receiving government money through NGO networks. That’s the depth of
transparency in the Western Cape government.

We will also publish on the Internet not only the name, address and other
details of these organisations, but their annual reports, MNE reports and
the Auditor-General reports. Every single detail you require of these
organisations will be published live before the end of this financial year.
This will also be done to ensure accountability and transparency to the
fullest.
The third objective of this department is what we call social
entrepreneurship. The vision of the department is to create a self-reliant
society. If you want to create a self-reliant society, you need to ensure
that you create opportunities for people.

We need to create opportunities so that people will benefit as a result of
it. And I am glad that the Minister in her budget speech spoke about social
entrepreneurship.

What is new is this, Market fundamentalism has proved not to be the tool
for creating opportunities. State fundamentalism – that’s new to you - has
also proved not to be able to deliver self-reliance. Market fundamentalism
fails because it lacks compassion – that’s new to you.

State fundamentalism fails because it creates a handout system - a
dependency culture which is not sustainable in the long run – that’s new to
you. [Interjections.] In order to navigate this government out of this
predicament, we are committed to social entrepreneurship – that’s new to
you. [Interjections.]

Social entrepreneurship is an approach that unlocks opportunities in
society. With regard to innovation and creativity, that’s new to you. Thank
you very much. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Ms M SEGABUTLA (Limpopo): Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers here with us
today, hon members of the House, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen, the transformation of the health sector and dealing with
poverty, as Cllr C Johnson from Salga has indicated, requires collective
collaboration across the broad spectrum of government, the private sector
and communities.

I take this opportunity to commend all those individuals and collectives
who chose not only to point fingers, but to partner with the Department of
Health and Social Development in the implementation of the departmental
programmes and projects aimed at improving and promoting health care and
social development provisions in our province and our country.

We say to all of you that your efforts are not in vain. They are the
building blocks towards an integrated, sustainable, accessible and quality
health care system and social services that endeavour to create a better
life for the poor, the vulnerable and the excluded in our society.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute in memory and honour of our
officials who fell in the line of duty, such as Mehloti Hetisani, one of
our public servants who fell in the line of duty; the management of the
Seshego Hospital that were murdered carrying out their responsibilities;
the emergency care providers who die on our roads in the rush to save lives
and in general the health workers who at times contract communicable
diseases whilst in the process of serving others.

Indeed, the two Ministers have indicated that we are committed. This ANC-
led government is committed to doing more in building infrastructure,
providing equipment, purchasing more tablets, but indeed you can’t buy
compassion, commitment and empathy.

It’s only those that have been there - that know what hunger is, that have
slept without food, that have been dehumanised, whose dignity was trampled
on - that can talk about compassion. Indeed there are some of our officials
who have died, as I said, in the line of duty, showing such commitment. As
a department we aim to emulate these individuals and continue from where
they’ve left off.

In honouring them, we commit ourselves to serve with pride and rise above
the many challenges that continue to impact negatively on the provision of
quality health care and social services, which are — the Minister has
talked about most of them — limited resources, both human and financial,
infrastructure, difficult working conditions compounded obviously, in our
province, by the rural nature of our province.

We embrace the call by the hon Premier of our province, Mr Cassel Mathale,
who said everything we do must contribute in a direct and meaningful way to
the improvement of the lives of our people and that the time for
procrastination has passed, and that we have to revitalise a new culture of
doing a job today and finishing it today, not tomorrow.

We further commit to address the issues raised by His Excellency President
Zuma in his state of the nation address that there is a need to further
reduce the inequalities in the health care provision, and the Minister has
talked to all those; boosting human resources capacity of the department;
revitalising hospitals and clinics; stepping up the fight against HIV and
Aids and other diseases and paying urgent attention to the issue of
remuneration of health professionals.

Note must be taken of the following top five killer diseases in the
province, which are ischaemic heart diseases; cerebrovascular accidents,
that is, bleeding into the brain, which causes strokes; infections of the
lower respiratory tract, that is TB; gastrointestinal infections in
children, attributed mainly to poor sanitation and lack of safe drinking
water; and HIV and Aids-related infections.

Factors around maternal deaths still relate to issues of nonavailability of
expertise in our institutions, such as gynaecologists and anaesthetists,
integration amongst departments and health education within the
communities.

A burden of disease project has been initiated, but is unfortunately not
functioning optimally due to financial constraints. We will pay more
attention to research, and the Minister has also talked to this, which will
provide us with accurate baseline information for targeted intervention.

One of the challenges facing the department is a lack of basic information
and vital statistics on causes related to infant mortality per district in
our province. This is important, as we have indicated. If we are to embark
on a targeted approach to reduce infant mortality, we have to be informed
of what diseases are killing our children and in which areas, so as to
channel all our resources in that fashion.

The budget proposal we are tabling before this august House affords us an
opportunity to elaborate on our collective contribution towards further
efforts in the creation of a better health system based on a principle that
health, like education, is a precondition for development. A healthy nation
contributes to innovation and development.

I must indicate that we have an allocation of R9 billion for the financial
year 2009-10 and 59,7% of that goes to compensation of employees, whilst
27,2% goes into goods and services and part of that, of course, would be
the programmes that we are running for the health branch. For Social
Development we have an allocation of R761 million and 27% of that
allocation goes for compensation of employees and 26% goes to goods and
services.

The issue of poverty has been raised in this House, as well as in many of
the forums. For us the passing of the Children’s Amendment Act holds the
promise of reversing this picture and is the dawn of a new era in the care
and protection of children. To advance this prospect, we are relying on
national, provincial and local government, as well as all other relevant
stakeholders to implement the Act and to co-ordinate it in a manner that
would maximise the limited resources.

As the Minister of Social Development indicated, integral to overcoming the
effects of child poverty are programmes such as the Early Childhood
Development, ECD, Child Care Protection, Foster Care and Orphans and
Vulnerable Children.

In relation to the ECD in the province, we have renewed our registration
drive of ECD centres. We have already registered and funded 1 263 sites
during the past financial year and we will increase our subsidy from R9,00
per child a day per attendance to R12,00 per child a day per attendance.
Going forward, we intend to register another 309 sites by March 2010; this
would bring it to a total of 1 572 registered ECD sites.

An amount of R89 million has been allocated for the ECD programme. A call
is hereby made on all stakeholders and, most importantly, our communities
to ensure that children are taken to these centres and that parents and
communities take an active role in monitoring and implementing these
programmes as implemented in these centres.

With regard to child care protection, the Minister has talked a lot about
it. As a province we have allocated R35 million for this purpose. The
amount will be utilised for providing food parcels, supporting institutions
that cater for these vulnerable children. We are still making a call to all
stakeholders, especially relatives and families of these children, in the
spirit of ubuntu ...

... gore kgodišo le tlhokomelo ya b ana ke maikarabelo a rena re le
setšhaba ka moka. [Tšhwahlelo.]  [ Nako e fedile.] [... that it is the
responsibility of the whole nation to raise and take care of the child.]
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]]

Mr T L BOTHA (Western Cape): Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister,
Deputy Minister, MECs, hon members and guests, thank you for the
opportunity to take part in this Vote. I also want to take the opportunity
to congratulate all the members who are newly appointed in their positions.
I want to start by saying that, from the Western Cape government, we
subscribed to most of these 10 points mentioned by the Minister of Health,
except, of course, the one regarding the National Health Insurance, but for
the others we certainly support that and subscrib to that.

Chairperson, our new provincial government is committed to the principles
of an open-opportunity society that offers equal opportunities to all the
people in our province dependent on health care.

I acknowledge that there are many things in the health sector that require
urgent, radical change, innovation and attention, and that will certainly
be my political challenge during my term. I must also place on record our
concern that the funds allocated for health services in our province or to
our province are inadequate to meet the needs and indeed the expectations
of the people of our province.

A couple of years ago, this was also mentioned by hon President Zuma.
Health services were certainly in a much better state of affairs than what
it is currently in our country and also in our province. I acknowledge the
good work of many health workers and staff working under very difficult
circumstances, but we should urgently address staff attitudes and all
issues relating to the delivery of quality health care services. The fact
that poor people are dependent on and also entitled to free health care can
never justify poor treatment and service to those people.

An issue of particular concern is the underfunding from the national
conditional grant for HIV and Aids, which includes the antiretroviral
therapy of which we had a deficit last year of R27 million rand, and we are
budgeting for a deficit this year of a shortfall of R60 million in our
province. I regard it as my political challenge and objective to narrow the
gap between the available budgets on the one hand and the demand and the
expectation in health care on the other hand.

Let me turn to key priorities of our Department of Health in the Western
Cape: Firstly, through further implementation of the Western Cape
comprehensive services plan, our department will address the important
issue of the quality of health care delivery.

Secondly, service of tuberculosis, TB, together with HIV and Aids poses a
major threat. We have to strengthen the TB programmes aiming to improve
cure and management, especially of those patients with drug-resistant TB.
We have to take the campaign against Aids and HIV to a higher level. And
therefore we support the national Minister’s endeavour and announcement in
that regard.

Thirdly, we will have to address service pressures, which are the
consequence of increasing burden of diseases resulting from particular
trauma and substance abuse. We will have to strengthen services in the
areas of mental health, obstetrics, surgery and emergency care.
Fourthly, mechanisms should be strengthened to assess the burden of
disease. Many of the reasons for people needing health services are not
from the health sector, but from other sectors in our society of which
we’ve also have today – many many reasons. We need increased funding for
maintenance of the backlog in our facilities, which is in the order of
about R800 million in our province.

The construction of two new hospitals in our province, one in Mitchells
Plain and one in Khayelitsha, are very important projects in our province.
The one in Mitchells Plain is really a challenge to our province, as there
was now eventually a shortfall in the funding from the National Treasury
for this hospital. It remains uncertain as to why this was initially
approved by National Treasury along with the Khayelitsha Hospital and then
fell by the wayside. It is of utmost importance to ease the burden on our G
F Jooste Hospital and to proceed with both these hospitals in our province.
I made a proposal, which was approved at our Cabinet, to cancel the current
tender and retender within three months with an extended contract period
from 36 months to 54 months. Therefore, we will be making our own plans
with additional funding from the province to also do the Mitchells Plain
Hospital, which is now a shortfall from the National Treasury.

It is about the National Health Insurance, which I want to express some
opinion on. It is by now common knowledge that the national government
envisaged implementing this National Health Insurance. And it is also
common knowledge that the DA, as the official opposition in South Africa,
and many other important role-players in our sector, are opposed to this
plan and has expressed this concern. The DA has also communicated its
alternative to the National Health Insurance. I will not repeat this again
in detail this year, but I will instate the review of many of the
alternatives to the National Health Insurance that our provincial
government will be investigating to implement in our province.

We will establish a much closer working relationship with the private
sector and the private health care and all the institutions represented by
them. We will, certainly, also explore the possibility of interacting with
private health sectors, investors and service providers to provide
facilities such as hospitals and clinics or to tender for comprehensive
public health care services as operators. We have little doubt that the
only viable solution to our enormous challenge to provide and improve
public health care can only be achieved through closer relationships with
the private sector and not the other way around.

We will address the current mandate and functions of hospital facilities
boards with the aim to improve the service ability, the oversight and
participation in the operation and functionality of our hospitals and
facilities. We will investigate various methods to improve ... Thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms M G BOROTO: House Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Minister,
members of the NCOP, our delegates from various provinces, distinguished
guests, ladies and gentlemen ...

... ke a le dumediša. Modulasetulo, ntumelele ke kgaleme lenyatšo pele ke
tsena ditabeng. [... greetings to all. Chairperson, allow me to correct
something first before I get into the debate.]

There is a problem if a person has an identity crisis, which leads to
people losing direction. They will listen to everything, but be unable to
take decisions. I am saying this because our Cope colleagues do not have an
identity. As such...

... ga ba na molao. Molao ba tla o tšea kae? Bjalo, ge ba se na molao ga go
na fao ba tlago ya gona. [... they have no manners. Where would they have
learnt that? They are going nowhere.]

As such they are going to allow the media to dictate to them and come here
to debate issues that are not on the table, such as Philippi. We are not
debating the public works budget here. [Applause.]

Again, if they talk about grants and beneficiaries that are not in place,
they should know that we have these things in place.

Re na le SAPS le Dihawks. [We have the SAPS and the Hawks.]
They will see to it that this thing goes well. As for the DA, self-
criticism is part of our life as the ANC. When we falter, we make sure that
we assess and evaluate ourselves and come with resolutions that will
rectify the mistakes made. We are not going to wait to be told that we
should be doing things your way. Remember who gave birth to you — the
National Party. [Interjections.]

Let me continue to say that, given that the health needs will always
outstrip available resources, we wish to commend the Department of Health
for identifying and prioritising the Polokwane resolutions in their 10-
point strategic plan and budget.

South Africa has the seventh highest TB incidence in the world and
contributes approximately 80% of the total global burden of all TB cases.
Having learnt that HIV and Aids and tuberculosis remain the focus area for
the National Department of Health, we acknowledge that South Africa’s cure
rate is improving. However, we are worried that it is still below the cure
rate of many developing countries.

The high defaulter rate has increased the probability for drug resistance.
This impacts on achieving the targets for treatment success and cure. If we
are to eradicate TB, we need to address the social determinants of the
disease. This means that we have to address the socioeconomic needs of the
affected people.

Poverty eradication, nutrition, housing and improvement of living and
working conditions are imperative in improving the cure rate. Community
mobilisation is critical in achieving success. The community is critical in
monitoring health and education intervention.

We have a stipend for community caregivers. This is in answer to the
500 000 jobs that the President alluded to. Having more community
caregivers coming onto the scene is going to satisfy our needs and promises
to our people.

The Department of Health has developed the draft tuberculosis strategic
plan for South Africa 2007 to 2011 that will ensure effective public health
and clinical intervention. This will certainly assist in ensuring effective
management and eradication of TB and its complications.

Lack of access to health facilities also contributes to our people seeking
help when the disease is at an advanced stage. However, we are happy,
because the Department of Health’s strategic plan includes establishment of
the ombudsman’s office, which will receive and investigate all complaints
about the quality of health services and recommend appropriate
interventions.

Ba ithutile gabotse. [They learnt a lesson.]

They know that they need to get recommendations and interventions. This is
highly recommended.

We also welcome the introduction of a directorate in the office of the
chief financial officer, CFO, that will work directly with the provinces to
strengthen financial management systems and ensure that district management
teams are established. We will ensure that we do oversight on this to make
sure that these plans succeed.

We want to emphasise that the auditing of nursing colleges and their
establishment, that should consider the demographics of our country, should
receive speedy attention. Critical to respond to is the Aids pandemic and
to ensure that all health facilities have the capacity to provide ARV
treatment, notwithstanding the challenges confronting us in achieving this.


Equally, it is important to implement the National Health Insurance that
will guarantee that all South Africans have free access to health care. The
ANC-led government will ensure that this is implemented over the next five
years. We will assist in the consultation process that will be taking place
until next year in 2010. The DA will oppose this, because they do not know
the pain of the poor who when suffering from illness, are not able to
afford the medicine from the pharmacies. [Applause.]

We also want to commend the NGOs such as LoveLife and Soul City for making
sure that awareness translates into behaviour change, as well as the
Department of Education for including HIV and Aids education as a
compulsory subject in the curriculum.

In conclusion, I support this budget as it forms a critical part in
achieving the goals we have set for ourselves to deliver quality health
care to our people. I want to appeal to all to give their support to the
National Health Insurance as it will be beneficial to us. We do not expect
it to be a simple process, but I believe that South Africans have the will
to find each other on this very important issue. Just as we stand in
support of our sport teams, we must also stand together in eradicating
inequality in all its forms and build social solidarity. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Hon Chairperson, I just want to call over members
of the opposition, specifically in this case the DA, that as we debate
these issues we must be painfully aware of who we are. We are elected here
to represent all the people of South Africa. Once the elections are over
and we are in these Houses, we represent all of them.

Now the DA likes talking about the Constitution, the country and that we
must follow it to the letter. They don’t want us to deviate even a bit.
Firstly, we remind you that we held up the Constitution, because you had no
way. All you need to do is support, but you are not going to pick and
choose which part of the Constitution you support.

The issue of health care is in section 27(1) of the Constitution. It says,
and I am reading for you directly from the Constitution, “Everyone has the
right to have access to health care services, including reproductive health
care.” It is a right. Section 27 (2) says, “The state must take reasonable
legislative and other measures, within the available resources, to achieve
the progressive realisation of each of these rights.”

It is our responsibility as the state to make sure that people have equal
access to health care. It’s an imperative of the Constitution; we have got
no choice in the matter. [Interjections.]

We are faced with a situation where 41 million people in our country — that
is 86% of the population - are not able to exercise this right. Unlike you,
I know no member of the DA in this House, not a single one, who’s not
covered by medical aid, not a single one, and I know no single ANC member
who is not covered by medical aid. In other words, all of us elected
members are covered by medical aids.

When our children are sick, they know where to go to; they are safe as we
are sitting here, but the people who voted for us can easily die. As with
the example of this woman, they can easily die, very easily. The example
people like giving here about what happened last week - it’s not the first
time. It’s not even happening for the second time.

Let me remind you what happened next to a private hospital in Johannesburg.
I don’t remember whether it was in 2007 or 2008, but it was around about
there, when somebody got into an accident next to a private hospital and he
was asked whether he had medical aid and, on saying no, he was rejected and
driven to the public hospital. He died on the way to the public hospital.

Now tell me: If this is not primitive, what is it? When a human being is
about to die, you ask them first how much they have got? Tell me if this is
not primitive. That is why a person no less than the Secretary-General of
the United Nations Mr Ban Ki-Moon, on 15 June, not a long time ago, at the
United Nations said, and I quote him directly, “Out-of-pocket expenses are
the worst form of health care financing and it must be discouraged.”

You can’t keep on financing health care by saying people must pay out of
their pockets when they are sick. Nobody decides to get sick. In the same
speech he says that in the whole world, every year, a hundred million
people are forced into poverty because they are forced to fork out money
for their health when they are trying to defend themselves from dying and
they get into poverty.

So we talk about health care financing. Let’s forget about being in the
opposition and face reality. Let’s forget about which party we belong to.
Let’s think about the poor people of this country and show that ...
[Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it in order for the
member of the ANC sitting right in front of me to say the DA wants people
to die when the hon Minister is making a serious speech; to make that type
of insinuation? [Laughter.] I ask you to rule on that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I think it will be very difficult for
me to make a ruling on that, because I don’t even have the benefit of
having what the member said, but maybe what you can do, hon member ....

Mr A WATSON: But you can ask him on his honesty as a Member of Parliament
to admit that he said so?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon member, please do not tell me what
to do. Don’t tell me what to do, because I think now you are out of order,
hon Watson. I was trying to address your point of order. Now you want to
tell me how to address your point of order, which is something that I’m not
going to do. Hon Minister, you may proceed.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: I was still saying when we deal with these issues
we must forget which party we belong to, because the issue of health care
financing, for your information, is not a South African issue. It’s a
global issue now. It’s debated all over the world. That is why the
Secretary-General of the United Nations said this.

The Director-General of the World Health Organisation, Dr Margaret Chan,
who, by the way, was the Minister of Health in Hong Kong, actually took up
this debate and said, “Let me make another obvious point. A health system
is a social institution. It does not just deliver pills and babies the way
a post office delivers letters. A properly managed and financed health
system that strives for universal coverage contributes to social cohesion
and stability.”

In other words, she is calling on all of us to properly manage and finance
health care systems and move towards universal coverage. What is universal
coverage? It’s a national health insurance system that covers every
citizen, regardless of their status of employment, of their colour, of
their religion and regardless of who they are. As long as they are human
beings, they need to be covered.

In the same week when these two people in the United Nations were saying
these words, Mr Barack Obama was also debating the same issue, because,
while in South Africa 41 million people are not covered, in America it’s
57 million people and he was worried about them.
He also wants them to move to universal coverage, because how do you feel
when a fellow human being can just die in front of you simply because they
don’t have money. How do you feel, in this era in time? It is primitive! It
can’t be allowed by humanity anymore. It’s embarrassing. It can’t be
allowed.

Don’t ask me where do we get the money to pay you and where do we get the
money to cover. Why were you covered? You never asked anybody where the
state gets the money from to cover you. I’m repeating that every Member of
Parliament is covered by medical aid and that coverage of medical aid is
from public financing and none of us stood up to ask ... [Applause.]

Really, we should be embarrassed. What is good for you must be good for the
rest of the population and we can’t keep on asking where the money is
coming from. Why is it that every time when we talk about the poor there
must be a debate? For goodness sake, they are human beings like us. I’ll
actually get very embarrassed to say that about these people outside. I
can’t look them in the eyes. But every time they are sick, they are asked
how much they have got. I’ll keep on repeating that no human being must be
asked about that because they do not choose.

When you talk about universal coverage of humanity, we must all become
human beings, not members of different political parties, please, because
we told our people that we want to serve them. We didn’t say we are coming
here to this Parliament to obstruct their service delivery. We said we
wanted to serve them.

How can it be that today in this democracy we are even worse off than
during the era of apartheid? I was a medical student during the era of
apartheid and I also worked at King Edward VIII Hospital. We were stopped
by apartheid from treating white people. We were not allowed to, and they
had to go to Addington Hospital, which was for whites. But when they got
into an accident next to King Edward VIII, we were forced to resuscitate
them to make sure that they live.

There were many white people who used to have accidents next to King Edward
VIII with their scooters. We would take them into a black hospital and
resuscitate them so that they would live before sending them to a white
hospital.

Today it is no longer an issue of colour. It’s an issue of money. You can’t
even be resuscitated in a private hospital before you are taken to a public
hospital, not because of the colour of your skin, but because of money.
It’s now financial apartheid. Do we want to support it? No, it can’t be! We
can’t allow that situation.

I want members of the opposition to please take off their caps as
opposition and become fellow South Africans and human beings. Become
members of the human race, please. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chairperson, let me start by
acknowledging all the inputs that were made by hon members, particularly
starting with colleagues from provinces as MECs, for sharing with us your
programmes as you are implementing them in various provinces. It is very
clear that indeed we are on track.

Co-operative governance, as I referred to earlier, is being implemented and
I thank you very much for that. That is why we gather in this National
Council of Provinces to share views as we do.

I just want to turn to the Western Cape though. Appreciate, firstly, that
the Western Cape province, which is part of our national government, does
say, hon MEC, that the programme that you have implemented on child abuse —
we appreciate that and indeed you did say that — needs an intersectoral
approach and a multidisciplinary approach. We agree with that. However, it
may be necessary, just as a word of cautionary advice, that we look at the
causes of this problem, because you can indeed begin a programme of
mobilising people when, in fact, you are not looking at the causes of the
problem. In the Western Cape I think, hon MEC, it is necessary to look at
the drug problem in this province. We need to embark on a very serious anti-
drug campaign in this province, because two out of every five cases of
child abuse, child molestation and all of those are actually caused by drug
abuse. So let us address the causes and not just the symptoms.
Having said that, I would like to say that we are in the situation that was
spelled out earlier on of this global crisis, partly and mainly because of
market fundamentalism - let’s face it. Now we are being told that there is
a province in South Africa called the government of the Western Cape that
is actually following policies that we know have actually failed in the
world. We have to contend with that and we have to say “yes”.

No, we are not going to be able to do that. The entrepreneurship that we
are talking about is indeed entrepreneurship within the context of the
policies of this country, mixed economy focused on people, focused on the
poorest of the poor, as well as developing them and not only the haves, as
it always happens and as it is being propagated by the province of the
Western Cape government.

With regard to the province of KwaZulu-Natal, hon colleague, I think we
appreciate the fact that we are beginning to work with the SA Social
Security Agency, Sassa. One hon member raised the issue about the need to
devolve functions of Sassa to provinces. We have gone past this issue in
our previous Minmec and we have resolved this issue to say there is a need
to work with provinces. However, we cannot go back to the devolution and
assignment and/or assignment of functions of Sassa, because of the famous
Mashaba case that actually led to the formation of Sassa in the first
place.

The hon member of Cope, if this matter of poverty were not so serious an
issue, I would have really laughed myself sick at the poverty of ideas that
was displayed by you here. Indeed, hon Chairperson, I think Cope deserves
to be censured for the absurdity of the views they hold about the poor of
this country, and in particular the women. This can only confirm that they
are a party of the middle class and the rich, and a party that bears no
consciousness indeed for the levels of poverty afflicting the citizens of
this country.

Interestingly, what they assert has been contradicted by independent
research. We in this department actually conduct research on everything
that we have to make decisions on. Listen, for if you are a good listener,
you will not repeat the same mistakes. According to research, there is no
link between child-support grants and teenage pregnancy. The registration
of children happens mainly at the age of two; between nought and two years
of age the registrations are low. Now, if mothers were registering or
getting babies for the sake of the grant, they would register them at month
one. That is the linkage, and there is no linkage at all.

The social grants are self-targeting and that is what research says. The
social grants are linked to positive social outcomes; that is what research
says. For instance, the school enrolment actually increases where children
are being fed; where poor children are being fed and assisted, they stand
up and they go to school.
Research has shown that access to health improves the quality of life of
the people - fact that research has proven. The ability to search for
employment — Luthuli House will teach you a lot — occurs where a person has
been able to at least receive social assistance — a fact proven by
research. So, the poverty of ideas that you come up with here, please leave
it somewhere else and not here.

I just want to talk about the issue of the five-year local government plan,
as raised by the hon member from Salga. Indeed, we agree that there is no
place called national, or geographic space called national. We all converge
at local government level. We have made a decision and we have agreed at
Minmec level that we will invite Salga representatives to our Minmec and to
such fora for the purpose of dovetailing and working together in this
sphere of government. We also do know that the very heavy issues the hon
member raised here are to be addressed within the context of the entire
discussion that is being led by our Minister for Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs, which is a matter that has to deal with devolution
of powers to local government and the future of provinces. That is where
this debate is located. Let us wait for that debate and then deal with it
as we come to that point.

The Children’s Act has actually been signed by the President; we are just
awaiting the finalisation of the regulations. As a caring government, a
government that understands what it does, we have been participating in a
public participation programme as these regulations were being drafted. We
have just finalised that process and now at the end of July we will be
dealing with the finalisation of that consultation process, and the
President will certainly sign those regulations and the implementation of
the Children’s Act will happen.

I also want to touch on the issue of matters raised by the hon member about
HIV and Aids and grants. We are currently looking at all these matters
within the department and within the social sector in its entirety. But,
for now, we actually hear that members in society are suggesting that we
classify those who are HIV positive and Aids-infected to fall under the
disabled, to consider that as the disability. Cabinet has agreed on a
working definition of disability for now, but we do believe that these are
matters that have to be looked at to ensure that we assist those who are
sick, hon Radebe, because it is a necessary thing to do so that those
vulnerable people who may not be working, but are unable to get any income,
are also assisted. It is a broader part of discussions that are taking
place.

I think that, hon members, on all the issues that have been raised, the
remaining ones are fraud and corruption issues. Again, research tells us
that here in South Africa, the norms of leakages on fraud and corruption
are leakages that you find in any other and every other system. Here in
South Africa we are currently ranging between 2% and 3%, and worldwide and
globally on average we are between 3% and 5%. We are, in fact, just below
that international average. However, that does not necessarily mean that we
must be complacent. One of the things that I did not touch on and that I
must bring into the speech is that we are actually, in Sassa and in the
department, on a day-to-day basis, working on this issue of ensuring that
we deal with fraud and corruption.

Very evidently, as the hon member was saying, when we do research and when
we institute an investigation, the outcome is that people must be arrested
and so on; somebody else must stand up and beat our drum. We are
investigating many people on a daily basis. You know that more than 4 000
people were fraudulently on the system of Sassa. They were dealt with by
this government. Now there are those that are from the private sector – we
are dealing with those as well. So, please watch the space and watch the
sky, because we are indeed dealing with these issues. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you, hon members. Before we
conclude, there is just one announcement. On the instruction from the
Chairperson, the programming committee meeting for tomorrow has been
cancelled until further notice.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 19:15.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             FRIDAY, 3 JULY 2009
TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled:

     1) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations:


        (a)      Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by
             Space Objects, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on International
             Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects.


        (c)      Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer
             Space, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
             1996.


        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on Registration
             of Objects Launched into Outer Space.

     2) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations:
          a) Government Notice No 1397 published in Government Gazette No
             31734 dated 24 December 2008: Standards Matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).

          b) General Notice No 211 published in Government Gazette No 31956
             dated 27 February 2009: Interactive gambling regulations: For
             written comments in terms of the National Gambling Act, 2004
             (Act No 7 of 2004).

          c) Government Notice No R.279 published in Government Gazette No
             32002 dated 13 March 2009: Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office: Amendment of Companies Administrative
             Regulations, 1973, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No
             61 of 1973).

          d) Government Notice No R.292 published in Government Gazette No
             32002 dated 13 March 2009: Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office: Amendment of Close Corporations
             Administrative Regulations, 1984, in terms of the Close
             Corporations Act, 1984 (Act No 69 of 1984).

     3) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development:
          a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 29 April
             2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
             informing Members of the Council of the employment of the SA
             National Defence Force for service in co-operation with the
             South African Police Service in the prevention and combating of
             crime and maintenance and preservation of law and order within
             the Republic of South Africa, along the RSA/Zimbabwe
             international border, to perform borderline control duties.


        (b)      The President of the Republic submitted the following
             letter dated 5 May 2009 to the Chairperson of the National
             Council of Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the
             extension of the employment of the SA National Defence Force in
             Burundi for a service in fulfillment of the International
             Obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards the African
             Union.


        (c)      Proclamation No R.36 published in Government Gazette No
             32205 dated 6 May 2009: Commencement of sections 2 and 3 of the
             Criminal Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 68 of 2008).


     4) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations:


        (a)      Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
             Division of Revenue Bill for 2010-2011, tabled on 26 May 2009
             in terms of section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal
             Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997) [RP 92-2009].


           ( Government Notice No R.646 published in Government Gazette No
             32299 dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/378), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


        (c)      Government Notice No R.647 published in Government Gazette
             No 32299 dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/316), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (d)      Government Notice No R.648 published in Government Gazette
             No 32299 dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/317), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (e)      Government Notice No R.643 published in Government Gazette
             No 32299 dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/315), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (f)      Government Notice No R.670 published in Government Gazette
             No 32309 dated 9 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/3/7), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (g)      Government Notice No R.671 published in Government Gazette
             No 32309 dated 9 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 8 (No
             8/7), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (h)      Government Notice No R.678 published in Government Gazette
             No 32319 dated 12 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1379), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


        (i)      Government Notice No 618 published in Government Gazette
             No 32280 dated 29 May 2009: Determination of interest rate for
             purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official rate
             of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, in terms
             of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


        (j)      Government Notice No 642 published in Government Gazette
             No 32280 dated 4 June 2009: Determination of interest rate for
             purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official rate
             of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule: Correction
             Notice for Venda and Zulu translations, in terms of the Income
             Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


        (k)      Government Notice No 582 published in Government Gazette
             No 32246 dated 22 May 2009: The dimension of, design for, and
             compilation of, the year 2009 “FIFA 2010 coin series”, in terms
             of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of
             1989).


     5) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land and
        Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on
             Restitution of Land Rights for 2008-2009 [RP 39-2009].
    (6)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs
             and Tourism for 2009/1- to 2013/14.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of South African Tourism for 2009/10 to
             2013/14.

        (c)      Business Plan of South African National Parks for 2009/10.


        (d)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Rural Development and
             Land Reform for 2009-2012.


    (7)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration:


        (a)      Annual Performance Plan for the South African Police
             Service for 2009/2010 [RP 23-2009].


        (b)      Strategic Business Plan of the Department of Defence and
             Military Veterans for 2009 – 2010.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of the Office of the Public Protector for 1
             April 2009 – 31 March 2012.


        (d)      Government Notice No R.513 published in Government Gazette
             No 32205 dated 6 May 2009: Regulations under the Criminal
             Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).


    (8)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry
             and Fisheries for 2009/10.
           ( Strategic Plan of the Departments of Water Affairs for 2009 –
             2014.


     (9)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Media Development and Diversity
             Agency (MDDA) for 2009-2012.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council
             (IMC) for 2009/10-2011/12.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of the Government Communication and
             Information System (GCIS) for 2009-2012.


        (d)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for
             2009-2012.


        (e)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for
             2009 - 2012.


    (10)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for
             2009/10–2011/12.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2009/10
             - 2011/12.

    11) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Social
        Services for consideration:


        (a)      Report of the Central Drug Authority (CDA) for 2007-2008
             [RP 10-2009].


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the National Development Agency for 2009-
             2012.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency
           (SASSA) for 2009/10 - 2011/12 [RP 28-2009].

    (12)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Trade and International Relations for consideration:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of International
             Relations and Cooperation for 2009-2012.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Trade and Industry for
             2009-2012.


        (c)      General Notice No 503 published in Government Gazette No
             32229 dated 15 May 2009: Debt Counselling Regulations, in terms
             of the National Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).


    (13)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations for consideration:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of National Treasury (Update) for 2009/12
             [RP 52-2009].


           ( Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Service for 2009/10
             – 2011/12 (Update for 2009-2010).


        (c)      Strategic Plan of South African Revenue Service (SARS) for
             2009/10 – 2011/12: Revised Activities and Deliverables per
             Corporate Strategic Priority June 2009.

    (14)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:


          a) Corporate Strategic Plan of the Department of Science and
             Technology for 2009-2010.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation
             for 2009 – 2013.

        (c)      Strategic Plan of the Departments of Education for 2009 –
             2013 and the Operational Plan of the Departments of Education
             for 2009 – 10.
        (d)      Strategic Plan of the Departments of Education for 2009 –
             2013 and the Operational Plan of the Departments of Education
             for 2009 – 10.


    (15)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration and report:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Public Administration Leadership and
             Management Academy for 20008/09 – 2011/12.

    (16)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Public Services in accordance with its
        mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Construction
             Education and Training Authority (CETA) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 71-
             2008].

    (17)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic Development and the Select Committee on Trade and
        International Relations for consideration:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Minerals and Energy
             for 2009/10 – 2011/12.

    (18)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises:


          a) Eskom’s 2009/10 tariff increase and amended pricing structure
             for municipalities with effect from 1 July 2009, in terms of
             section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
             Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

                             MONDAY, 6 JULY 2009
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Appropriation Bill, 2009:
        Preliminary outline on Inter-Departmental Function Shifts – 10 June
        2009.

     b) Government Notice No R.685 published in Government Gazette No 32322
        dated 19 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/644), in terms
        of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (c)     Government Notice No R.686 published in Government Gazette No
        32322 dated 19 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/317), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

                            TUESDAY, 7 JULY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Calling of Joint Sitting

CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT


    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr M V Sisulu, and the
    Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in
    terms of Joint Rule 7 (2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Wednesday, 8 July 2009 at 12:00 to conduct a debate in
    celebration of Mandela Day.


    M V SISULU, MP                           M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                           CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted
    (1)     Bill amended and passed by National Assembly on 7 July 2009 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Appropriation Bill [B 5B – 2009] (National Assembly – sec
              77) (amended in accordance with section 14 of Money Bills
              Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act).
              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance
              and Appropriations of the National Council of Provinces.


 2. Referral to Committees of papers tabled:

     1) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations for consideration and report:


        (a)      Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by
             Space Objects, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on International
             Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects.


        (c)      Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer
             Space, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
             1996.


        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on Registration
             of Objects Launched into Outer Space.

        Please note:   The above entry replaces item 1 of the referrals as
                       published on page 361 under “Referral to Committees
                       of Papers tabled” in the Announcements, Tablings and
                       Committee Reports (ATC) of 3 July 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department of the South
        African Reserve Bank for 2008.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Government Notice No 380 published in Government Gazette No
        32067 dated 3 April 2009: Introduction of a compulsory
        specification for preservative treatment of timber, in terms of the
        National Regulator for Compulsory Specification Act, 2008 (Act No 5
        of 2008).

    (b)     Government Notice No 559 published in Government Gazette No
        32233 dated 22 May 2009: Standards matters, in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).
    (c)     Government Notice No 560 published in Government Gazette No
        32233 dated 22 May 2009: Standards matters, in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


    (d)     Government Notice No 596 published in Government Gazette No
        32253 dated 29 May 2009: Application for an exemption in terms of
        Part A of Schedule 1: Health Professions Council of South Africa,
        in terms of the Competition Act, 2008 (Act No 89 of 1998).


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Petition from the Sasolburg Masalla Benefits Committee.


    (b)     Petition from the committee representatives of Wolvenkop Farm,
        in Mpumalanga.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Petitions and Members’
        Legislative Proposals.


