---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 10 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2009-11-10
---

TUESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:04.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                  PREPARATIONS FOR THE 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to acknowledge the presence in the gallery
of members of the 2010 Fifa World Cup Local Organising Committee.
[Applause.] We warmly welcome you to Parliament.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Mr Speaker, Deputy President,
and hon members, it is indeed a privilege to introduce this special debate
on the 2010 Fifa World Cup in this Joint Sitting of the Houses of
Parliament this afternoon. Allow me to thank the Programming Committee for
acceding to the request to dedicate a special occasion during this closing
of Parliament to this momentous event that will take place in our country
next year.

We are 212 days away from the biggest football event that Africa has ever
hosted. We are counting down with confidence because we know that we have
done and are continuing to do our best to ensure that the stage is set for
the world to play on. When we say, “Ke Nako,” [“Now is the time,”] we say
without doubt that we deserve to be the host we are about to be. When we
make a call for the world to visit Africa and celebrate her humanity, we do
so because we know that Africa is ready to welcome and share with them her
humanity.

Preparations for the hosting of the 2010 World Cup have not been easy.
Equally, we have never as a government given up, even when faced with
escalating financial requirements within a worldwide financial recession.
The preparations are not complete but we are at a very advanced stage.
While we still have to go through a few areas, progress in each of the
projects cascading from the 17 government guarantees can be seen in many
spheres of life in our country.

Our government has invested a substantial amount of funds from the fiscus
in the hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup. This was done with the clear
understanding of the benefits that this event would realise for our country
and for our continent, Africa.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup will be the most significant branding exercise in
the history of South Africa, and Africa. Cumulatively, more than 26 billion
television viewers will be focused on our country for more than 30 days. I
have no doubt that the world will be blown away by what they are going to
experience: a world-class event in a truly African setting, from the beauty
of Table Bay, with an iconic stadium set against the backdrop of the
majestic Table Mountain, to the magnificence of the Indian Ocean beaches,
where the Moses Mabhida Stadium gives visitors a view of the city and the
coastline from a unique vantage point on top of the arch, to the images of
African wildlife at the Mbombela Stadium, and finally to The Calabash at
Soccer City where more than 94 000 fans from around the world will gather
in true African style for an opening and a closing lekgotla about “the
beautiful game” of football.

Each one of our stadia tells a different story, whether it be about our
father, Nelson Mandela, in Nelson Mandela Bay; or about a youth leader,
Peter Mokaba, after whom the stadium in Polokwane is named; or the Royal
Bafokeng Stadium in Rustenburg; or, of course, the old workhorses – Loftus
Versfeld, Ellis Park and the Free State Stadium - where many a battle for
national pride has been won and which will also be dressed up for this
spectacular occasion.

As a government and as a people we will be proud to roll out our
achievements of the past 15 years. Cast your minds back, hon members, to
the old Jan Smuts Airport of 1994 and look now at the magnificent Oliver
Tambo International Airport of today. It symbolises the great progress that
we have made in infrastructure development. The same can be said of our
roads, our hotels, and the rest of our hospitality infrastructure, from our
IT&T infrastructure through to our banking industry.

As one of the most critical elements in the hosting of a successful World
Cup, transport is a key focus area from government’s point of view. With a
total expenditure of R170 billion over the past five years, the fiscal
years 2005 to 2010, the South African government is certainly taking this
very seriously – and demonstrating it. South Africa’s rail system, road
infrastructure and public transport will not be the same once 2010 rolls
around. It will, in fact, be world-class.

South Africa’s airports are also being prepared for 2010. With the expected
450 000 foreign visitors for the tournament and the majority of them
arriving by air, we must be ready for the influx, and we certainly will.
Already we have seen the new international terminal opened at Cape Town
International Airport, while the new La Mercy Airport is well on the way to
completion. The OR Tambo Airport in Johannesburg is increasing its parking
and baggage-handling facilities considerably. Anyone who has used the
airport in recent months will testify to the many improvements already
noticeable at South Africa’s main airport.

Our visitors will be welcomed to our country with the friendliness and
hospitality for which South Africans are renowned. Our people will once
again prove that they are our greatest asset. Just as we triumphed over the
adversity of the past, our nation will rise to the occasion and show the
world who we are: a nation united in our diversity. Our people will fly our
flag high in Alexandra and in Sandton, in Bishopscourt and in Gugulethu, in
Umzimkulu and in Chatsworth, in the Lowveld in Mpumalanga and on the dust
fields of Springbok.

South Africa’s tourism industry is set for a major boom, both during and
after the World Cup. We are already seeing a number of direct benefits from
South Africa’s hosting of the tournament, with 25 new hotels being
developed in the Johannesburg area alone.

Currently we receive around 9,5 million visitors to South Africa on an
annual basis. With the World Cup, we expect this to rise past the
10 million mark and we even hope to reach the 14 million mark by 2015. It
is the preparations we are making now that will ensure that we can deal
with this influx of visitors after 2010. It is the improved airports and
public transport that will mean that we can cater for the expected
increase. The work we are doing for the World Cup will allow us to cater
for growth in South Africa on a wide front.

Of course, the infrastructure developments and the expected increase in
tourism during and after the 2010 Fifa World Cup are important parts of
ensuring that South Africa receives the full benefit of hosting the world
next year, but, most importantly, the football will also unite the people
of this country.

Everyone saw how we as a country came together during the Fifa
Confederations Cup in June of this year. Never before have we seen, at any
stadium or sports venue, all our people being represented on the stands –
all in support of Bafana Bafana.

As a nation we celebrate not only football but the success of a country
that we all hold dear to our hearts. We celebrate because all of us know
that this will be felt 10 times over in 2010. South Africa will be a
changed country once the final whistle blows. We will all be united in
celebration of our achievements.

We still, however, need to get to the World Cup. With 23 teams qualified
and the rest to follow in the next two weeks, the country now has to
prepare for the final draw in Cape Town on 4 December this year. This
important event will map out the 2010 Fifa World Cup to the whole world as
the 32 teams are placed in their groups.

It is after this date that the teams will begin to select where they will
set up camp during the tournament, as the surrounding communities prepare
to host some of the world’s greatest football teams. It is then that South
Africans will certainly wake up to the fact that this is real, that 2010 is
in fact here.

We will also see a sharp increase in ticket sales as fans from around the
world will then be able to see who their teams are up against in the
opening rounds. The remaining tickets will soon be snapped up. It is
therefore important that as many South Africans as possible go out there
and get their tickets.

This is an historical event that will not be repeated in South Africa for
some time to come. This is our chance as South Africans to have front-row
seats for the greatest show on earth, the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

We know that while our people are seeing the evidence that the 2010 Fifa
World Cup is upon us, we have to keep reminding them that we will be
hosting the best football tournament ever. In this regard, the Department
of Sport and Recreation, Government Communications, provinces and the Local
Organising Committee have already conducted six 2010 mass mobilisation road
shows across the country. The road shows are a continuation of what we
started prior to the Confederations Cup.

We will soon be heading to Mpumalanga, before we go to the Western Cape and
the Northern Cape. The programme seeks to galvanise and inspire communities
to support the hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup. We urge our communities
and our organisations to come out in big numbers and arrange similar
activities in their communities so that the spirit of 2010 permeates every
facet of our South African society.

The Football Friday initiative is receiving support from many quarters. We
have recently seen the Deputy President, on behalf of The Presidency,
showcasing this campaign. This is to show that all South Africans should be
active participants in the build-up to the 2010 Fifa World Cup. It is to
this end that we urge all South Africans to wear their Bafana Bafana
regalia every Friday.

After the final draw, the next big moment will be on 11 June 2010 when our
President, Jacob Zuma, and the president of Fifa will officially open the
World Cup. The country will have prepared itself after years of hard work
for that moment when people from around the world tune in to watch Soccer
City in all its glory. We will realise then that it has certainly been
worth it.

It may be the culmination of years of work and toil, but the 2010 Fifa
World Cup is only the start. We as a country did not decide to host the
tournament just so that we could bring some of the world’s best footballers
to Africa. We decided to host it because we knew the long-lasting effects
of 2010. It will be the catalyst for a South Africa that has risen from the
ashes of the past and in a little over 15 years has taken its place as a
world-class country. As a country we also decided to host the tournament
not only to showcase South Africa and Africa; we did so mindful that it
would be a catalyst to unite our people further.

Allow me to thank the volunteers who always raise their hands to offer time
and energy – this for the good of society. It is in this context that we
reiterate, “Working together we can do more.”

Hon members, ladies and gentlemen, the journey is about to begin. Ke Nako!
[Now is the time!] It is time to celebrate Africa’s humanity. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms M W MAKGATE: Speaker, Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Deputy President, hon
members, Fédération Internationale de Football Association delegates, the
Fifa Local Organising Committee, and invited guests, the hosting and
staging of the 2010 Fifa  World Cup in South Africa required our country to
provide a range of guarantees to host a successful World Cup. These
guarantees followed the submission of an economic and social impact
assessment report to our government. This assessment report preceded any
consideration of support for the 2010 bid. It included a diverse range of
stakeholders.

When the Fifa executive decided that the World Cup should be held in
Africa, and South Africa should host the 2010 World Cup, it took into
consideration our logistical and financial capacity to discharge this
obligation. It also considered our country’s political legitimacy, as
perhaps the defining requirement. Moreover, it sought to convince the world
that the African Renaissance was indeed a reality.

As South Africans, and the ANC, we achieved the dawn of democracy in 1994
that created the basis for the confidence the world is showing in us. And
now, as in 1994, our ANC-led government will ensure that 2010 will
contribute to realising the strategic objectives of the developmental
state.

The debate in this august House underscores our government’s commitment to
give effect to measures - I might add, extraordinary measures - to realise
the objectives of an extraordinary event, not that extraordinary events are
anything new to us! As South Africans, we have become known globally as an
extraordinary nation.

The central principles of these commitments are all encapsulated in our
democratically elected government’s 17 guarantees made to Fifa 2010 in
regards to facilitating the hosting and staging of the 2010 Fifa World Cup
in South Africa, and for the first time on African soil.

This is in accordance with the Organising Association Agreement, OAA,
between Fifa and Safa and the guarantees issued by our country to Fifa. In
this regard we have, as the host country, satisfied all the necessary
requirements – technical, statutory and academic. For example, there are
specific seating requirements for spectators, and specific requirements for
stadia, marketing, etc.

One of the scenes that left most of us as a television audience with lumps
in our throats during the recent Confederations Cup – a foundation to the
2010 World Cup – was certainly the singing of the anthems of the countries
before the matches and the unbridled display of the national colours of the
nations competing. Whether it was paint on the faces of the fans and
spectators, or replicas of flags, it was indeed something to behold.
Moreover, what struck me more than anything else was the respect afforded
to individual countries during the singing and playing of anthems.

In this regard we are all satisfied with the statutory guarantees which are
in place to ensure the rights of all countries that will qualify and come
here to display their flags and sing their anthems without fear of
intimidation or provocation. If there is intimidation of any kind, we
believe it should be in the display of skills, ability and technique on the
playing field. We therefore welcome the imposition of penalties in the
event of such offences.

In regard to visas, visitors’ permits, work permits and business permits,
our country has provided guarantees through legislation that was passed in
the two Houses of this Parliament.

No person or persons with unscrupulous intentions and involved in sinister
activities will be allowed into the country. As South Africans, we have
become a favourite destination for millions of tourists and we enjoy that
status.

Suffice it to say that unpatriotic conduct by officials within departments
that are integrally involved in preparations will not be tolerated, let
alone the threat of corruption, since this event will certainly re-
emphasise the sheer weight of the dollar. We are, however, encouraged by
the contingency and anticorruption measures that were introduced by the SA
Police Service, the Department of Home Affairs, other departments and
provinces, etc, as a matter of priority.

We are particularly safe in the knowledge that the Department of Home
Affairs has introduced 2010-specific plans such as Advance Passenger
Processing, APP, which provides a mechanism to prescreen travellers at
foreign airports of entry by April 2010. Hence, the message should go out
to every official that the ANC-led government is indeed highly vigilant and
prepared to quell any mischief that is intended to tarnish the image of our
country.

Our experiences over the past 12 years have shown that our sport
federations are not proactive, and sometimes lag behind when it comes to
asserting themselves in regard to crowd control, particularly before big
matches. From what we have witnessed through images in the media, we are
facing a herculean task in regard to crowd control and control of unruly
behaviour. We are also mindful that communicating our control and safety
measures will present its own challenges. However, as the ANC we wish to
state again and without fear of contradiction that we are ready.

Regarding transport, our national Department of Transport has adopted and
is implementing some of the most advanced public transport and traffic
systems in the world. In this regard, and at a statutory level, traffic-
free zones are envisaged in certain areas, with accompanying provisions for
prevention and penalties. We endorse and support these provisions, although
we are also mindful of the fact that football fans will generally be
travelling by public transport, on foot, etc. Experience and research in
cities where previous World Cups have been held prove this point. However,
it does not mean that we should be complacent.

In line with the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, our country
wants to halve poverty and unemployment by 2014. And we believe that the
hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup could not have arrived at a more
opportune time, since we are striving to fulfil these goals in the
development of our nation.

In conclusion, as the ANC we are indeed secure in the knowledge that our
government is putting in place the required instruments that signal
confidence and our passionate determination to the global community.
However, we would like to appeal to Fifa from this podium to ensure,
together with us as government, that the much vaunted Legacy Project indeed
becomes a living monument, and is nourished and sustained. We would
therefore like to call on our people to demonstrate in no uncertain terms
why we got the vote of confidence to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup, since we
believe that ultimately the 2010 Fifa World Cup is about the African
Renaissance in general and South Africans in particular. Let the games
begin.

Ke Nako. [Now is the time.] We are ready to welcome the world. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr T D LEE: Mr Speaker, Mr Deputy President, Ministers and colleagues, in
2006 I told this House that the 2010 World Cup was just under four years
away and that we had some 1 460 days to ensure that we got everything
right.

I said that the government needed to provide:


   ... strong leadership and a clearly focused and deadline-driven vision
   for the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

I also said that in four years’ time:
   South Africans want to look back with pride, not only with regard to our
   performance in the tournament, but also with regard to our role as host
   and organiser.
As of today there are 212 days to go and that challenge still holds.

There is something the World Cup can deliver to our people that no amount
of money ever will. Here I refer to the priceless example of everything we
can be as individuals and as a nation. I refer to evidence of our ability,
proof of our will to succeed, a legacy of success, and a reservoir of self-
belief, as examples that will benefit us long after the final whistle has
blown.

But to succeed we must fixate with laser-like intensity on one clear
objective, and that is to produce the best World Cup ever. We must not
simply match but surpass the achievement of every host nation that has come
before us: our World Cup must be run more efficiently; our hospitality must
be much warmer and more generous; and our streets must be much safer than
anything experienced before.

To make it happen we need inspired leadership, a clear management structure
and obsessive attention to detail. Today the government and the World Cup
Local Organising Committee have delivered on this requirement and their
role in the management and creation of this event must be commended. I
think we can clap. [Applause.]

But we aren’t there yet. To use a rugby analogy, we can’t drop the ball
with the try line in sight. And we can’t drop the ball, because this World
Cup is as much about the next year as it is about the next generations. It
is about leaving behind a legacy that we can all be proud of and benefit
from for generations to come.

Central to that objective is making sure that this World Cup has a series
of benefits that run far into the future. Here I am not talking just about
infrastructure or better systems and structures, but about an emotional
benefit, a sense of pride in our democracy and our achievement. This is our
real challenge and the prize that awaits us.

Finally, let me take this opportunity to thank the Local Organising
Committee and Dr Khoza for what they are doing. As far as I’m concerned,
coming from Port Elizabeth, I really want to thank Danny Jordaan, because
we are from the same area. Danny, we are very proud of you. [Applause.]

Mr G P D MACKENZIE: Speaker and hon Deputy President, we are left with just
212 days to go to the World Cup - the clock is ticking! After the
disappointment of losing the 2006 World Cup bid to Germany, it was with
great euphoria that on 15 May 2004 South Africa received the news of being
awarded the right to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup. Last June South Africa
successfully hosted the Fifa Confederations Cup, signifying our country’s
readiness to host the World Cup. South Africa’s legacy will be immense
after this event.

The Bus Rapid Transit system will soon be implemented in a number of host
cities, and is already operational in Johannesburg. The refurbishing of 2
000 train coaches at a cost of R18 billion, and the development of new
generation stations will benefit all of us in the future. South Africa’s
airports are also being refurbished for 2010 and beyond. The number of
luggage carousels will be increased, as will the number of terminals and
parking bays. Durban will also have a new airport at La Mercy. An
improvement in our road network will materialise with the expenditure of
approximately R96 billion.

We shall have outstanding stadia in our country. The huge cost of overruns
in the construction of various stadia across the country is a matter of
utmost concern to us in Cope. Again and again contracts are not awarded to
the lowest tender. In one case a tender for seating that was accepted was
almost double that of the lowest tender. The issue of tenders is now a very
sore point with all South Africans. The electorate insists on transparency,
accountability, and 100% compliance with all Public Finance Management Act,
requirements. We will also need to examine the very crucial point of
whether the contractual obligation with Fifa in respect of 30% of all
contracts being issued to SMMEs has been complied with.

A total 465 000 tourists are expected in our country, with an estimated
spend of R8,5 billion. The safety of football fans will naturally have to
receive the highest priority. Cope wants to see every single South African
identifying with this event, and for each to exercise utmost vigilance.
Cope therefore calls on government to release a telephone hotline number
that can be used to request help or report any matter of importance. The
setting up of a call centre is crucial.

Cope calls on government also to start preparing the South African nation,
through regular rehearsals, to receive tourists warmly and leave an
indelible impression on them of a crime-free, friendly and hospitable
nation.

The World Cup must also inspire entrepreneurship amongst all South
Africans. It is important that opportunity is spread across the formal as
well as the informal sector.

The hosting of the World Cup will be a time to celebrate our ability and
our capacity to undertake organisation on a mammoth scale, and to produce
spectacular results. To those throughout the world and our country who were
negative about our capacity to handle the staging of the World Cup, let me
say it is evident that the facts prove that their misgivings were
misplaced. To Danny Jordaan and his team we would like to express huge
thanks for a job well done. [Applause.] Their skill in negotiating
bureaucratic hurdles has inspired us. We will be indebted to him and his
team for years to come.

Finally, the question that everybody is asking is whether we will be ready
to meet our contractual obligations to Fifa by December 2009. Cope is very
confident that everything will be completed in time. Phambili, Mzantsi
Afrika! Phambili, Bafana Bafana! [Forward, South Africa! Forward, Bafana
Bafana!] [Applause.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Speaker, His Excellency the Deputy President, colleagues,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, in the well-known song, My African Dream,
the lyrics read:

   ... in my African Dream


   There’s a new tomorrow


   My African dream


   is a dream that we can follow

My African dream for this upcoming 2010 World Cup, the first to be hosted
on African soil, is that it should not only be the greatest Fifa World Cup
ever hosted, but also be a tool that will secure a better tomorrow for all
South Africans and the continent.

It is also my dream that this World Cup fulfils government’s investment
goal of achieving economic growth and development by making sure that the
hosting of the tournament creates opportunities that can be accessed by
South Africans, in particular those who were previously excluded from
participation in the economy - the poor and unemployed.

My dream is that this World Cup will once again evoke the passion and pride
that winning the 1995 Rugby World Cup did. Also, I wish that this World Cup
will serve as a valuable nation-building exercise that will bring all South
Africans together, proudly united in our diversity.

My dream is that this World Cup will become a powerful vehicle through
which we can change the often negative international perceptions of our
country and our continent as a whole.

Having said this, I know that any big sporting event such as the World Cup
has its challenges and the 2010 World Cup will be no different. That is to
be expected with such a major undertaking as hosting an international
showpiece.

Looking at the preparations that have been made so far, I believe that
South Africa has made great progress in recent months and I can confidently
say that our planning and preparations for the event are on track.
Construction of most of our stadiums is now in the final stages, while
concrete plans have been put in place by the Local Organising Committee to
ensure that the event goes smoothly. The Local Organising Committee has
also ensured that all the finer details are in place, 212 days before the
event starts.

I am pleased that as we prepare for the 2010 World Cup we are already
witnessing positive results. Let me mention a few of these: firstly, more
than 20 000 jobs were created in the construction of the stadiums;
secondly, construction workers have received extensive skills training;
thirdly, a substantial number of other jobs have been created, and it is
estimated that the World Cup will create about 415 000 permanent jobs; and
lastly, there has been an investment of about R212 million in school and
community sport over the period to 2010.

I am, however, concerned about the state of readiness of our transport
system. The Bus Rapid Transport system has been rolled out in Johannesburg
with great success, and the other host cities are nearly ready. I hope that
government gives this matter the urgent attention it deserves, because the
success of this World Cup will also largely depend on whether or not we
will be able to transport our visitors safely to and from stadiums, and in
and around our cities.

It is important that we take note that South Africa is already the focus of
the world. The world’s eyes are on us. The countdown has begun. Let us use
2010 to celebrate our colourful culture and our people. Together, let us
leave no stone unturned in making sure that this is the best and most
successful Fifa World Cup ever. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate our true sons of the soil, Dr Danny Jordaan and Dr Irvin
Khoza, as well as the Local Organising Committee, LOC, for the good work
they have done in preparation for our country hosting the 2010 World Cup.
“Phambili, Bafana Bafana! Phambili!” [Forward, Bafana Bafana! Forward!]

HON MEMBERS: “Phambili!” [Forward!]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Of hoe sê hulle, Danny? [Or how does the saying go, Danny?]
Together we can do more. [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Viva!

Mr J J MCGLUWA: To every single worker who has contributed to this event
the ID says: “We are very proud of you.”

I would also like to call on the media to be responsible and patriotic in
the coverage of this World Cup. We are saying to the media: “Stop your Afro-
pessimism!”

In addition, today during the joint committee meeting, together with the
LOC, the ID was not given a clear answer regarding the eventual
privatisation of World Cup stadiums built with taxpayers’ money.

Another concern for the ID is the delay, until October next year, of the
deadline for the completion of the first phase of the Gautrain. The ID is
disappointed that the first phase has been separated from the World Cup
deliverables of the LOC.

Furthermore, in the period before our victory in the Africa Cup of Nations,
Afcon, in 1996 under the leadership of Clive Barker, our local hero, all
Bafana Bafana preparations were held in South Africa. The ID says that it
does not make sense to take Bafana Bafana to Brazil. We are asking today:
What does Brazil have that we don’t have? Brazil has only one thing that we
don’t have, and that is the family of Carlos Perreira. [Applause.]

The ID would also like to voice its extreme concern that while Sepp Blatter
has been assuring the world that visitors to this World Cup will be safe,
people like Julius Malema, who has asked for protection, will not agree
with this sentiment. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Mr Speaker, Deputy President and hon members, the country
has managed thus far to stay on schedule with its preparations for the 2010
World Cup. We need to congratulate the many thousands of South Africans who
have already contributed to ensuring that next year’s event will be a
sporting and tourism spectacle.

All the stadiums seem to be ready or very near completion. Now our focus
must shift to other logistical and infrastructural issues. Our two foremost
concerns are transport and accommodation.

The latter, which is accommodation, seems to be under control at the
moment, but we should not underestimate the huge demand that there will be
for it. This means that we will have to guard against greedy and
unscrupulous people exploiting foreign visitors by providing them with
inferior accommodation at astronomical prices. We need to make sure that
there are proper channels, perhaps a hotline, to ensure that exploitive
behaviour can be addressed swiftly. The mere existence of such a hotline
will serve as a deterrent.

The biggest concern at the moment, however, is the question of transport.
The Confederations Cup demonstrated that there are still issues surrounding
the park-and-ride facilities. Another concern is the implementation of the
Bus Rapid Transport, which has been badly received by the taxi industry.

Finally, we need to be sure that the government is properly prepared for
the inherent security risk of hosting such a large event. There are risks
posed by international tourists, the so-called “soccer hooligans”, as well
as the domestic security situation during community protests. In all of
these cases, proper preparation is critical.

This is an example on an international scale of prevention being better
than cure. We need to do everything in our power as South Africans to
ensure that none of these political risks come to pass. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, the ACDP wishes to commend the Local Organising
Committee for all the preparatory work that has been done to make the 2010
Soccer World Cup a resounding success. This is indeed a momentous occasion
for South Africa in particular, and the African continent as a whole. We
trust that this event will strengthen and boost our image abroad.

Due to my limited speaking time, I will raise only two issues that we
believe require further attention: transport and a reliable electricity
supply. We are concerned that not all taxi operators have pledged their
unqualified support for the Bus Rapid Transport system, as many still want
to profit from the transportation of spectators. Equally, unions have not
promised that they will not strike during the soccer tournament. As it is
the norm in our country for roads to be blockaded during strikes, we want
to know if there are any alternatives or emergency measures in place that
will still make it possible for the teams and fans to be transported to the
stadiums on time if there is a blockade.

During the MTN 8 Cup final between Golden Arrows and Ajax, we were
embarrassed by the blackout that was caused by floodlights that failed
after the first half. This, despite being told that the stadium management
had checked the lights and backup generators three hours before the game.
Until today, we still do not know why the backup generator failed to come
on automatically.

We need to be assured that these challenges will be addressed, and that
South Africa and the LOC will be able to host the best Soccer World Cup
ever. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M N MATLADI: Speaker, I would like to greet the committee that is
organising the 2010 Fifa World Cup, who are among us today, especially the
CEO of the 2010 Local Organising Committee, Dr Danny Jordaan. The Fifa
World Cup final draw has developed into a major live show that is being
followed, with great excitement, by millions of people across the world. It
will reignite the 2010 World Cup fever, not just in the host country, but
also in the qualifying countries, where excitement is mounting as we draw
closer to next year’s Fifa flagship event.

On the preparations made, let me congratulate Dr Danny Jordaan, as well as
his committee management, for the infrastructure development in preparation
for the event, including the stadia, roads, airports, hotels, tourist
attraction areas, and diverse South African artistic cultures in music,
dance and so on.

We would , however, like to caution the Local Organising Committee on a
matter of concern, the fact that Gauteng Province will not pay the extra
R1,3 billion to have the first phase of the Gautrain ready before the 2010
World Cup. The section between the OR Tambo Airport and Sandton is supposed
to be finished by 27 June 2010 while the tournament will have started by 11
June 2010. This is a real concern.

Another concern is the issue of sex workers. In South Africa we do not yet
have a law that governs this. Other countries that already have laws are
asking questions. Last week in Paarl we had questions as to what South
Africa was saying about sex workers. We need to look at the matter and say
what South Africa says so that people who come to our country will have
answers.

Allow me to mention again an issue regarding 2010 that concerns me more
than anything: the competence that is expected of our team in South Africa,
Bafana Bafana, which has been very weak of late. We are worried about
whether we as a country will make it. [Time expired.] Thank you very much,
Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Speaker, our country has proved that it can organise world-
class events. The Indian Premier League championship, the Rugby World Cup
and the Swimming World Cup are classic examples of this. Indeed, South
Africa must be commended for its organisational ability.

We have the necessary expertise and the know-how to build the best stadiums
in the world, but we have some very important regrets. The Cup Final in
Germany was played in a stadium that was built in 1933. It was revamped.
Some of the venues we are using to erect World Cup stadia are being
revamped, as they were rugby grounds.

What happened to Korea after the World Cup? Germany did not perform an
economic miracle.

Are we leaving behind a legacy for our townships? Instead of our building a
stadium next to a stadium, don’t you think that the people in the townships
would rather have been proud to say that they had sports fields because of
the legacy of the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup? Lots of tongues will be
wagging after the international teams depart!

In KwaZulu–Natal 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup co-ordination is at gutter
level. For the past five years the MEC for Economic Development and Tourism
has been the co-ordinator, and the co-ordination of KZN with the district
councils is a disgrace. It’s pathetic, and we call on the Minister for
intervention.

We have made some excellent decisions, but we have also made some bad
decisions and sometimes people wonder whether South Africa, with its
economic problems, can afford to host the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup.
Nevertheless, our flag is important. The MF calls on everybody to unite
under the flag. Unite behind our President and show the world that in our
diversity we are a united country and we are proud of the 2010 Fifa Soccer
World Cup! We must indeed do everything to place on record that we
delivered the best World Cup ever and take party politics out of this.

So, let’s march forward with courage, conviction and determination in the
deep spirit of brotherhood and happiness so that we can not only deliver a
2010 Soccer World Cup but, indeed, also be the best. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Mr Speaker, the APC joins this House and indeed the whole
country in congratulating Dr Irvin Khoza and his team, not only for winning
for our country the right to host the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup, but also
for running the preparations for it in a way that promises that this Soccer
World Cup will be one of the best organised. The growing awareness and
excitement in the country confirm that, indeed, the World Cup is coming to
our country, to our continent.
The APC believes that Fifa needs to be thanked for debunking the tendency
of international bodies to marginalise Africa. We have just seen the
conclusion of the Fifa Under-21 Soccer World Cup in Egypt, which was won by
Ghana. The Fifa Under-17 Soccer World Cup is currently taking place in
Nigeria, and next year the World Cup will be held in our country. This is
truly appreciated. The APC believes that our country will live up to its
commitment to deliver for Africa a soccer spectacle never to be forgotten.

Beyond the logistical preparations, which we all agree are on course, there
is the issue of the performance of African teams in particular. It is
important that Bafana Bafana should perform credibly, for they know that
they have the unqualified support of the nation.

The APC however decries the fact that Safa does not appear to be
appropriately positioned to provide the kind of foresight and leadership
that will ensure that we have a squad that can rise to the challenge of the
World Cup, in which case we would have to rely on the likes of Ghana and
the Ivory Coast to save us from embarrassment.

Looking at the performance of the African players in the tough European
leagues, I feel that there is no reason why we should not follow the
example of the Ghana under-21 team, which beat Brazil, despite playing with
10 players for the better part of the game. Our African teams should not
just participate, but should compete with the will and confidence to win
the cup for Africa.

The APC once again would like to salute the Local Organising Committee for
a job, so far, well done. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Speaker, agb Adjunkpresident, agb Ministers, agb
Parlementêre Leier van die Opposisie, Athol Trollip, agb lede van die
Nasionale Vergadering en die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies, genooide gaste,
en elke luisteraar vandag, dit is my voorreg om namens die DA aan hierdie
debat te kan deelneem.

Die DA is daartoe verbind en gemotiveerd om te veg vir patriotisme, die
behoud van die rykdom van Suid-Afrika, volhoubare ontwikkeling van groei in
ons land, die uitwissing van werkloosheid en armoede, en om sover moontlik
steun te werf en te wen vir ons nasionale sokkerspan, Bafana Bafana.

As Suid-Afrikaners moet ons sielkundig en liggaamlik 100% gereed wees om
die wêreld daar buite, asook die sokkerspanne van die ander lande, te wys
dat ons ’n wennasie is, net soos ons destyds was met ons steun vir die Suid-
Afrikaanse rugbyspan.

Om te wen en te presteer moet jy emosioneel, verstandelik en liggaamlik
gereed wees om jou doelwit te bereik.

Hierdie wêreldklas geleentheid is ’n geleentheid vir ons as Suid-Afrikaners
om te toon dat ons sukses kan en sal behaal. Reeds tydens vorige
geleenthede – soos in 1995 met die Rugbywêreldbeker, in 2002 met die
Wêreldberaad oor Volhoubare Ontwikkeling, in 2003 met die
Krieketwêreldbeker, en nou onlangs met die Konfederasiebeker-sokkertoernooi
– het ons dit bewys.

Mislukking is nie ’n opsie nie. Sukses is ’n wen vir die nasie en ons
toekoms. Een nasie, een toekoms. Die internasionale gemeenskap het ’n mosie
van vertroue in Suid-Afrika ingedien. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers, hon
Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, Athol Trollip, hon members of the
National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces, invited guests,
and every listener, today it is my privilege on behalf of the DA to be able
to take part in this debate.

The DA is committed and motivated to fighting for patriotism, the
preservation of the wealth of South Africa, sustainable development and
growth in our country, the eradication of unemployment and poverty and, as
far as it is possible enlisting and gaining support for our national soccer
team, Bafana Bafana.

As South Africans we will have to be 100% ready, both psychologically and
physically, to show the world out there, as well as the soccer teams of the
other countries, that we are still a winning nation, just as we were in our
support for the South African rugby team.

To win and to do well, you have to be emotionally, mentally and physically
geared to achieving your goal.

This world-class occasion is an opportunity for us as South Africans to
prove that we can and will be successful. We have already proved this on
previous occasions – such as in 1995 with the Rugby World Cup, in 2002 with
the World Summit on Sustainable Development, in 2003 with the Cricket World
Cup, and recently with the Confederations Cup.

Failure is not an option. Success is a victory for the nation and our
future. One nation, one future. The international community has given South
Africa a vote of confidence.]

It is a challenge we have accepted and we know that South Africans are more
than capable of rising to the challenge and succeeding.

Ons het groot uitdagings wat armoede en werkloosheid betref en moet
gemotiveerd wees om dit uit te roei. Die DA glo in geleenthede, en daarom
beskou ons die Fifa-sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi in 2010 as ’n geleentheid wat
baie potensiaal het om werkloosheid en armoede aan te spreek. Ons almal kan
saam hierdie doelwit bereik. Ons wil en ons sal.

Wat is die geleenthede, onder andere? Statistikusse gee te kenne dat een
werkgeleentheid vir elke 12 toeriste ontwikkel word. Ons sal dus ongeveer
16 000 werkgeleenthede in Suid-Afrika kan skep. Die groot agterstand in die
padnetwerkstruktuur word byvoorbeeld aangespreek, en dit skep werk vir
duisende mense.

Die Fifa-sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi in 2010 sal ’n geraamde R21,3 miljard in
die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie inspuit. Die staat sal R7,2 miljard in
belastingwaarde ontvang.

Daar is egter ook dreigende faktore wat die Fifa-sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi
in 2010 kan benadeel. Paniek kan ontstaan as ons nie daarin slaag om kos te
beveilig vir die ongeveer 500 000 ondersteuners en vir Suid-Afrikaners nie.

Parkeer- en rygeriewe mag onvoldoende wees.

Medisyne om H1N1 te behandel mag onvoldoende wees. Die toernooi word juis
in Suid-Afrika se winterseisoen gehou en hierdie siekte kan van oral kom en
ons moet gereed wees daarvoor.

Elektrisiteitsvoorsiening mag in duie stort. Dit sal winter wees en die
aanvraag na elektrisiteit sal dus hoër wees. Kan u u indink watter chaos
dit kan skep as ’n skare mense vanaf ’n paviljoen moet beweeg na ’n
stikdonker stad daar buitekant?

Ons moet gereed wees om al hierdie uitdagings die hoof te bied.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We have immense challenges as far as poverty and unemployment are
concerned and we must be motivated to eradicate these. The DA believes in
opportunities, and therefore we regard the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup as an
opportunity that has lots of potential for addressing unemployment and
poverty. We can all reach this goal together. We want to and we shall.

What are these opportunities exactly? Statisticians suggest that for every
12 tourists one job opportunity is generated. Therefore, we will be able to
create approximately 16 000 job opportunities in South Africa. For example,
the huge backlog in the road network structure is being addressed, and this
creates jobs for thousands of people.

The 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup will inject an estimated R21,3 billion into
the South African economy. The state will receive R7,2 billion in tax
revenue.

There are, however, also pressing factors that could be damaging to the
2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup. Panic could arise if we do not succeed in
securing food for the approximately 500 000 supporters and for South
Africans.

Park-and-ride facilities may be inadequate.

Medicine for the treatment of H1N1 may be inadequate. The tournament is, in
fact, being held during South Africa’s winter season and this illness can
come from all over and we have to be prepared for it.

The supply of electricity may collapse. It will be winter and the demand
for electricity will therefore be higher. Can you imagine the chaos that
could erupt if a crowd of people were to move from a stadium to a pitch-
dark city outside?

We will have to be ready to cope with all these challenges.]

Hosting a Fifa World Cup is a rare event for any country. Therefore, we
South Africans must ensure that we make use of every opportunity that
hosting this event affords us. We must stand together as a nation, both
psychologically and physically. We must support Bafana Bafana
wholeheartedly. Every citizen must play their role with dedication and
motivation.

The 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup will be a success and benefit South Africa
as a nation. One nation, one future! Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Speaker, Deputy President, Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, hon members, leaders of football, and organisers of
the Local Organising Committee led by Danny Jordaan, I want to tell you
today that I asked the ANC regarding the fact that since 2004 up until
today Donald Lee has never minced his words in support of the 2010 World
Cup. I said that maybe we had taken a wrong decision. When the DA supported
the decision we took in 2004, I can recall that Donald Lee said the World
Cup was priceless. And when Donald Lee said the World Cup was priceless, we
said maybe we should evaluate our decision. But, Deputy President, it means
we took the correct decision, to welcome the nations of the world to our
shores. [Applause.]

I want to deal with a few things, Deputy President. Countries were saying
there was a Plan B if South Africa was unable to host the World Cup. But we
were resolute and firm - we never lost our focus on the fact that the World
Cup was going to be held in South Africa. Plan A was South Africa, Plan B
was South Africa, and there is no other plan apart from South Africa.
[Applause.]

Yesterday hon Ndude called me and told me that she had cried in Germany
when she saw an article in which somebody had said he or she would have to
put on a bulletproof vest when he or she landed at OR Tambo Airport. She
said that that was painful. I said the pedlars of lies had to be proven
wrong because the World Cup was going to be in South Africa. A few weeks
from now there will be a draw, and 32 countries are going to be in this
country. South Africa will never be the same. [Applause.]

Regarding our national team’s performance, this august House gave us an
opportunity to go around the world in order to learn from other countries
who have hosted the World Cup before. We went to Korea and Japan. When we
arrived there, their teams had been written off because of weak
performance. But as the competition progressed, with the people of Korea
and Japan supporting their teams which they had initially written off, the
Korean and Japanese national teams did fairly well.

We went to Germany and Klinsmann was on the front pages of all the
newspapers in Germany. As the tournament progressed, the German national
team also progressed, and everybody sported red, black and gold in support
of the German national team.

This is going to be the case with Bafana Bafana. All of us as a country
will have to unite and rally around this national asset. This will avert a
situation in which the people of this country clap and sing for other
countries, or we see the early exit from the tournament of our national
team.

At its 52nd national conference the ANC took a decision that the
infrastructure that was going to be used for the 2010 World Cup should be
infrastructure that would leave an everlasting legacy for the people of
this country. Therefore, we have to look after these assets and investments
so that after the World Cup our people will have nothing to regret.
Instead, they should say they want another World Cup to come to South
Africa. [Applause.]

Madam Speaker ... Hon Speaker ... [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, don’t repeat that. [Laughter.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: I’m sorry, Speaker. I say with absolute certainty that I
believe we are ready for the world, and the world is ready for our stage.
The success of this event is not a question of bricks and mortar, but of
how much South Africa is going to be sold to the nations of the world. What
is going to be the perception of those countries of South Africa? Is it
going to be that Africa is just a dark continent with rampant crime?

We have hosted so many events in this country. We have hosted the Indian
Premier League, in the middle of our own national elections! Therefore
South Africa is ready to host any other event, and is equal to the rest of
the world.

During our discussions Dr Khoza said it would have been an embarrassment if
the government of South Africa had not supported the World Cup bid. He said
South Africa would have been the laughing stock of the world. But today we
walk tall in the corridors of the world because South Africa has made us as
human beings proud. We agree with that, Dr Khoza. Everywhere we go, we
tower over the world! [Applause.]

It is not rhetoric but an active reality that our lessons we have learnt
from other countries. It is therefore with the greatest humility that we
accept this World Cup in the name of Kwame Nkrumah, Nelson Mandela, and
Samora Machel.

We hope that this is not going to be for the last time. We as South
Africans are most privileged. That is because of the fact that in our time
the World Cup has come to our country. Maybe it will come only in another
94 years from now and by that time we will not be here. At least we will be
here to see the World Cup come to South Africa now. [Applause.]

However, we are challenging the international community to afford us the
opportunity to host the Olympics. It is 113 years since the Olympics were
established. If we are ready to host the Fifa World Cup, which was
established in 1904, it means that we as a country are also ready to
demonstrate to the nations of the world that we can host the Olympics. The
Olympics must come to South Africa; we will be ready to host that great
event too. [Applause.]

The 52 regions of the SA Football Association, Safa, are going to benefit
from the legacy that will be left by the Fifa 2010 World Cup. We want to
say that that is going to be a springboard for us to build a formidable and
far better national team than we have. The Fifa 2010 World Cup legacy will
provide us with a base to build something for this country.

As a result of the hosting of the Fifa World Cup, we have enacted two Acts,
and one of them is the 2010 FIFI World Cup South Africa Special Measures
Act. This Act aims to ensure that our people are protected in terms of
safety and security, and that they are able to benefit from the legacy of
this 2010 World Cup.

But the main question that people have been asking, even up to today, when
we had a session with the Local Organising Committee, is: ...

... OoMamkhize bazakufumana ntoni na? [What will Mrs Mkhize and company
get?]

We have stated it very clearly in the two Acts that ...

... ooMamkhize xa betshisa inyama, besenza zonke izinto ... [when Mrs Mkize
and company braai meat, preparing all the dishes ... ]

... nothing is going to change. OoMamkhize is not in conflict with any
other Fifa brand.

Bazakusinika inyama kulaa ndawo baqhele ukuhlala kuyo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [They
will serve us meat from where they are normally found. [Applause.]]

So, to the people who are panicking and asking whether or not our people
are going to be removed with their ...

... pap en wors sê ek vir die agb lede dat dit nie so gaan wees nie. Mense
van hierdie land gaan hul boerewors in die stadiums geniet want dit is nie
teenstrydig met wat Fifa in die stadiums het nie. Daardie dag gaan ons ons
pap en wors geniet! [Applous.] (Translation of the Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[ ... “pap” and “wors” I say to hon members that it will not be the case.
The people of this country will enjoy their boerewors in the stadiums
because it is not contrary to what Fifa wants for the stadiums. On that day
we will enjoy our “pap” and “wors”! [Applause.]]

So, our people must be confident that the ANC, in its desire to enable our
people to benefit out of this, has put these measures in place. The first
thing that came to our minds was what would happen to those at grassroots
level, because we knew that people were going to ask us about the
grassroots. Therefore, we put these measures in place for the grassroots
people to benefit out of the 2010 World Cup.
We even went beyond that and told the 2010 Fifa World Cup Local Organising
Committee that it would be correct if there were also, besides the fan
parks that belong to Fifa, public viewing areas that were managed by the
municipalities. This would ensure that there would be free zones for our
people to go and party in during this grand occasion of the 2010 Fifa World
Cup. There is such an agreement, and that is going to happen.

Therefore, we are calling on everybody to join us in this festival of
football. The prophets of doom will come to this country, and there will be
no need to wear bulletproof jackets at OR Tambo International Airport, or
in Cape Town or Bloemfontein. Instead, in Bloemfontein ...

 ... re tla ba amohela ka masele ka siwelele sa masele. [ ... we will
welcome them with a Celtic praise, Siwelele sa Masele, which means we are
cheering for Celtic.]

They will see the passion for football in this country.
In conclusion, Madam Speaker... [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
Take your seat, hon member.

Siyabonga, bab’ uMkhize. [Thank you, hon Mkhize.]
Hon members, on your behalf I want once again to thank members of the 2010
Fifa World Cup Local Organising Committee for their attendance, and also
for keeping the hopes and aspirations of our people alive. We know that we
will get there.

Debate concluded.

The Speaker of the National Assembly adjourned the Joint Sitting at 15:09.


