---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 March 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-03-19
---

THURSDAY, 19 MARCH 2009
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 09:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORT – see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I have been informed that
the Whippery has agreed that we won’t have motions, except for the motion
on the Order Paper, as printed in the name of the Chief Whip.

 RESOLUTION TO EXTEND DEADLINE OF AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE APPOINTMENT
          OF MEMBERS TO THE NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BOARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the motion on the Order
Paper as follows:
   That the Council, noting the resolution it adopted on 17 February 2009,
   inter alia, setting the deadline for the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on the
   appointment of members to the National Youth Development Agency Board to
   report by 19 February 2009, and subject to the concurrence of the
   National Assembly, resolves to extend the deadline by which the Ad Hoc
   Joint Committee has to report to 19 March 2009.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am told that this is a maiden speech.
[Laughter.] Both a maiden speech and a closing speech on the last day.
Seeing as the Deputy Minister is addressing us for the first time today, I
would like to, on behalf of the Council, congratulate you formally on being
elevated to the position of Deputy Minister. We are glad that you are
addressing us today.


                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, indeed it is a privilege for
me to address you, in my maiden speech, on the last day of the sitting of
this House, of course. Firstly, let me express my sincere appreciation and
gratitude to everybody who has participated in the processing of the 2009
Division of Revenue Bill. In particular, we are eternally grateful to the
Select Committee on Finance, under the leadership of Mr Ralane, for their
sterling work. This is particularly remarkable bearing in mind that, due to
the elections scheduled for 22 April 2009, the processing of the Bill had
to be expedited, which afforded the NCOP limited time for the processing of
the Bill.

The Division of Revenue Bill is the embodiment of co-operative governance,
which is at the heart of our democracy and Constitution. It’s an outcome of
extensive consultative processes among technocrats and between the
political leadership of the three spheres of government.

The division of resources among the three spheres of government is one of
the most critical steps in the Budget process as it provides the basis for
the preparation of the national, 9 provincial and 283 municipal budgets for
the coming financial year.

The Bill gives effect to section 214(1) of the Constitution and the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act of 1997, which require an annual Act
of Parliament to provide for the equitable division of revenue anticipated
to be raised among the three spheres of government.

There is no doubt that this Division of Revenue Bill is presented to you
when the world economy is in turmoil and each and every country in the
world is finding ways of protecting itself from the adverse effects of the
sharply slowing economic conditions.

A large part of the strategy is to explore ways of ensuring that we do more
with the little that we have, that we employ our resources more smartly and
more efficiently and that we minimise and, at most, eradicate wastage.

The period ahead will require of us, as a collective, that we improve our
oversight over the scarce resources to ensure that the quality of services
is improved and that the poor are not left behind during these difficult
times.

The Bill before us covers in detail all transfers to be made to provinces
and municipalities over the next three years. The explanatory attachments
also contain detailed information on the formulas for the provincial and
local equitable share allocations, and a detailed framework on each
conditional grant to a province or municipality.

The publication of this information will enable every province and
municipality, and every national and provincial department, to prepare
their multiyear budgets in terms of the Public Finance Management Act.

The good strides made by South Africa in ensuring a transparent budget
process have been recognised internationally. South Africa is ranked second
in the world on the Open Budget Index, which measures the transparency and
quality of budget information. This is indeed a remarkable achievement.

Allow me to caution that the certainty of flows alone is not sufficient to
ensure that services are delivered to our people. This House has an
exceedingly important role to be even more vigorous in its oversight role
to ensure that these fiscal flows result in services being delivered to our
people.

This House has been vigilant in the past in ensuring that funds are spent
and that these funds are spent on the programmes that seek to ensure that
the poor receive quality services. We expect that this good work will
continue to ensure that value for money is indeed attained during these
leaner fiscal times.

More effective and efficient spending by every province and municipality
will make sure, for instance, that no children learn under trees; that
clean and cholera-free potable water is delivered to our people; and that
access to housing and public transport for our people is fast-tracked.

This Bill, with the wealth of information it contains, such as the outputs
set out in the frameworks for conditional grants, is but one of the tools
we put before this House for it to exercise oversight over national
departments, including National Treasury, provinces and municipalities. Let
me now turn to some of the highlights of the deliberations in the select
committee on the Bill that this House is about to adopt today, as I believe
it will.

I am aware that some of the discussions were quite vibrant. Some of the
issues that were raised by those who made representations to the committee
pointed to some pertinent matters about our budgeting, financial management
and performance monitoring system.

Firstly, and perhaps most importantly, the deliberations highlighted the
importance of the NCOP in exercising its oversight role.

Secondly, the discussions highlighted matters of capacity and the quality
of spending. I am told that members of the select committee raised concerns
that insufficient investment in libraries, community and sports facilities
should be addressed as these types of interventions are essential tools in
creating an environment that supports the development of our youth. At the
same time, attention needs to be given to putting in place appropriate
scholar transport systems that are supportive of urban and rural scholar
transport needs.

Thirdly, employment-generation programmes will have to be supported in the
present economic climate the country finds itself in, hence phase two of
EPWP, the Extended Public Works Programme. I am informed that there was
rigorous debate on this matter. The concerns raised by the committee have
been noted and the allocations will be adjusted in future to ensure that
the programme is also institutionalised in rural municipalities.

Lastly, the importance of ensuring that more poorly resourced
municipalities are appropriately funded was stressed throughout the
hearings. As part of the ongoing review of the local government fiscal
framework, the focus will be on strengthening the revenue base of
metropolitan and other larger urban municipalities and increasingly
targeting transfers to more poorly resourced municipalities.

A number of reforms have already been introduced to fund poorly resourced
municipalities more appropriately, such as introducing a minimum of R500
million for the Municipal Infrastructure Grant allocation and making
appropriate adjustments to the revenue-raising component of the local
government equitable share formula.

Again, additional resources alone will not address the challenges faced by
these smaller and rural municipalities. Steps will have to be taken to
ensure that these additional flows to these smaller and rural
municipalities result in tangible service delivery improvements and are not
used to pay salaries and consultants’ fees only.

The division of revenue, as set out in this year’s Bill, gives effect to
the priorities articulated by President Kgalema Motlanthe in his state of
the nation address on 6 February, which were further elaborated on in the
speeches of the Premiers in our nine provinces. The budget framework allows
us to provide R161 billion in additional spending over the next three
years, in comparison with our spending plans from a year earlier. Over the
period ahead, government’s spending plans are focused on enhancing the
quality of education; improving the provision of health care, particularly
for the poor; reducing infant, child and maternal mortality rates; reducing
the level of crime and enhancing citizen safety; expanding the built
environment to improve public transportation and to meet universal access
targets in housing, water, electricity and sanitation; and decreasing rural
poverty by taking steps to raise rural incomes, and improving livelihoods
by extending access to land and support for emerging farmers. The resources
provided for in this Bill will enable each sphere of government to step up
the programmes targeted in these priorities.

Of the R161 billion additional resources, national departments will share
R101,5 billion – including the R50 billion for Eskom – provinces
R47,8 billion and municipalities R11,3 billion over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework. Further details on the specific programmes and
projects to be implemented in each province and municipality over the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework can be found in their 2009 budget
statements.

Schedule 1 of the Bill provides a summary of the allocation of funds to the
three spheres of government. Of the R738,6 billion Budget in 2009-10, the
national department functions amount to R483,7 billion. This includes debt
service costs amounting to R55,3 billion and a contingency reserve of R6
billion. Provinces receive R231,1 billion and R23,8 billion is allocated to
local government.

Schedules 2 and 3 allocate equitable shares to provinces and
municipalities. Schedules 4 through to 6 allocate conditional and other
grants to provinces and local government. Schedule 7 allocates in-kind
transfers to municipalities. Schedule 8 allocates incentives for provinces
and municipalities to meet targets with regard to priority government
programmes. The 2009 MTEF allocations to provinces provide for the further
strengthening of social services programmes that have a high impact on
human development, the quality of life and social transformation.

A substantial share of the additional resources is expected to go to
education to ensure that services and quality are improved. The 2009 Budget
extends the no-fee-schools policy from the poorest 40% to the poorest 60%;
reduces the teacher-learner ratio in the poorest 20% of schools; caters for
facilities for learners with disabilities; and extends the coverage of the
national school nutrition programme. Provision is also made in the
infrastructure grant for provinces to increase classroom space for Grade R
learners and to upgrade school infrastructure, secure facilities and
install libraries and laboratories. These investments constitute a
considerable effort to improve the quality of schooling in our country.

Provincial budgets will reinforce the strengthening of the health sector so
that South Africans who do not have medical insurance can also enjoy good
quality health. Allocations are set aside to expand the range of vaccines
provided to children in order to reduce maternal and child mortality and to
combat HIV and Aids, and Extreme and Multidrug Resistant Tuberculosis. The
hospital revitalisation programme is also prioritised in the period ahead.
In addition, provinces are expected to step up their own hospital
maintenance budgets.

Our housing budget receives a further R3,7 billion, taking the total
allocation over the next three years to R44,7 billion. In 2003-04, we spent
R4,6 billion on housing. By 2011-12, the end of our present budgeting
period, the budget rises to R17,2 billion. Allocations for water,
sanitation, electrification and municipal roads all rise in a complementary
fashion. It is thus very important that this House continues to ask
questions concerning the returns for this sizeable investment.

Access to public transport has a major impact on the economy and on
people’s lives, particularly the poor that are mainly reliant on public
transport to get to work and education facilities. The need for an
effective public transport system is therefore critical to creating a
better life for all. Transport-related adjustments include the creation of
a new conditional grant, the public transport operations grant, of
R11,5 billion over the period for bus subsidies.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Excuse me, hon Minister. I’m told that people
cannot hear you. Or is it a case of the unavailability of interpreting
services? [Interjections.] Oh, no sound volume?

An HON MEMBER: Chairperson, the sound volume is very low. We can’t even
hear you speak, Chairperson. I have to read your lips.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You can’t hear me?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Can I start all over again, Chairperson?
[Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, Deputy Minister, just continue. Can the
staff concerned increase the level of the sound volume, please?
[Interjections.] Continue, hon Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Turning to local government, I’ve spoken
about provinces; over the next three years municipalities will receive
R181,7 billion, including in-kind allocations or an additional
R11,3 billion. This includes R22,9 billion for the sharing of the general
fuel levy with metropolitan municipalities, which will be introduced from
the 2009 Budget as the primary replacement for the former regional services
council levies. The local government equitable share receives a further
R2,5 billion for the delivery of free basic services to all poor
households.

Municipal infrastructure-related spending is allocated an additional
R8 billion over the next three years. This results in total infrastructure
transfers to municipalities of just over R58,3 billion over the next three
years, which increases to R67,5 billion, if infrastructure that is provided
on behalf of municipalities, that is in-kind transfers, is also included.
These adjustments are intended to enhance access to water, sanitation,
electricity and roads; to extend regional bulk infrastructure to support
such services to the poor; to promote municipal initiatives that will
support more efficient use of energy; and to support host cities in their
preparations for the Fifa Confederations Cup in 2009 and the 2010 Fifa
World Cup.
We need to ensure that the intergovernmental grants at our disposal are
designed in such a manner that they support optimal outcomes. It has become
evident that there is a need to reform the Municipal Infrastructure Grant
to respond appropriately to the different demographic, economic,
infrastructural and institutional challenges faced by the 283
municipalities in our country. From the 2009 Budget, the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant to cities will enable cities to manage more
effectively, and to support and account for built environmental outcomes by
rather focusing on their entire infrastructure programme performance than
solely on project outputs. Although smaller, more rural municipalities will
continue to account for project outputs, attention will also be given to
introducing innovations that will address the capacity and resource
deficiencies faced by these municipalities so as to improve expenditure
outcomes.

Finally, allocations for capacity-building total R1,7 billion over the 2009
MTEF period. This is further complemented by the Siyenza Manje programme,
via the Development Bank of SA, to develop skills in engineering, planning
and financial management within municipalities. In the period ahead,
government will take steps to co-ordinate these capacity-building
initiatives to avoid duplication and contradictions. These allocations are
aimed at supporting local programmes that will provide for sector
investment in underserviced communities. Together with increases in housing
allocations, this should provide a major boost to local economic
development.

In conclusion, provinces and municipalities continue to play an important
role in accelerating growth and job creation, broadening economic
participation and reducing poverty. Taking into account the current
economic downturn, it will be exceedingly important in the period ahead to
take stronger action in pursuit of efficiency and better targeted
expenditure. Expenditure priorities of provinces and municipalities
therefore need to focus on more efficient and effective service delivery,
protecting the poor and creating employment.

Chairperson and hon members, once again, thank you very much. And together,
we can do more. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I have been informed that the
microphones are not functioning properly, but if you use the ear pieces
provided, you will be able to hear better.

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Chairperson and hon members, the Division of Revenue
Bill for 2009 was tabled in a very different economic climate to that in
which these Bills have been tabled in recent years. The world economy, and
that of South Africa, is in a worse position than it has been for several
decades. However, the DA welcomed Minister Manuel’s decision to keep to his
considered and responsible fiscal position in the current global economic
environment.

This Bill is the most important Bill passed annually, as it is a recognised
critical step in the budget process, allocating resources to the three
spheres of government. It is a process essential for national government,
the 9 provinces and each of the 284 municipalities to be able to determine
their budgets. The process for making this decision is at the heart of co-
operative governance - the ideal envisaged in the Constitution of South
Africa.

As members of the select committee we are convinced that the debates on the
division of revenue constitute the foundation of our work and our oversight
responsibilities. We welcome the fact that the following have been
prioritised: enhancing the quality of education; improving the provision of
health care, particularly for the poor; to reduce infant mortality, child
and maternal mortality rates; reducing levels of crime and enhancing
citizen safety; expanding the built-environment to improve public
transportation and meet universal access targets in housing, water,
electricity and sanitation; and decreasing rural poverty by taking steps to
raise rural incomes and improve the productivity of farms. Improving food
security for our nation through increasing the number of extension officers
to support emerging farmers is vital. However, I must caution that, while
making funding available is vital and laudable, the most important step is
to improve on delivery and accountability. There must be an emphasis on
quality spending and responsible spending.

Mentoring is vital to improving quality service, and so is the enforcement
of checks and balances. For this to happen there must be an improvement in
the work ethic and in the performance of all officials, from the Directors-
General down to the lowest levels. And so too we need a more responsible
attitude from our mayors and local councillors, concentrating not so much
on perks and privileges but on service delivery to the poor and neglected,
those who have been sidelined and neglected in the pursuit of power and
influence. When committees, whether from national or provincial
parliaments, do their oversight work, they should keep this most important
document, the Division of Revenue Bill, in mind.

We welcome the following improvements made in the current Bill: the
recommendation that, just as the Division of Revenue Bill requires that
indicated allocations to schools and hospitals be gazetted with the tabling
of provincial government budgets, this practice should be extended to
clinics and other primary health care facilities as and when they fall
under provincial control. The intention is to address bottlenecks that are
hampering housing services delivery by accelerating the accreditation of
municipalities with adequate capacity in line with the framework provision
of the Integrated Housing and Human Settlement Development Grant. I refer
here, in particular, to the City of Cape Town, which was denied
accreditation contrary to the spirit of co-operative governance. Who
suffered? The poor who desperately await homes of their own.

The recommendation was made by the FFC to ensure that spending for public
transport infrastructure for 2010 is linked to broader city development
plans. With the introduction of the new conditional grants to provinces and
local governments, it is believed that such grants will strengthen the
capacity of governments at all spheres to accelerate service delivery.
However, there is an area of concern, because the equitable share formula
used is largely population-driven and the allocations it generates are
sensitive to shifts in populations across provinces. Such population
shifts, in turn, lead to changes in relative demand for public services
across the provinces. Population shift patterns in provinces like the
Western Cape and Gauteng need very special attention to ensure that
underestimations in population trends are accommodated to avoid increases
in current backlogs.

I am appealing to Minister Manuel and Deputy Minister Nene not to forget
about significantly increasing the conditional grant for libraries every
year when I am no longer here to make this appeal to them. I am also
appealing to you, hon members, to ensure that the provinces spend the full
allocation of the conditional grant, so that libraries can be built in
order for literacy and education to become top priorities at schools and in
every home. In this way our nation can prosper and thrive with jobs for
all.

In conclusion, it was Thomas Jefferson who once wrote that: “The purse of
the people is the real seat of sensibility”. The way in which we expend
that purse shows how we care about the poorest and most vulnerable in our
nation and that our ideals are not just empty rhetoric. Let us all remember
that as we go into this election period.

I thank the members of the Select Committee on Finance, Scof, for their
spirit of collegiality over the past five years in the interest of the
people who elected us to Parliament. Finance committees are generally not
very political or combative, as they focus on figures rather than on
ideology and I think it is a good idea for all of us to concentrate on
service delivery to the people. We have insisted on better performance and
have sometimes sent mayors and officials away with their tails between
their legs, and told them to come back again when their figures made sense,
but that has always been in the interest of service delivery. So, let us
take that forward, as we all assume new roles in the next term of office.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T S RALANE: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, congratulations to you, Deputy
Minister, on your appointment that is accompanied by new responsibilities.

Hon members, this is our last engagement for the Third Parliament. All
things considered, we have an admirable record of political decisions.
This, at times, was as a result of robust engagements which invariably
produced democratic and progressive outcomes. In the Select Committee on
Finance we were frequently challenged by contentious issues, but hopefully
the results proved edifying. I thank my colleagues in the Select Committee
on Finance for their co-operation in ensuring progress in the completion of
the committee’s work. I also wish the public representatives to have
successful election campaigns in raising political awareness and making
voters aware of the significance of exercising their vote.

This Division of Revenue Bill is the last Bill of its kind in this Third
Parliament. In the next Parliament, the Division of Revenue Bill will be
governed by a new National Act of Parliament - the Money Bills Amendment
Procedure Bill.

The Division of Revenue Bill is tabled annually on a Budget day and
epitomises intergovernmental fiscal relations. Essentially, the Division of
Revenue Bill reflects the legal division of revenue between the three
spheres of government. The Bill divides revenue horizontally within the
provincial and local government spheres. Politically, the Division of
Revenue Bill relates to the allocation and division of revenue across
government spheres for the purpose of improving service delivery. The
collection of revenue and its allocation is determined by policy and
political decision-making. The Bill is predominantly a political evaluation
and assessment of financial resource allocation. We observe, for example, a
nexus between the key provisions of the Division of Revenue Bill and the
ANC’s 2009 election manifesto.
Key provisions of this Bill, particularly the new conditional grants,
provide the legislative means by which key provisions in the ANC’s 2009
election manifesto will be implemented. The new conditional grants include
various grants.

The Ilima/Letsema projects grant helps poor farmers to increase production
and to adopt modern farming methods. This grant has been allocated
R650 million over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. It also includes
the Overload Control Grant which has been allocated R21 million over the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework for initiatives to reduce overloading
practices by trucks on the network; the Sani Pass Road Grant which is
receiving R34 million for road infrastructure projects that promote
integration and development between South Africa and Lesotho; and the
Expanded Public Works Programme incentive grant for municipalities
encouraging provinces to increase spending on labour-intensive programmes.

Furthermore, some of the other conditional grants are: the Public Transport
Operations Grant which is receiving R11,5 billion over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework for the subsidisation of commuter bus services; the
Technical Secondary Schools Recapitalisation Grant which has been allocated
R280 million for equipment and facilities in these schools; the Health
Disaster Response (Cholera) Grant is receiving R50 million; and the Housing
Disaster Relief Grant is receiving R150 million to respond to natural
disasters.
The ANC, in its 2009 election manifesto, has identified five priority
areas, which are as follows: the creation of decent work and sustainable
livelihoods; education; health; rural development, food security and land
reform; and the fight against crime and corruption. The improvement in the
circumstances of the poor, who are seen as suffering from the legacy of
apartheid, is the central thrust of the ANC’s 2009 election manifesto. The
reduction of poverty is based on the creation of new jobs. The struggle
against poverty remains the central political task of the ANC’s 2009
election manifesto. This Division of Revenue Bill is a vehicle for
incrementally achieving the targets laid out in the manifesto, which are
politically significant to the successful future of a democratic South
Africa.

The Select Committee on Finance calls on the members of the NCOP to endorse
the 2009 Division of Revenue Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Chairperson, today, in the debate on the Division of
Revenue Bill, I will speak on behalf of my province, the Eastern Cape. I
will also talk about matters that have been brought to the attention of the
committee and about the division of revenue.

We all know that this is probably the most important Bill passed in the
NCOP. The first thing I would like to bring to your attention is that there
is a need to develop a clear policy on land disposal as municipalities are
more inclined to sell land to private developments than to government. This
is affecting the spending of money allocated for housing delivery. The
process of accreditation of municipalities must be speeded up. I would like
to add that it must be municipalities that have the capacity to deal with
this matter.

There is a need for the reconsideration of the local government equitable
share formula rather than to base it on the outdated 2001 census. Instead,
factors such as the prevalence of poverty and the location level of
unemployment and education, among others, must be taken into account. It is
proposed that historical backlogs be taken into account so that poor
municipalities, especially those from the former homelands, may be assisted
to get on par with others. If this is not done, these municipalities will
actually never catch up, and they will always be in trouble. It is very
important that this is dealt with.

Circumstances specific to each municipality are not taken into account with
the Municipal Systems Improvement Grant and the Financial Management Grant
allocations. Although the new conditional grants are welcomed, we are of
the view that the Overload Control Grant should be brought forward to the
2009-10 financial year, taking into account the infrastructure of our
roads.

It is proposed that the Local Government Data Collection Forum referred to
on page 71 of the Division of Revenue Act be decentralised to the
provinces. Although provinces are welcoming the favourable response from
government regarding the Financial and Fiscal Commission submissions, it is
proposed that timelines be attached to responses.

In conclusion, I would just like to mention that oversight must be very
rigid on the spending of conditional grants. We have had cases in the
country and in our provinces where Municipal Infrastructure Grant funds
were used to pay salaries of councillors. It is of utmost importance that
we are very vigilant as far as the spending of conditional grants is
concerned. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, the division of revenue that is considering
the poor is welcomed if it is going to be used as budgeted for in the areas
of allocation. The allocation of an extra R45 billion for provinces towards
health, education, roads and rural development is appreciated.

Municipalities have to be assisted with more funding for the Ilima/Letsema
projects to plough the fields that are lying fallow in rural areas. Co-
operation with local farmers will definitely call for more than the
R50 million that has been allocated for Ilima/Letsema projects so that
people can be assisted to get out of poverty.

We are all aware of the problems we are experiencing right now in various
departments like the Department of Health, where one may actually say that
the training of nurses has to be looked at. Rather than leaving it to
universities, training must be done at hospitals where nurses will have
hands-on training through the nursing of patients at their bedsides. This
should be done rather than having nurses being trained privately and paying
exorbitant sums of money like R7 200 just to be trained as a nurse who has
to make people aware of what is going on with diseases. So, the money we
have needs to be used properly. We cannot say the money is not enough. We
all have to co-operate in the three spheres of government to assist each
other in making sure that the money that has been given is used
appropriately.

The IFP and our province support the Bill that is in front of us. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Deputy Minister Nene, comrades
and colleagues, the people of South Africa gave the ANC an overwhelming
mandate to change their lives through, amongst others, the Budget. The
Division of Revenue Bill that we are passing today is, therefore, one major
tool that contributes to the creation of a better life. The track record of
the ANC government, over the past 15 years, shows the steps that the ANC
government has taken to address decades of deprivation and exclusion from
the mainstream provision of services. And the people would want the ANC to
continue with a programme of ensuring that children in rural areas have the
same access to quality education, health, a clean environment, and food
security, amongst others, as children in the Western Cape.

Despite the global economic meltdown, this Division of Revenue Bill,
informed by the ANC manifesto, addresses itself to decent job creation
through, inter alia, a restructured public works programme and public
infrastructure. No one in this House can deny that South Africa, today, is
a construction site. Construction is taking place at the stadiums, and it
is taking place on the roads. It is taking place everywhere.

One matter that drew a lot of attention in the hearings, Deputy Minister,
was the issue of incentives for municipalities that exhibit the capacity to
create more jobs. These municipalities will receive more from the R4,2
billion earmarked for this process over the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework. This is expecting the Lephalale Municipality in Limpopo, for
instance, to compete with Johannesburg Metropolitan. Ordinarily, we all
know that the budget of Johannesburg Metropolitan is bigger than most
provinces’ and, therefore, comparing the small, rural municipalities with
metropolitans is like comparing a cat to an elephant. So, the committee
suggested that what needs to be done is to build the capacity of the small,
rural municipality in order to create more jobs, and to give an incentive
to the municipality to create these jobs.
With increased resources in many departments, it will be incumbent upon
committees to do vigorous oversight over the departments to ensure that
these resources are expended properly. The government has responded
positively to disasters by providing a special disaster management grant
for swift response to disasters that continue to ravage our country.
Emerging farmers or poor people of the Alfred Nzo Municipality, for
instance, in the Eastern Cape can’t wait for 20 years for government to
respond to disasters. It is not fair. We must pass this Bill so that
service delivery can start tomorrow.

I would like to express our sincere gratitude for the co-operation that we
received from the officials of departments, especially National Treasury
and the Department of Provincial and Local Government. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, the first one was the maiden
speech. This one is now the farewell speech. [Laughter.] Once again, let me
extend our sincere appreciation to this House and, as I have indicated,
particularly to the committee for having dealt with this Bill and now for
the support that we have received from this House.

We trust that it is now up to us to ensure its implementation, and I have
heard this in speech after speech – everybody has emphasised the importance
of making sure that the money that has been allocated is buying what it is
meant to buy.

A number of concerns have been raised, and I know most of these concerns
are also in the report of the committee, which we take very seriously, and
we have indicated that we will take into account most of the issues that
have been raised.

One of the issues that was raised by the hon Robinson was the issue of the
refusal to accredit the City of Cape Town. The hon member would know that
this is a process that needs to be linked to the Department of Provincial
and Local Government’s review process on provincial and local government. I
would imagine that the member, in her campaign, will also educate the
nation on the importance of this process, without necessarily pointing
fingers at government.

On the issue of the formula, also, that underestimates populations in
metropolitans, two issues need to be taken into account. There have been
substantial increases that were made to the local government equitable
share allocations, which take into account the increases in service
delivery responsibilities that have been assigned to local governments.
Regarding the other issue, we require a fair basis for the allocation of
required resources from the central source, which currently is Statistics
South Africa and no other. I know that hon Robinson also raised the issue
of how outdated the statistics are that Statistics South Africa still has
on record, which is the 2001 statistics. We take note of that.

On the issue of the Libraries Conditional Grant, we agree that it is a
priority. I did indicate in my speech that we have prioritised it, but all
we want is that, together, we ensure that funds are spent for this
particular purpose.

The Chairperson raised the issue that these allocations will be governed by
the new Act of Parliament from now on, which is a constitutional
requirement in terms of section 77(3) which has since been passed. We thank
Parliament for having asserted its voice and ensuring that we have this
piece of legislation. We look forward to its implementation, and we trust
that you will all participate and make sure it achieves its intended
objectives.

Other than that, Chairperson, I do not want to spoil this beautiful day. I
want to take this opportunity, once again, to thank you all for the support
and wish you well. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, can we please take Order Number
Four on the Order Paper just to allow Minister Shiceka to come in. It will
take us about five minutes. Definitely, by that time, he will be here. I so
move.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Is everyone in
agreement with that?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): And the DA, are you
in agreement?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, one must ask the question: Where is the Minister?
We all knew about this meeting. Is he now suddenly being uplifted to a
status beyond punctuality for a meeting that he is entitled to address?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Watson, I asked
if you agree to the question put. Hon Chief Whip, hon Watson does not
agree.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, if we get a decent response as to where the
Minister is, perhaps we can agree. But just to say he is not here, he is
late ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): The hon Chief Whip
will answer.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, let’s put it to a vote. That’s
all.

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Can we vote? Those
who agree sit on the right side of my table. Hon Mzizi. Can I have order in
this House please?

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I think it would be appropriate that we accord
the Minister THE time to be here. Let’s continue with other business so
that we don’t lose anything. Thank you.

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): The Minister is
running late. We will continue with Order Number Four. [Interjections.] I
have spoken, thank you very much. I wish to apologise. We will go back to
the Second, Third and Fourth Orders.
                    CONSTITUTION SIXTEENTH AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

                    CONSTITUTION SIXTEENTH AMENDMENT BILL

                      (Consideration of Second Report)

   CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPALITIES LAWS REPEAL AND REALTED MATTERS AMENDMENT
                                    BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Deputy Chairperson, I
hope I will be given more time because I have just come home. Therefore, I
must be given more special treatment than other Ministers present here.
[Laughter.]

Deputy Chairperson; Comrade Enver Surty, the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development; hon members, comrades and friends, ladies and
gentlemen, we are gathered here today to reverse the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Act and replace it with the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill
and its accompanying legislative provisions. We are putting a final nail in
the coffin that buries unhappiness and protests from the people of Merafong
in general and Khutsong in particular. We have reached the crest of the
journey of taking the people of Merafong to where they belong. These people
were incorporated in the North West province against their will.

The Freedom Charter says that no government can claim legitimacy unless it
is based on the will of the people. Today we are coming to reaffirm the
principles that have guided the ANC for the past 97 years as a
revolutionary and people’s movement. These are the principles that made the
ANC the darling of the people of South Africa. It is the only party that
has its fingers on the pulse of the people of South Africa. This assertion
is evident by the fact that the ANC is the only party in the world that has
increased its majority in successive elections. There is no other party
that has done so across the world. It is only the ANC. Therefore, this
assertion is not going to stop on 22 April 2009; it will continue as
before.

The ANC is the party that is viewed by the people of South Africa as their
Parliament. This darling of the people of South Africa is the only party
that confuses politicians, particularly political commentators and the
media. It also baffles opinion-makers and surveys conducted against it. It
is unpredictable, particularly to those who are not members of it. This is
the secret that has made this party the darling of the South Africans. It
is driven by its principles; self and constructive criticism;
organisational discipline, democratic centralism; and a people-centred and
people-driven approach, to mention a few.

It is these principles that make us come before you, South Africans, and
the world today and say sorry to the people of Merafong.

Re entse phoso. [We have made a mistake.]

Lixhoshwa libhekile. [We have made a mistake.]

Let us look back at the reasons for why we are here today.

Ake nginithathe ngamehlo engqondo nginise eMerafong. [Let me paint an
imaginary picture of Merafong.]

That municipality was a cross-boundary municipality; 26% of its southern
tip fell under the North West, whilst 74% fell under Gauteng. The
population of that area is estimated to be approximately 308 237
inhabitants, of whom the majority fall under Gauteng.

When the cross-boundary municipality was done away with, the gold mining
belt was established from the East Rand to Johannesburg, linking with the
West Rand, which historically included Carltonville, a major town in
Merafong. Western Deep Levels is the deepest gold mine in the world. This
gold mine is part of Merafong. The mining belt called PWV was created and
established because of the discovery of gold. Therefore, the economic,
social, historical and transport links were established many, many years
ago in that part of the country. There is a train service that goes from
Johannesburg to Carltonville and vice versa. It means that the people of
Merafong have been part of Gauteng since time immemorial. What it means in
essence is that the removal of these people from Gauteng to North West was
like ripping off parts of a human body.

As we all know, PWV was a province that preceded Gauteng. Gauteng is a
Sotho word which means gold. The discovery of gold included that part of
Gauteng which was Merafong, and the deepest gold mine is in Merafong.
Therefore, you can’t separate Merafong from Gauteng. Gauteng is part of
Merafong, and Merafong is part of Gauteng. It is this logic that made us,
the people of this country and the ANC-led government, to say that we have
made a mistake.

This mistake was caused by the decision we took in the 1980s that said one
city one tax base. Therefore, when we built a new local municipality that
had to ensure that it took the whole of Merafong, which included the areas
that are liked by Sbali – Kokosi Sbali – and they are part of Merafong.
Those parts were part of the North West. We made the mistake of taking the
74% majority to the area of 26% minority. The 26% were the people who
stayed in the former North West and 74% have been part of Gauteng since
time immemorial. That was the first cardinal mistake we made in dealing
with this issue.
We also made a mistake because despite their objections and their grief, we
took them back and that decision was never accepted by the people of the
area. However, they involved themselves in illegal violent protests which
were supposed to be condemned because to raise one’s views does not require
using extraordinary means of violence. Express your views and government
must be able to listen.

We say, today, that era is past, it is gone and this is the second last leg
to ensure that the matter is resolved. Once the Bill is passed, it will be
sent to the President for his assent. On 22 April 2009, I will vote in
Merafong. I will welcome the people of Merafong back to Gauteng. I will be
in Khutsong to cast my vote on that day, because the people of that area
will then be part of Gauteng.

We have also established a transitional committee composed of different
spheres of government led by my department. The transitional committee will
be dealing with overseeing the reincorporation and reconstruction and
development of the Merafong area. The business sector, particularly the
mining houses, has come forward. They want to contribute to the party. They
want to release the land and contribute financially to ensure the
development of that area. The area has the deepest gold mine in the world,
therefore it cannot afford to be poor. As a department we are ensuring that
this matter is addressed.

We also have other challenging areas. Regarding the area of Moutse, we will
be taking a decision soon, within the next two weeks, to come up with a
conclusion in terms of what will happen in that area. Where the area of
Matatiele is concerned, we will also take a decision around it which will
be underpinned by the interest of the people, because we believe that if
this ANC government is rooted in the people it will always be in power.
Maybe it will be out of power when the son of someone comes back to this
country. That will be the only time when it will not be in power.

The matter of handling the issues of cross-boundary municipalities is
something that must be done because we believe that this is a sideshow. Our
focus must be on service delivery, development and on improving the quality
of lives of our people. And we are going to do that without fear, favour or
prejudice. That’s what we are going to do. And I want to say in this august
House that I appreciate the fact that for the past four years I’ve worked
with wonderful people, including the leadership of the Deputy Chair and the
Chairperson. We appreciate it. I am the son of the soil in this House. The
strength and the wisdom that you have given me will allow me to conduct my
tasks and my responsibility in a way that will make you proud when you look
at it.

I want to thank the committee that I worked with, which we called the
Mokoena detachment. If you look at the clusters in this House, this
detachment has managed to raise the bar; even in times of debates it was a
committee that did very well. I felt privileged and honoured to be part of
the Mokoena detachment. So please, Mokoena, continue with the detachment;
it did very well. It shaped and chiselled us to be what we are today.

I also want to thank the committees of the National Assembly for conducting
this work because when the Bill was introduced – when the concept was
conceived – nobody, including some of my colleagues in Cabinet, believed
that it could be done. Today, it was proved that it can be done. I must
also thank Minister Surty for his co-operation, because we worked very well
on this task, as well as the select committee led by “uSbali” uBhuti
Mkhaliphi for doing this work so well. We really appreciate your
contribution. As much as I need to thank the Chief Whip and the leadership
of the institution for the way they have managed to assist us in conducting
this work and developing it, I need to thank my department and my office,
led by Ntlaks Nkondwane. That team doesn’t sleep; it works until the
morning. I feel proud to be associated with hardworking men and women of
such calibre. This country will be taken to another level if they continue
to do so. [Applause.]

I also want to thank my family for allowing me to do what I am doing by
giving me the support, which is important in terms of discharging one’s
responsibilities. We hope, in going forward, that the NCOP will always make
us proud.

However, you must know, the issue of your future is on my table. The future
of provinces is in my desk drawer with regard to looking at whether or not
provinces, as spheres of government, need to remain. Sometimes when I touch
that document I get very scared because it is quite fundamental and
serious. Therefore, when you see me you must smile at all times, otherwise
your future will be determined. [Laughter.] Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, colleagues, hon members, comrades and
friends, let me start off by saying thank you to the Minister for
explaining and taking us through the Bill and for telling us what led to
this Bill being brought back to Parliament.

Public hearings were conducted in the areas of Merafong in the year 2005 to
get the views of the people concerned. Let me boldly say that the current
Minister for Provincial and Local Government, hon Sicelo Shiceka, was very
vocal in advising Parliament that it was wrong to incorporate Merafong into
the North West. Unfortunately, his views were ignored. The committee also
raised some concerns on this issue, but unfortunately the powers that be
didn’t want to listen then. Thank you very much, hon Minister, for
progressively addressing this issue.

In the two Bills, we are reversing the mistake that was made in 2005, where
the two districts of Kenneth Kaunda and West Rand were placed under North
West against the will of the people. In these two Bills, we are
redetermining the geographical areas of the provinces of Gauteng and North
West. All the areas under the above municipalities will be reincorporated
into Gauteng province.

After some serious discussions, the committee decided to join our
colleagues in provinces when they conducted public hearings. In this very
affected area of Khutsong in Merafong, we were informed by our colleague,
the hon Mzizi, that attendance was very good. We were informed that all
structures in the area were with one voice saying “yes” to Gauteng and “no”
to North West. After going through all the mandates from the nine
provinces, the committee agreed that Khutsong in Merafong and the two
districts I mentioned must be reincorporated into Gauteng.

In any conflict there are always two opposing views. This was the same in
Khutsong. The name Khutsong means a place where there is peace. But during
the time of the conflicts, unfortunately, there was no peace there. On
behalf of the committee, I want to thank the hon Mzizi for the role he
played in making sure that all the necessary logistics and dynamics in our
committee were in place. Thanks very much, “Baba” Mzizi. You are one of the
best shining examples in our committee. You put the interest of the country
first and not that of your party. Thank you very much, hon member.

People opposed the views held by the majority in the area. Some of these
people were attacked and many of them were even exiled. Councillors
couldn’t work in the area. I want to appeal to the leadership in the area
to try and call some meetings to reconcile the opposing groups there. In
any democracy, it is not possible for people to think the same way. If need
be, some of us won’t mind if you call prayer meetings or prayer days. We
need to reconstruct Khutsong. If I had my way, I would rename the
municipality after the Minister because of the role he played in the area.
That would be part of saying “thank you” to you, Minister, for being such a
dynamic Minister.

To all the people of Khutsong, please give our officials a chance to
develop your area. We are all aware that service delivery was hampered
because of these disputes. Of course, my colleague Comrade Chris Ntuli will
deal with this matter decisively. Let me say in passing it is true that the
department assured us they would do everything in their power to ensure
that service delivery in the area is not hampered. As you are aware, the
budget that is supposed to service the area is still under North West. The
department promised that, through the transitional committee, nothing will
fall through the cracks.

The last time I checked, South Africa was a unitary state. I know Comrade
Moseki will give us “a briefing” on the subject. But at the same time what
should occupy our minds is whether the areas in which we are staying are
developed and not the question of where we are located. There are still
some people who want to be placed in one province or the other. The
question is how the department is going to deal with these conflicts in the
future. Of course I am not best qualified to deal with this matter. It is
only the hon Mkhaliphi who can do this decisively. This is all I can say on
this subject.

This being our last sitting, on behalf of the committee, I would like to
thank our leadership in this council for their support. We wouldn’t be such
a dynamic committee if it was not for the support of our leadership in this
council. To date, as a committee, we have had 163 meetings since 2004. In
those meetings we were able to pass 45 pieces of legislation. We were able
to put through this House 25 international agreements. All this was
possible because of the support we had from our leadership. Chairperson,
this was possible because you gave us this support.

Apart from a few, we also got co-operation from our Ministers in this
cluster. I was fortunate to chair this committee that consists of such
selfless, hardworking, dedicated, understanding, decisive, intelligent,
sharp, cool, always alert, wonderful, magnificent, excellent, evergreen,
calculated and dynamic members. I am still humbled by the respect and co-
operation I received from these members who serve on this committee. It’s
true that history remembers us not by our looks, but by the work we have
done. Our motto as a committee has been “don’t put away for tomorrow what
you can do today”. We have been doing this because we are aware that the
full use of today is the best preparation for tomorrow. One other reason
why we took this direction is because we knew that it is not the hours that
one puts in that count, but what one puts into those hours.

Finally, to you colleagues, I want to wish you all the best in your future
endeavours. You are an asset to this committee, the NCOP and our country,
and not a liability. Hon members, please support us when we deliver the
people of Khutsong back to where they belong – Gauteng. Let’s support both
Bills.

Modulasetulo, ga ke nyake go hlwa kgorong. Go ja kudu ga se go ntšha tlala.
Ka gona e re ke re, diphala tša mona marula di a tloga. A re thekgeng
Melaokakanywa ye mebedi ye. Ke a leboga. [Chairperson, I do not want to
waste time. May I therefore say that it is time for me to wrap up. Let us
support these two Bills. I thank you.]

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, Ministers present and hon members, the
Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act of 2005 and the Cross-boundary
Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Act 2005 provided for
transitional arrangements to ensure a smooth transition from the cross-
boundary municipal dispensation to where a municipality would only be
located in one particular province.

One of the consequences of the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act and the
Cross-boundary Laws Repeal Act was that Merafong cross- boundary
municipality was incorporated into the North West province in its entirety
and became part of the then Southern District Municipality. I quote from
the Bill itself:

   Due to opposition by the residents of Merafong City Local Municipality,
   and in particular the residents of Khutsong, against their incorporation
   into the North West province, the government ...

(read as ANC)


   ... has now decided that Merafong City Local Municipality must be
   reincorporated into the Gauteng province.

The ANC is merely playing musical chairs with these Bills. [Laughter.] The
opposition, including the then chairperson of the local government
committee who is now the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, was
against the incorporation of Khutsong into the North West province right
from the start. This was obviously against the wishes of the majority of
the people, which then led to riots and civil unrest, causing great damage.

However, all the opposition’s protests were ignored, and in the debate in
this very House I was told that my perceptions - What is a perception; are
you talking as a third person, what is your perception? - were wrong and
the overwhelming consensus of the so-called public hearings were in favour
of incorporation into the North West province. Where were these public
hearings? What public hearings? They must have been cooked up public
hearings.

Exactly the same fiasco happened with the incorporation of Matatiele from
the Eastern Cape province into KwaZulu-Natal where the appeal court then
upheld and found that insufficient or no public hearings - note, no public
hearings - had been held, and that the people had not been properly
consulted. But here we have the ANC apologising “We made a mistake.” This
is the first time I have ever heard an ANC Minister publicly admitting that
he made a mistake. We are going to have snow here on Table Mountain one of
these days.

One of the objects of incorporating Merafong into the North West province
was to balance the number of persons transferred from the North West
province to the Northern Cape province, to ensure that the opposition will
never gain control of the Northern Cape. [Interjections.] If you go down in
the woods today, you are in for a big surprise. Through submissions
received, it is apparent now that the residents ... [Interjections.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I just want to say, while the member is so
emotional, is he saying that the Minister is taking it away ... He is so
emotional.

Mr D A WORTH: That is not a point of order!

Rev P MOATSHE: It is a point of order!

Mr D A WORTH: Through submissions received it is apparent that the
residents of Khutsong and Carltonville, who make up 20 municipal wards and
more than plus-minus 300 000 inhabitants of the total municipality, are in
favour of reincorporation into Gauteng province. However, Fochville,
Kokosi, Green Park and Wedela, consisting of six wards, totalling plus-
minus 75 000 inhabitants, wish to remain in the North West province. In the
committee we explored the possibility of establishing two municipalities to
try and accommodate everyone, one of six wards remaining in the North West
province and the other 20 wards to be incorporated into Gauteng province.
The ANC members and officials did not want to consider this proposal
seriously because of all the legal and practical implications.

An amendment is required to the Constitution in order to give effect to the
change in provincial boundaries. Not only this, but the provincial
equitable share will have to be adjusted as well as any intergovernmental
transfer such as the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, Municipal System
Improvement Grant, the cost of the inputs by the Municipal Demarcation
Board, the cost of the public hearings, etc. Hospitals and clinics will
have to be retransferred back to the provinces they came from. What this
fiasco has cost the South African taxpayer, heaven knows, but then the ANC
does not worry about such trifling matters.

In promoting this fundamental example which demonstrates that the will of
the people and consistency in respect of the redemarcation of municipal
boundaries must prevail, the fact that the majority wish to go back there
and that it’s a substantial minority who do not wish to go back, the DA
will therefore abstain from voting on this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, hon members, hon Ministers, Minister for
Provincial and Local Government, Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, comrades and friends, this debate should reflect that section
103 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa recognises the
boundaries of the nine provinces of South Africa. In order to alter a
provincial boundary, a constitutional amendment must be enacted. The
Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill seeks to alter the provincial
boundaries of the North West and Gauteng provinces in order to
reincorporate the Merafong City Local Municipality into the province of
Gauteng.

The Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Act of
2005 is also amended to facilitate the redemarcation of the Merafong
municipality and other affected areas. I was surprised when hon Darryl
Worth was talking like that, because the DA did not attend the briefings
when we were briefed about the reincorporation of Merafong into Gauteng.
They were not there. They just disappeared. And I wonder, because the
Minister has apologised, and our chairperson, Kgoshi, has apologised for
what happened, but he continues.

What he must know is that when we were conducting the public hearings, we
were not conducting referendums. The member wants to imitate hon Thetjeng
who is no longer here. Maybe he wants to follow him. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]

Mr Z C NTULI: Sihlalo, angifuni ukukhuluma ukuthi uyephi. Laphaya eMerafong
sinethimba elikhethiwe ... [Chairperson, I do not want to say where he went
to. In Merafong we have appointed a team ...]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Is that a point of
order, hon Tau?

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I just wanted to check whether the hon member is
saying that hon Thetjeng could not cope with the DA?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Ntuli, you may
continue. That is not a point of order.

Mnu Z C NTULI: Bengisathi lapha kunethimba lochwepheshe elisungulelwe
ukubona nokwenza ukuthi umasipala waseMerafong udlulela kahle esiFundazweni
saseGauteng. Siyakubonga lokhu okwenzile Ngqongqoshe. Leli thimba
libalulekile ngoba yilona elizobheka imininingwane yonke kanye nokususwa
kwazo zonke izihibe uma kuqhutshekwa kuyiwa phambili.

Leli thimba lizosebenzisana kakhulu nohulumeni wasekhaya e-NCOP. Phela
Sihlalo, sikubekile embikweni wekomodi lethu ukuthi ikomidi elisha leNCOP
likahulumeni wasekhaya kufanele libe seduzane kwaleya ndawo ukuze kube
ngamagama enkehli. Okusho ukuthi abaphat hi (oversight) kuyofanele ukuthi
ikomidi elizoba khona lePhalamende yesine liye njalo laphaya ukuze libone
ukuthi izinto zihamba kahle yini. Siyojabula futhi Ngqongqoshe uma
ungashesha uwasho amagama, usho nokuthi ngobani labo chwepheshe ukuze
sikwazi ukukhuluma nabo ngqo ukuthi bayilungisa kanjani le ndaba.

Njengoba kuvela ukuthi isabiwomali sika 2009-10 sesenziwe angeke sisakwazi
ukusishintsha, sesiyoze sishintshwe ngonyaka wesabiwomali sika2010-11.
Okusho ukuthi isabelo sabantu baseMerafong sihamba nabo sisuka eNorth West
siya eGauteng. Okusho ukuthi lokho ebesebenikwe kona kofuneka imiNyango
yenze ngqo ukuthi lezo zimali zayo ziyasetshenziswa uma sebeseGauteng
uhulumeni waseNorth West.

Kulokhu-ke kufuneka iziphathimandla zazo zombili lezi zifundazwe okuyiNorth
West neGauteng ziqaphele ngamehlo okhozi. Lokhu kumele kwenzeke kusukela
phezulu kuNdunankulu kuze kuyofika ezisebenzini zoMnyango yohulumeni
bobabili. Ngineqiniso ukuthi lokhu kuzokwenzeka ngoba zombili lezi
zifundazwe zizobe zisaphethwe nguhulumeni kaKhongolose, uhulumeni wabantu.
Siyazi futhi ukuthi unyaka wezimali womasipala uzoqala ngoJuni kuyoba kuhle
ukuthi yonke imininingwane kanye nokulethwa kwezinsiza, imali kufanele
ibekhona kumasipala lo abantu baseMerafong abazobe bengaphansi kwakhe i-
West Rand District municipality. Siyazi ukuthi labo hulumeni bobabili
bazobe besaphethwe uKhongolose okusho ukuthi abantu baseMerafong
bayaqinisekiswa ukuthi ukulethwa kwezinsiza kuzobekwenziwa futhi
zizotholakala. Ngalokhu esengikubekile ngenhla ngithi-ke le Ndlu
ayiwusekele lo mthethosivivinyo siqhubeke siyephambili. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: I was saying that there is a team of experts who was
appointed to oversee the smooth transition of the Merafong Municipality
into Gauteng province. Hon Minister, we are grateful for what you have
done. This team is very important because it will look into every detail
and do away with all of the existing obstacles that might stand in the way
of progress.

This team will mainly work with the department of cooperative governance
and traditional affairs in the NCOP. Mind you Chairperson, we have stated
in our report that the new Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs must be closer to that place so that everything will go
according to our plan. This means that the forthcoming select committee of
the Fourth Parliament must always visit that place to oversee if everything
is going according to plan. We would be pleased, hon Minister, if you could
quickly mention those names and tell us who these experts are so that we
can directly talk to them to understand how they hope to rectify this
situation.

As has emerged, the budget for the 2009-10 financial year has already been
allocated, and we know that we cannot adjust it; it will be adjusted in the
budget for the 2010-11 financial year. Therefore, this means that the
allocation for the people of Merafong will go with them from the North West
province into Gauteng. This means that the departments must ensure that the
funds which were allocated to them are utilised when they are in Gauteng.

In this instance, delegated authorities from both the North West province
and Gauteng need to be very vigilant. This synergy must start from the
level of both the Premiers and cascade down to the level of officials in
both departments of co-operative governance and traditional affairs. I am
certain that this will be possible because both provinces would still be
governed by the ANC-led government - the government of the people.

We know that the municipal financial year will begin in June and it would
be appropriate if all the necessary details, as well as service delivery
issues, are catered for in the budget of the West Rand District
Municipality under which the Merafong Municipality falls. We are certain
that both these provinces would still be governed by the ANC which means
that the people of Merafong are guaranteed that services would be
delivered. With what I have said above, I am therefore urging this House to
support this Bill so that we can move forward. Thank you.]

Ms M G VANTURA (Western Cape): Deputy Chairperson, we are all aware of the
background to the circumstances which brought us here today to discuss the
Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill.

Some will argue that it is the fault of government for not listening to the
people, but it is, according to me, the complete opposite. The ANC
government has listened to the people and will always do so. It will try to
make the lives of the people of South Africa better than it was yesterday
as well as to make tomorrow better than today. And so, it was for that
reason that we had a situation where the proposed improvements for service
delivery were rejected by a community and the re-organisation of service
delivery were seen, wrongly so, as a threat to service delivery.

It is extremely regrettable that destruction to infrastructure took place.
Community property was destroyed; education was disrupted; and valuable
learning time was lost. The matric students, with the support of the
Department of Education, made tremendous effort against all odds. They did
well and I salute them.

It will take time to rebuild the area, not only schools and libraries, but
also a spirit of learning and returning to a sense of normality. The people
must once again respect and take care of the institutions that define it.
The libraries and schools should once again be the pride and joy of the
community. They should not be used as sites of protest and anger.

Let me also put on record that this is not done for election purposes. This
has been a long time coming. We know that Khutsong is an ANC stronghold.
People would rather not vote than to vote for any other party. It is a pity
that this process has taken so long and cost so much. Public protest must
be bound by the processes we have institutionalised in our society. There
are avenues for protest built into the design of our Constitution and
society. Perhaps we’ve failed in implementing these systems. Having said
that, wonderful and valuable lessons have been learned, the most important
of which is a reminder that the definition of democracy is “government by
the people for the people” and that the will of the people must be
respected at all times. The ANC, therefore, calls on all of us to work
together to do more to change the lives of our people. We are proud of our
election call which says “Working together we can do more”.

Lastly, Minister, I would like to apologise because I will leave before the
end of the debate as I have been deployed to attend the funeral of a
comrade. So I do apologise, but my colleague, hon Mack, will inform me of
what took place afterwards. I thank you.

Cllr B MOLOI (Salga): Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister for Provincial and
Local Government, hon Minister Enver Surty, hon members of the NCOP and
special delegates. Good morning.

Ladies, gentlemen and hon members, I must say that the SA Local Government
Association, Salga, representing 283 municipalities in South Africa,
welcomes this opportunity to address this august House on the occasion of
passing into law the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill of 2009. This
important piece of legislation paves the way for the reincorporation of one
of our member municipalities, which is Merafong City Local Municipality,
from the North West province into Gauteng.

In 2002, the Presidential Co-ordinating Council resolved that no
municipality should straddle across provincial boundaries. This,
effectively, meant that the boundaries of all cross-boundary municipalities
had to be reviewed to ensure that they, indeed, fall within one or the
other province, but not both – it couldn’t be both. In implementing this
decision, the Minister for Provincial and Local Government introduced
legislation to redetermine the boundaries of certain municipalities and,
likewise, the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
introduced legislation to redetermine provincial boundaries. As a result
the following municipalities and provinces were affected: Umzimkhulu Local
Municipality; Sisonke District Municipality; Alfred Nzo District
Municipality; Umzimvubu Local Municipality; Matatiele Local Municipality;
Bushbuckridge Local Municipality; Ehlanzeni District Municipality; Maruleng
Local Municipality; Mopani District Municipality; Merafong City Local
Municipality; Southern District Municipality, which is now called Dr
Kenneth Kaunda District Municipality; the West Rand District Municipality;
Metsweding District Municipality; and Ekungwini Local Municipality.

The affected provinces are: KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, Limpopo, North West
and Gauteng. Accordingly, amongst others, Merafong City Local Municipality
was incorporated into the North West province in its entirety and became
part of the Southern District Municipality which is now Dr Kenneth Kaunda
District Municipality. A proposal subsequently surfaced and was approved by
the Cabinet for the redemarcation of the boundaries of the Dr Kenneth
Kaunda District Municipality to the extent that Merafong City Local
Municipality is to be reincorporated into the West Rand District
Municipality.

The process of moving Merafong City Local Municipality from the Dr Kenneth
Kaunda District Municipality of the North West province to the West Rand
District Municipality of Gauteng province has several municipal and
provincial boundary implications. The boundary of Dr the Kenneth Kaunda
District Municipality will, henceforth, be reduced in that Merafong City
Local Municipality will no longer form part thereof. Subsequently, the
boundary of the West Rand Local Municipality will, obviously, expand in
such a way that Merafong City Local Municipality will be incorporated into
its jurisdiction. In view of the fact that the two district municipalities
fall within two different provinces, this will, obviously and effectively,
give rise to changes in the boundaries of the North West and Gauteng
provinces alike.

The Minister for Provincial and Local Government introduced the Cross-
boundary Municipalities Law Repeals and Related Matters Amendment Bill,
which seeks to provide a legislative framework for the redetermination of
the municipal boundaries, and the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development introduced the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill for the
redetermination of the provincial boundaries.

In fulfilling its constitutional mandate, Salga consulted widely on the
proposed legislation by circulating the Bill to the relevant local
municipalities. A meeting was subsequently convened with the executive
mayors, Speakers and municipal managers of the respective municipalities on
8 January 2009 to consider fully the implications of the proposed
legislation. The outcome of that meeting indicated overwhelming support for
both Bills. Concerns have, however, been raised with regard to the
implementation date, transitional arrangements and the financial
implications relating to both the Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal
and Related Matters Amendment Bill and the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment
Bill.

A number of functions are currently being provided for by the Merafong City
on an agency basis for the North West provincial government. These include
library services and vehicle licences and, similarly, the provision of
health services has been driven at local level, while this arrangement is
actually substantially different in Gauteng province. The final
implementation date should, amongst others, allow sufficient time to put
the appropriate structures and systems in place to ensure a smooth transfer
and transition from the North West province to Gauteng province.

We have learnt some lessons in the 2005-06 redemarcation process, and
central to this is the agreement reached on the implementation protocol to
be entered into between the receiving and the releasing province. In
addition, to ensure that the necessary implementation protocol is duly
agreed upon and entered into between the North West and Gauteng provinces
before the implementation date, it will be critically important that
structures at both the technical and political levels are established to
facilitate this transition further, with Parliament and, in particular,
this select committee playing the general oversight role. Local government
must be directly represented as a number of functions that are subject to
the transfer are performed at local government level. And, for that matter,
the central and overriding purpose would be to ensure a seamless transition
and uninterrupted service delivery in respect of those functions and
services that will be directly affected by this exercise.
This process of reincorporating Merafong City Local Municipality, from the
Dr Kenneth Kaunda District Municipality which is in the North West
province, into the West Rand District Municipality, which is in Gauteng
province, will have serious planning and consequent financial implications
for all three municipalities as well as the two affected provinces.

From a planning point of view, I must indicate that various high-level
considerations are evident. The receiving municipality, which is the West
Rand District Municipality, will have to, obviously, amend its integrated
development plan, IDP, to incorporate planning for the Merafong City Local
Municipality.

Similarly, the receiving province, which is Gauteng, would have to amend
its provincial plan to incorporate development for the Merafong City Local
Municipality. The provision of services by the Merafong City Local
Municipality on an agency basis on behalf of the Gauteng provincial
government and planning on certain specific matters will also required, for
example, a review of the municipal IDP.

In conclusion, as Salga, we are fully supportive of this proposed Bill and
eagerly awaiting the roll-out of the oversight role of this committee over
the implementation process, subsequent to the promulgation of this
legislation. I would like to take this opportunity to thank this august
House for giving us the opportunity to present it here. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I was lenient because
the hon member is from the South African Local Government Association,
Salga. So, we want to entice them with incentives to be more active.

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, noNgqongqoshe bobabili ngithi okumhlophe kodwa.
[Chairperson and both Ministers, I wish you all the best.]

Chairperson, these two Bills before us intend to give effect to the
decision taken by government to reincorporate the Merafong City Local
Municipality into Gauteng province.

In 2005, when government decided, after reviewing the municipal
demarcation, to incorporate Khutsong and its municipality of Merafong into
the North West, the IFP was vehemently opposed to this move. This was a
wasteful and fruitless exercise and the ANC government met with absolute
resistance that actually caused the people of Merafong to be violent.

Similarly, the IFP has condemned the intention of the ruling party to go
ahead with the implementation of demarcation legislation with regard to
Matatiele, despite the opposition and the wishes of the majority of the
people in Matatiele. The IFP has at relevant times stood together with the
people of Merafong City, and in particular the area of Khutsong. We
therefore give unconditional support to the reincorporation of Khutsong
into Gauteng. The question is, however, whether this government has learnt
a lesson from it.

The controversy around Merafong and other remaining boundaries stresses the
importance of public participation. Many people often confuse public
participation with public hearings. The principle of public participation
holds that those who are affected by decisions have a right to be involved
in the decision-making process. Public participation implies that public
contribution will influence the decision. Had the public participation been
done prior, the emergence of violence and unrest in Khutsong would have
been averted, but now a lot of damage to infrastructure and properties has
already been done.

The real question in the eyes of the public is whether the reincorporation
of Merafong into Gauteng province would have been possible without the
violent protests. Is it because, for about four years since the
incorporation, Khutsong has became synonymous with violent protests such as
burning tyres, torching homes and breaking traffic lights. What is the
message that this government is sending to the people out there in
desperate communities? Is it that if people wanted their issues to be on
the national map or immediately addressed, they must resort to violence?
The reincorporation of other remaining boundaries, such as Matatiele, needs
to expedited because familiarity breeds contempt.

Angisho nje ukuthi nomthandazo uyasho uthi: ngithethelele ngoba nami
ngiyabathethelela abangonayo. [Let me tell you that even the prayer says:
Forgive me as I forgive those who trespass against me.]

There was nothing wrong when the Minister stood up and asked for the people
of Khutsong to forgive us for the mistake that was made. I would have stood
up if he had said that the ANC is sorry and I would have said that he must
take my speech as read. But because he said “We are sorry”, it means that
he was doing it for all of us even though we actually did not agree with
that decision.

Asimemukele uNgqongqoshe uma ethi ucela uxolo. Kuhle lokho. [Let us accept
the Minister’s apology. That is good.]

Forgive us.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, your time has expired.
[Interjections.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Hawu! Nanamhlanje lo mama udodi bengithi singabangane.
[Ihlombe.] [Alas! Even today this woman is still evil; I thought we were
friends. [Laughter.]]

Ms R S LETWABA (Gauteng): Chairperson, may I address the House while I am
seated? Chairperson, hon Minister for Provincial and Local Government,
Sicelo Shiceka, in his absence, hon Minister Surty and the House at large,
I thank you for the opportunity. I am rising to this debate with all the
respect I can muster.

The decision of the Gauteng Provincial Legislature to support the
Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill of which the main objective and
purpose is to give effect to the decision to reincorporate Merafong City
Local Municipality into Gauteng translates, actualises and demonstrates our
commitment to the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.

Public participation lies at the centre of our democracy. Parliamentary and
government decisions should reflect the will of the people. A free South
Africa must therefore ensure that parliamentary decisions do not become a
source of division or conflict.

Residents of Merafong, which includes Khutsong township, have in the past
taken to the streets in protest against the 2005 decision of incorporating
Merafong into the North West province. Their contention was the perceived
perception that their standard of living would plummet under the North West
province. The fact of the matter is that the people of Merafong regard
themselves as an inseparable part of Gauteng. Their position is informed by
the socioeconomic fibre linkages between their municipal area of
jurisdiction and the Gauteng province.

While we agree with the struggles of the people of Merafong, we are
cognisant of our responsibility to restore law and order. Restoration of
peace will require a concerted effort by all, including civic associations,
trade unions and other independent bodies. On the other hand, I want to
stress to you, Chairperson, that we are mindful of the constitutional
principles of a democratic South Africa, which envisages that provinces or
regions should not be devised as a means of perpetuating privilege. Central
government has a responsibility of seeing to it that all areas of the
country have equitable access to natural resources and opportunities.
Similarly, when we speak of a united South Africa, we speak of a society
united behind one national identity. The Merafong cross-boundary dispute
has sparked tensions, but it has also allowed us as public representatives
to remind ourselves of the slogan used by the ANC in the late 1980s and
early 1990s which was “one person one vote in a unitary state”. This was a
simple statement of mass democracy.

In the 1980s the Khutsong protests were not foreseen or anticipated.
Surprisingly, the slogan is as relevant today as it was then. The right to
vote in a unitary state is a right that cannot be defined or determined by
a provincial boundary. This applies to the people of Moutse or Matatiele -
we must encourage them to vote. We are not a federal state. We are tasked
with the responsibility of promoting national unity.

The urban-rural balance is another consideration which requires that
provinces with a rural bias must be on equal footing with provinces with an
urban bias, particularly in terms of opportunities. We cannot sit here and
be boastful of Gauteng and condemn the North West province. What we need to
do is to expand opportunities to all South Africans, irrespective of
provincial boundary lines. We must, as legislatures and as Parliament,
ensure that we enable communities to access services. We also need to
promote the dignity and equality of all South Africans irrespective of
where they are.

Spheres of government are distinctive in that they are interdependent and
interrelated. It is important to develop co-ordinated implementation
programmes that will enable the receiving municipality and Gauteng province
to achieve the intended objective of the Bill. The end result, which is
what we are fighting for, is the restoration of national pride in the whole
Merafong community. As Gauteng we support the Bill. I thank you.

Rre A J L MOSEKI: Modulasetulo, badirammogo, Tona Rre Enver Surty, Tona Rre
Shiceka, yo o tsamaileng fa a fetsa go bua le rona, fa nkabo ke le kwa
kgotleng ke ne ke tla re ke la me leo. Fela go botlhokwa ka gore ...
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr A J L MOSEKI: Chairperson, colleagues, Minister Enver Surty, Minister
Shiceka, who left after delivering his speech, if I was in the council I
would have seconded but it is important because ...]

... we also represent the North West province. North West, as a progressive
province, is better than other provinces and supports the passing of this
legislation. We do that because we understand the importance of the
development of our people in this country. The second thing is that we
understand that South Africa is a unitary state.

Go nna kwa Gauteng, Bokone Bophirima kgotsa Limpopo ga go kae sepe. [It
does not matter whether you live in Gauteng, the North West or Limpopo.]

The bottom line is that we are all citizens of this country. The
development brought by government to communities is intended to improve the
lives of all South Africans.

North West is negatively affected by cross-boundary municipalities and has
lost a number of areas such as Kgalagadi, Phokwane, Mabopane, Ga-Rankuwa,
Temba and now Merafong to other provinces. We never protested and are not
going to do so.

Go sa ntse go na le morafe wa GaMothibi o o batlang go tswa kwa Bokone
Bophirima o ye felogongwe. Ke batla go kopa gore puso e matlafatse lenaane
la thuto ya setšhaba gore re nne le bokao bo le bongwe ba gore Aforika
Borwa ke eng. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[There is still the community of GaMothibi who wants to move from the North
West and be incorporated somewhere else. I would like to urge government to
improve its programme of educating the nation so that we can all have a
common understanding of what South Africa is.]

Firstly, we appeal that citizens at the lower level must have the same
understanding as other citizens at other levels about what South Africa is
and what it means to be a citizen of this country.

Our second appeal is in respect of what the South African Local Government
Association said in terms of revenue, economic space and equity shares.
North West is losing a lot in this regard. We want to urge the Minister and
Cabinet to speed up the process of the review and consolidation of
provinces. It is our view that if we don’t do that speedily the caucus
problems we have regarding Matatiele and other areas are going to continue.
If you review a number of provinces in the country and consolidate them to
a manageable number, you will have a permanent solution to our problems.

Another important thing we want to say, as members of the ANC having said
what the North West would have wanted to say, is that the ANC-led
government is a caring government. Our people must understand that if this
government was not a caring government, it would not have reconsidered what
the people of Merafong have been saying. It should be understood by Mr
Worth and others that, being the caring organisation that we are, after
realising that some of the decisions taken in the past are no longer
fulfilling the interests of our people, we reviewed them and decided to
address the will of our people. That shows how caring the ANC is. It is not
because the DA or IFP have said something, but because we are a caring
organisation.

We also want to mention this for other parties to understand that we are
doing these things in the spirit of good governance. We are mindful of the
fact that if people are not satisfied, there is no way that there can be
good governance in this country. As a caring organisation, we want to
ensure that there is good governance at all levels.

We see the need for the people of Merafong to be part of that good
governance. We want them to be happy. We want the people of Merafong to
enjoy the warmth of the ANC and to enjoy the love of the ANC. We are happy
that we listened to the people of Merafong in the public hearings, speaking
with one voice, saying that they’d want to be relocated to Gauteng.
Therefore, the ANC supports the passing of this Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, we welcome our two hon Ministers to this
House. How befitting it is to be in this House in this last sitting.

The Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Amendment
Bill provides for the administrative procedures and processes in the
redemarcation of boundaries between the district municipalities of Dr
Kenneth Kaunda in the North West province and the West Rand in the Gauteng
province. This Bill goes with the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill so
that, when read together, these Bills have the effect of reincorporating
the Merafong City Local Municipality into the Gauteng province. The
principal Act, that is the Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and
Related Matters Amendment Act of 2005, and of course its twin, the
Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act of 2005, are amended by these Bills.

If we reflect briefly on clauses 4 to 7 of the Bill under discussion, we
will realise that it makes provision for the amendment of the statutory
notices by the relevant MECs for local government in terms of section 12
and section 17 of the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, as well
as for the schedules stipulating the changes in expressions of the affected
districts and localities identified on the relevant maps. Clause 9 of the
Bill makes provision for the voting district of the Merafong City Local
Municipality to be part of the Gauteng segment on the voters’ roll in order
to comply with the stipulations of section 24 of the Electoral Act of 1998.

Also, looking at clause 10(2) of the Bill, clause 9 deems to have come into
operation on the day the 2009 election was proclaimed in the Electoral Act.
In essence, it says that when the President proclaims this year’s
elections, we will consider this Bill to have been in place by then. Unlike
other pieces of legislation, which come into effect on a date proclaimed by
the President, this Bill takes effect on the same date as the start of the
Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Act of 2005, hence we say that these Bills
should be read together.

During our deliberations on this Bill, National Treasury highlighted that
the budget allocations for the Merafong City Local Municipality will
continue to be disbursed by the North West provincial government until the
end of the 2009-10 financial year. We were then also informed that the
Department for Provincial and Local Government was establishing an
interdepartmental transitional committee with clear timeframes and
protocols to ensure the smooth and effective management of the changeover.
We further discussed how we should be dealing with such boundary changes in
future. This is a work in progress, but there are some suggestions which
make some sense constitutionally, as put forward by the demarcation board.

In terms of section 103(2) of the Constitution we can make a once-off
amendment to that section of the Constitution to make provisions for any
change in the boundaries of municipalities to be dealt with in terms of the
relevant legislation, without going for constitutional amendments. This is
the issue that will be taken forward by the next Parliament, the Fourth
Parliament.

In conclusion, our roles as respective legislatures is that of regular
oversight on these processes, bearing in mind the previous hurdles observed
in similar areas like Bushbuckridge. As to the reason for these Bills
coming here, the hon Minister has elaborated on these matters. We have also
rendered our apology and our repentance in this regard and anybody who
continues to lambast us in this regard is trying to score a political goal
via an offside position. We table this Bill for consideration by this
august House. Thank you very much for your attention.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the
National Council of Provinces has indeed delivered. It has delivered to the
national executive, and to Ministers, who were nurtured, developed, and
shaped by this House. [Applause.] So today you have, on the last day of
this democratic period, the presence of two of your sons, as my colleague
has correctly pointed out, who were largely influenced by the ability of
this institution to contribute directly to their development. For that,
both of us say thank you very much and, perhaps, our presence in the
executive is a celebration of the outstanding achievement of this
particular House. In doing so, we recognise the leadership of the presiding
officers, the support of the Chief Whip and all other presiding officers.

What is interesting about this House, and this is a useful example in terms
of a public education issue that was raised by you, Ms Letwaba, is that
because we are drawn from the ranks of this particular House, we understand
the importance of co-operative governance, the relationship between the
three spheres of government, the need for collaboration, and the role of
the National Council of Provinces and the National Assembly in giving
effect to the implementation of legislation.

If we did not have a sense of this particular complex arrangement within
our constitutional landscape, indeed the Minister for Provincial and Local
Government – who is always in a hurry to get things done, full of energy,
robust, and vibrant – would not have been able to achieve this. It meant
that we had to collaborate as a Department of Provincial and Local
Government and a Ministry of Justice or Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development. It is in this regard that I would like to say
thank you very much to Mr Rudman and his team for their commitment in
ensuring that, as agents on behalf of the Ministry of Provincial and Local
Government, we were able to deliver. So, you have delivered two Ministers
who have indeed delivered the legislation on time to the people of Merafong
and Khutsong.

This would not have been possible if it was not for the able, wise,
experienced, capable, competent, proficient and well-endowed leadership of
the two chairpersons, Kgoshi Mokoena and hon B J Mkhaliphi. For your
leadership and collaboration, we say thank you very much. [Applause.] As
the astounding leaders that you are, you would tell me that it would not
have been possible without the participation of your very committed and
passionate members of the committee. So, to the members of the select
committee of all political parties, thank you very much for your co-
operation.

I think the next lesson that can be drawn from this experience, and this
has been indicated in the speech of Cllr Moloi from Salga, is that central
to the tenets and the imperatives of our Constitution is the participatory
nature of our democracy. We should engage with communities, and what hon
Worth - who is normally very placid, very serene, and very calm - has said
now, very passionately in a moment of excitement about the elections, is
that we didn’t listen attentively. We were not listening well enough to the
voices of the people. What we are saying, and what he is saying -
unfortunately, he is going to abstain - is indeed true. I think both my
colleague and I would say quite unashamedly that the ANC apologises. We
take the responsibility, as the leading party in government which certainly
would influence the outcomes of political decisions, to say that to the
people of Khutsong and Merafong.

However, this debate, and that is the next lesson, is not about provincial
boundaries; it is not about competing fiefdoms; and it is not about where
the line is drawn. It is a recognition of the nature of our societies as
they evolve; of its diversity in terms of language; and of its linkages, as
Ms Letwaba quite correctly pointed out, to the social and economic
phenomenon that the community encounters in their day to day living. When I
think of what Ms Vantura said, and she spoke quite correctly about the
frustration of the community in terms of education, this House would know
more than any other House about how we had to transport people physically
to to and from Further Education and Training colleges and Khutsong to
enable the Grade 12 learners to write the matric examination. That meant
that something was not right, that there was resistance, and that people
were unhappy.

However, the reality, and that is the next lesson, is that the people of
Khutsong and Merafong did not go to the polling stations. They did not vote
for the DA. They did not vote for the IFP. They said to the African
National Congress: “We are disappointed. You have not heard our pleas for
incorporation. You have not recognised the complex nature of our society
and our linkages of yesteryear. Please reconsider.” That plea was responded
to by the African National Congress. That is why the ANC is saying that it
is sorry and that it is neither proud nor condescending. It will not only
admit where it has erred but will also rectify the error in a hurry.

To my colleague, the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, if you
can please listen to me – I know this is his House – I wanted to speak to
you directly to say thank you very much for the enthusiasm, spirit, and
urgency with which you dealt with this matter. Thank you very much for
doing so and for recognising that this is not the end of the journey. I
know that, as I speak here in this House, the Minister has been to Mutse,
the Minister has been to Matatiele, and the Minister is aware that even
within the North West Province, hon Moseki, there are other areas which
have to be looked at. In fact, his closing remark was that he is tasked
with the responsibility of looking at the consolidation and alignment of
provincial boundaries in its totality.

It is not about fragmentation, about Matatiele which must be attended to,
and indeed is being attended to as we speak, or about Mutse as we look at
it. It is about saying that, given our experience over the past 15 years,
we recognise the challenges and the socioeconomic linkages. How do we do
it? How do we create a unitary state with boundaries that make sense to the
people, recognising their diversity and not intending to fragment them, to
divide them or separate them, but really to unify them around issues of
socioeconomic development? These notable points for development are going
to be recognised, so we say thank you very much.
I am very impressed with the quality of the contributions that have been
made here. They certainly, in no uncertain terms, quite unequivocally,
reflect a clear understanding of the challenges of local government,
provincial government, and its interrelationship. Cllr Moloi, quite
correctly again, raised the issue of the implementation of the protocol. We
have an intergovernmental relationship framework. Protocols are critical
and Salga as well as Ms Letwaba from Gauteng have indicated that the
implementation of these protocols, these transitional arrangements that the
Minister for Provincial and Local Government has spoken about, are critical
and necessary.

Let me assure hon Ntuli that, indeed, Treasury is aware of its
responsibility in providing resources to the community of Merafong,
including Khutsong, and, indeed, National Treasury has allocated resources.
So, in the realignment and the rearrangement of the provincial boundaries,
there will not be any financial prejudice or hardship. What should,
however, occur is a strong oversight and monitoring, and strong
collaboration among provinces, and among cities, to ensure that delivery
does take place and resources that have been earmarked are spent for the
benefit of the people of Merafong, as well as the people of Khutsong.

What we are saying, which is another lesson that we have learned from this,
is that there is no better teacher than experience and we learn from our
mistakes. We are better able to understand the needs of communities in its
great diversity if we interact. The party that I belong to does not only go
to communities but goes door to door to listen to the concerns and the
needs of our people, because a constitutional amendment is of no value and
does not fulfil the objective of a developmental state unless it reflects,
quite correctly, the aspirations and the ethos of a new democratic
dispensation which says that our task as public representatives is to
improve the quality of the lives of our people, especially the poorest of
the poor. Today, what you are doing here is celebrating that commitment to
ensure that we do indeed bring about a qualitative change in the lives of
our people.

I will say, in conclusion, that an election period is imminent. We have
responsibilities as public representatives. We have to be tolerant. We have
to ensure all political parties have the right to participate without fear,
without favour and without prejudice. We have a responsibility, as
political leaders, to ensure that we instil discipline among our people and
wish all political parties well in our new democratic elections.

To the members of this House and to its leadership, I can, as my colleague
has correctly pointed out, only say thank you very much for contributing so
significantly and so largely to our development to ensure that what we do,
we do together, and we do it in a hurry, because together we can do much
more. Thank you very much.
Debate concluded.
Question put: That the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Question put: That the Second Report of Select Committee on Security and
Constitutional Affairs on Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Amendment
Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON NCOP VISIT TO LADY FRERE, EASTERN CAPE IN TERMS
               OF PROGRAMME OF TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, thank you very much for the
opportunity to make some remarks regarding Taking Parliament to the People,
which is one of our most effective tools of public participation. It is a
tool for engaging with our people, discussing with, informing and educating
them about how Parliament or the National Council of Provinces’ functions,
and how they can monitor government programmes on the ground. It is also a
tool for making sure that information reaches the government on issues that
need to be addressed on the ground.

Therefore, once again, the National Council of Provinces has reinforced
this programme of Taking Parliament to the People. It has given us and the
people an opportunity to raise the issues that bother them on the ground -
bread and butter issues that affect them on a daily basis.

It has also given all the three spheres of government - national,
provincial and municipalities - an opportunity to respond to these issues.
Through this programme, South Africans living in remote areas are now in a
position to access us as Parliament. It enables us to engage with them
physically and have eye to eye contact with them and talk to them directly
and get their issues resolved.

I just want to dwell on a few issues that have been raised by the people
when we were at Lady Frere, in the Eastern Cape. I see that hon Moerane is
here, as well as Mr Le Roux – no, Mr Le Roux, you are not from the
legislature. You are part of the legislature anyway, because you are from
that province. Who else comes from the Eastern Cape? Ms Dlulane is here,
but I don’t see other people. But, all I want to ask – Marius, where is he?
– is that you make sure that you take the time to work in that particular
area from time to time. Carry this report with you. Go there and make sure
that the things that people have raised are happening on the ground. Follow
them up. It does not matter whether it is the national government, the
municipality or the provincial government that should do those things; it
is our duty to make sure that those things are happening.

In terms of local government, the following issues were raised: the lack of
access to clean water, sanitation and sewerage systems; the lack of service
delivery in general; inadequate electricity supply; insufficient
infrastructural development; decent housing; and no water for irrigation or
less water in many areas. You would remember that we recommended that
government should get involved to make sure that the big dam around Lady
Frere is utilised so that people can get potable water from it. Because
this dam is big enough, it could also be utilised for irrigation so that
people can continue with farming in that particular area.

In terms of LED, Local Economic Development, some of the income-generating
agricultural projects have ground to a halt at the moment owing to a lack
of water. As I have said, if we can begin to generate water for that
scheme, the people will be in a position to go on working on those
agricultural projects which have almost ground to a halt.

The small, medium and micro enterprises are not supported enough and there
is no evidence of municipal funding for some of them. We still have to do a
lot of work in this regard to make sure that these small enterprises rise
in number, because they are part of the economic hub in any province. They
play a very significant role in developing our economy and that makes them
full participants in the economy of the country. If they are not supported,
they will not be in a position to participate fully in the economy of the
country.

The lack of transport hampers the delivery of crops, the markets and other
marketing strategies, and this is still a problem. That is what we have to
look at. We have to talk to the Department of Trade and Industry and see
how we can assist those people. There is very little capacity-building,
particularly with regard to the administrative task and operations of these
small enterprises.

The lack of security for initiated projects in some instances leads to
theft and vandalism. Those are the things that government has to look at.
Locally initiated projects dealing with education, school feeding, health,
correctional services and social development are not fully supported by
government at times.

With regard to integrated planning, which is a very important tool for the
municipality to be able to deliver, we have noticed that priorities are
sometimes duplicated in terms of the Integrated Development Plans. We now
want to take this opportunity to encourage municipalities to make sure
that, as they compile these IDPs, they go to the people themselves and not
get consultants to do these things for them. Municipalities must go there
and discuss with the people and find out what their needs are. Before
compiling any IDP, they should first discuss with the people the priorities
they would like to have funded.

The implementation of the IDPs is crucial because it is no use having an
IDP and not implementing it. At the end of the term, you would find that
you have had a lot of IDPs, but there has been a lack of implementation.
Therefore, we need to strengthen capacity in terms of the delivery of that
plan that has been identified by the municipality in co-operation with the
people.

In terms of health matters, there was a notice of overcrowding owing to
overutilisation of clinic services; insufficient staff in the clinics; lack
of electricity and satellite installations at some health care facilities;
reliance on old X-ray machines to perform scans and other related functions
at hospitals; lack of provision of 24-hour services; and an insufficient
number of ambulances and medical emergency personnel. Consequently, people
have to be transported to clinics - some of them on wheelbarrows and others
in hired cars - whilst they don’t have money because they don’t work. These
are some of the things we have to look at. Another issue raised was the
shortage of medication which has to be dispensed to people.

Regarding social security, land beneficiaries indicated that they were not
receiving enough assistance from government. Individuals and communities
have received land from government, but, to date, they have received little
assistance, in the form of training and infrastructure from government, in
order to become productive. Fencing of farming land continues to be a great
challenge, because the livestock gets into the land and feeds on the
product that has been planted by the people on their land. Therefore, we
need to fence in this land for the people. Grazing land for stock is also
limited and we should get enough grazing for the stock. Some of the issues
that were raised were the need for proper irrigation systems, the catchment
areas and incomplete work by contractors.

In terms of education and the Extended Public Works Programme, EPWP, the
following issues were raised: some of the schools are still built from mud;
the lack of electricity, water and sanitation in some areas; the schools
nutrition programme is not very effective in some of the schools; and a
lack of roads and bridges restricts access to some of the schools, because
when the river is overflowing, children cannot go to school, leading to
poor school attendance. These are some of the issues that were raised,
including the insufficient budget to meet the needs of schools and the
prevalence of a high teacher-pupil ratio.

In terms of the EPWP, accommodation and funding for home-based care are
still challenges we need to look at. Further training is needed for
administrative and financial skills. There is also a lack of support for
municipalities to engage in projects. Applying for a foster care grant
remains a challenge, and this leads to backlogs with regard to social
workers processing child grants. Backlogs with regard to the establishment
of Early Childhood Development Centres is also an issue that is raised in
the report, and we have to look at it. It is therefore very important to
note the lack of time we have experienced this year since this is an
electioneering year and with the elections at our doorstep. Together we can
do more in the fourth Parliament.

I would like to request that those who will be coming back to this House
should take this work forward and not let it fall by the wayside. They must
make sure that all the issues that have been raised by our people on the
ground can be expedited so as to make their lives better. That is what we
are committing ourselves to doing, and that should be done. We should not
hesitate to say to them that we are here for them and can help them do
these things. I table this report and I ask you to adopt it. I thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mr D G MKONO: Chairperson, hon members, in the third democratic Parliament,
which is now drawing to a close, this institution took the strategic
initiative to expand its oversight role and presented a programme of action
which later came to be known as Programme 2009. It established the focus of
the work of the NCOP as largely oversight in order to strengthen the
delivery of services. It also compels the NCOP to direct more time and
resources towards the performance of oversight work as a mechanism for
following up on the implementation of laws, government policies and
programmes.

The NCOP, therefore, saw an expanded oversight role over the past five
years, which resulted in the thorough entrenchment of the programme of
Taking Parliament to the People as a key mechanism for ensuring public
participation in Parliament and a strong culture of participatory democracy
in South Africa. The programme has grown to be an important mechanism of
creating a platform for the public representatives to engage with the
people on the challenges that they face or those around service delivery.

Since the inception of the programme in 2004, the NCOP has visited all nine
provinces and undertook follow-up visits to some of the provinces that were
facing immense service delivery challenges. During its visits, the NCOP
brings to the people the executive and senior officials from the public
service that would be able to respond to service delivery concerns. This is
designed to ensure that obstacles affecting the delivery of quality and
efficient services are immediately attended to – I hope the opposition is
listening there.

Pursuant to the fulfilment of its vision of a People’s Parliament as part
of its oversight function, the NCOP held its annual programme of Taking
Parliament to the People in Emalahleni Local Municipality in the Eastern
Cape during the first week of November last year. As with previous
occasions of this nature, the NCOP was enabled to broaden opportunities for
public participation for communities that would ordinarily find it
difficult to assess Parliament directly.

More importantly, it would enable the NCOP to perform its oversight role
and to target areas where public education about democracy in the country
is needed most, as well as areas where people usually feel that government
is neglecting them, thereby ensuring that the concerns of communities are
heard and taken into account.

An outstanding feature of the last on-site sitting of the NCOP in the
Eastern Cape was, in my view, the urgent and persistent need for rural
development, land reform, agrarian reform and food security, which are
inextricably linked and intertwined. It is therefore inevitable that
problems and deficiencies experienced in one or more of these aspects
invariably cause imbalances in others.

Colonialism and apartheid were rooted in the dispossession of the African
people of their land and the destruction of African farming. Poverty,
inequality and unemployment are the consequences of centuries of
underdevelopment and exploitation perpetrated on the majority of the
population, which have its most destructive and enduring impact on rural
South Africa. During this visit we have also seen that these rural areas
still lack basic infrastructures, such as roads, water and electricity
supply, which entrenches the problems of chronic poverty and limits the
potential of communities to sustain economic growth, rural livelihoods and
social development.

It is therefore clear that efforts to extend free basic services and
government services, such as education and health care to all our people,
are slowest to reach rural areas. We have also seen that the municipalities
in the poorest and most rural parts of the country are among the most
deprived in terms of human, physical and financial resources. This lack of
capacity limits the extent to which rural municipalities can act as a
catalyst for growth and development.

Rural development is a central pillar of our struggle against unemployment,
poverty and inequality. Despite significant progress made over the past 15
years, people living in rural areas continue to face the harshest
conditions of poverty, lack of access to land and basic services.
Interventions, such as the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
Programme, have made significant, but thus far insufficient progress.
Although social grants are making a huge contribution to pushing back the
frontiers of rural poverty, fighting hunger and improving the potential for
economic growth in rural areas, it cannot substitute a broader strategy for
rural development and job creation. “Abantu mabasebenze”! [People must
work!]

The upscaling of social and economic infrastructure and the extension of
quality government services, especially as far as health and education to
rural areas are concerned, still require continued attention while land
reform initiatives, including the land and agricultural reform programme,
need to be strengthened and expanded to create sustainable rural
livelihoods on a greater scale. However, I am happy to say that, as far as
rural development is concerned, the ANC is committed to a comprehensive and
clear strategy linked to land and agrarian reform and the improvement of
the conditions and livelihood of the rural population. The ANC is
determined to review the appropriateness of the existing land
redistribution programme and to introduce measures aimed at speeding up the
pace of land reform and redistribution in order to promote landownership.

It has to intensify the land reform programme and ensure that more land is
in the hands of the rural poor, providing them with the technical skills
and financial resources to use the land productively in the creation of
sustainable livelihoods and decent work in rural areas. Furthermore it has
to expand the agrarian reform programme that will focus on the systematic
promotion of agricultural co-operatives throughout the value chain,
including agro-processing in the agricultural areas and developing
supporting measures to ensure better access to markets and more finance to
small farmers. This will ensure a much stronger link between land and
agrarian reform programmes and water resource allocation and that the water
resources reaching all our people, especially the poor, are of a high
quality. It will also strengthen the partnership between government and
traditional leadership focusing on rural development and fighting poverty,
developing programmes to promote the important role of agriculture and
employment and meeting basic needs for community development.

The latest initiative of Taking Parliament to the People, in the Eastern
Cape, has again clearly demonstrated that millions of our people who farm
on small agricultural plots in rural areas can and do make a substantial
contribution to poverty reduction and the creation of sustainable
livelihoods in the most adverse conditions. Agriculture in these areas
remains a critical opportunity to combat poverty and provide ... [Time
expired.] Sicela nifake isitampu kulo mbiko mhle kakhulu. [Please endorse
this good report.] Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chair, hon members, today is the day that everybody’s
admitting their mistakes and it was very refreshing to see two of our
Ministers admitting their mistakes. It would be very, very nice if more ANC
Ministers would start doing the same.

As you know, the concept of Taking Parliament to the People was often
criticised by the DA. We experienced it as an ANC road show and
prohibitively expensive. Now it’s my chance to admit something, and I admit
that, in retrospect, it was an initiative that had many positive outcomes.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: More DA ...

Mr J W LE ROUX: Very few, but there were some. [Interjections.]

Visiting the rural areas of the Eastern Cape and witnessing the poverty and
lack of basic infrastructure must inspire the present government and future
governments to reconsider carefully and to reprioritise. Wasting money on
grandiose schemes is unacceptable; money must be spent where it is most
needed. Spending billions on huge soccer stadiums and, worse, submarines we
have no use for can never be justified. After 15 years of democracy it is
disgraceful that children in Lady Frere must go to school where there is no
water, no electricity, no toilets and in some schools not even desks.

Taking Parliament to the People exposed all of us to these injustices that
young children must endure on a daily basis. Unfortunately the same applies
for the state of our medical services in those remote areas. It is nothing
but disgraceful.

Ek dink in die toekoms behoort nasionale Ministers en hul provinsiale
eweknieë hierdie besoeke saam met die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies mee te
maak. Slimstories van die verhoog af is net nie meer goed genoeg nie.
Ministers, net soos ons, moet eerstehandse kennis hê van wat in hierdie arm
gebiede gebeur en wat die werklike behoeftes is.

’n AGB LID: Nie kospakkies nie!

Mr J W LE ROUX: Ja, nie kospakkies nie.

Agb Voorsitter en kollegas, dis die laaste maal dat ek hierdie Raad sal
toespreek. My hartlike dank aan u vir ’n baie aangename vyf jaar.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I think national Ministers and their provincial peers should join the
National Council of Provinces on these visits in future. Clever speeches
from the stage are just not good enough anymore. Ministers, just like us,
must have firsthand information about what is happening in these poor areas
and what the real needs are.

An HON MEMBER: Not food parcels!

Mr J W LE ROUX: Yes, not food parcels.

Hon Chairperson and colleagues, this is the last time that I will address
this Council. My sincere thanks to all for a very pleasant five years.]

Obviously there were disappointments as far as decisions that were taken by
the NCOP were concerned, but fortunately the positive developments far
outweigh the negative. To the chairpersons that I was involved with, the
hon Kgoshi and Mr Shiceka, who was late this morning – I was very surprised
to see that, because he always tried to be on time – and lately the hon
Mkhaliphi, thank you very much for the sterling work you gentlemen did. It
was always a great pleasure to be in your committee and to serve under you.

Wat die Voorsitter van hierdie Raad betref – ek sien nie nou vir mnr
Mahlangu hier nie – kan ek sê hy het dit reggekry dat die atmosfeer in die
Raad oor die vyf jaar gaandeweg ál beter geword het. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Concerning the Chairperson of this Council – I do not see Mr Mahlangu here
– may I say that he has managed to improve the atmosphere in this Council
gradually over the past five years.]

Five years ago we first met as colleagues, but now we part as friends, and
I really thank you all, ladies and gentlemen and colleagues, most
sincerely.

Wat my DA-kollegas betref, vriende, dit was heerlik om saam met julle te
werk. Ek het elke dag daarvan geniet. Ek dink ons was ’n effektiewe span.
Wattie, baie dankie vir die wonderlike opoffering wat jy gemaak het.
Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Concerning my DA colleagues, friends, it was pleasant working with you
all. I enjoyed every moment of it. I think we were an effective team.
Wattie, thank you very much for the wonderful sacrifice you have made.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms N MOERANE-MAMASE (Eastern Cape): Chair, hon members, I rise on behalf of
the Eastern Cape to say that we are grateful as a province that you chose
us for your visit. The people of Emalahleni, I promise you, will forever be
grateful for that visit. They are hoping that all of us seated here will
advocate their plight to better their lives as a collective. They are also
expecting us not to point fingers, but to take Emalahleni as a classic case
of a town in South Africa.

I must confess that reading the report was depressing. The report projects
a forgotten village. While realising that much has been done, and much
still has to be done, nothing good was acknowledged in that report, and my
heart was so sore. I was hoping that in an executive summary we would trace
the development of that particular area and acknowledge the fact that so
much has been done or realised by the Eastern Cape.

As a province, yes, we have been in government for 14 years. We should not
forget what we inherited – a town with no facilities. But during our era so
much has been done. The tarred roads that we are talking about are a
product of the interaction with us, and the infrastructure in the town is
what we have put in place as a province which includes sanitation and
electricity. Basically the town is a functional entity, unlike before, and
that should be acknowledged.

Realising that the villages are where one finds the majority of
inhabitants, it is important that as a province we have identified that the
different spheres of government should plan and budget together. And when
we visit these areas in the different provinces, we should make sure that
our input-output is balanced. We need to make sure that, when we visit, we
will be working together to monitor what we have put in place together. If
we are not going to do that, we will never realise how far we are in terms
of our development.

We can talk about fruitless and wasteful expenditure. Fortunately, we have
had a debate on the Division of Revenue Bill and we all participated in
that. Regarding those quotas that are quoted in the Division of Revenue
Bill, surely, if you are to develop the Eastern Cape and even KwaZulu-
Natal, that is not enough. We have been to other countries of the world and
we are mindful of the fact that it takes so many years to develop an area
such as Emalahleni.

With the infrastructural backlogs that we are faced with as a province, we
need to step up with the Division of Revenue Bill. It is unfortunate that I
didn’t take part in that debate. I am just taking this opportunity to point
out that the resources we are allocating to smaller towns will not assist
them. It will take them years to get to where other areas are. The Eastern
Cape, as a result of that, is faced with migrations from those areas to the
Western Cape, without realising that those areas need far more development.
The problem is that we still have to develop the bigger towns. So the
priorities will forever change in our areas.

I am grateful for this opportunity, because I know as a collective we will
do more. That is a slogan, but we need to put that into practice. Most of
the areas that are highlighted in the report are the responsibility of the
national government and not of the provincial government. The much-needed
resource of water falls under the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
and that is a national competency. So we really request the House to
advocate on our behalf with regard to those resources.

As a province, yes, we can do much more, but we can’t do everything. We
therefore want to encourage everybody seated here. You have seen the pilot
in terms of Emalahleni. When our plight is debated, please, we would be
forever grateful if you were to advocate for us when it comes to the
division of revenue.

As a province we do recognise that Taking Parliament to the People is a
very important tool to measure the achievements of our Millennium
Development Goals. We do realise that, if we were to measure what we saw at
Emalahleni as a replica of what is happening in other provinces, the pace
at which we are allocating resources to the different areas will never
realise the Millennium Development Goals we are hoping to achieve by 2014.

We are really grateful that you chose to visit Emalahleni. As the province
of the Eastern Cape we will follow whatever we have to follow. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Ngathi umnumzane Le Roux usephumile noma. Hawu, nanguya.
Uyihlabe esikhonkosini. Udaba lokuthatha iPhalamende liye kubantu
lubalulekile kakhulu. Abaningi babecabanga ukuthi kuyangcebelekwa laphaya,
sifuna nje ukuyobona izihlobo. Uma esevumile umnumzane Le Roux kusho khona
ukuthi umyalezo ufikile kwabaningi.

Uma ngabe ngempela ngempela siyithatha indaba yokuthi sithathe iPhalamende
kubantu, siyithatha ngokukhulu ukuqiniseka kufuneka siye ebantwini
siyobonana nalabo bantu abasikhethile. Singabi kude nabo. Benginganicebisa
nje mina. Nina eningakakuboni lokho bhekani uhlelo luka Khumbul’ekhaya
kumabonakude, nikhumbule ekhaya. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu speech
follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: It seems as if Mr Le Roux has left. Oh, there he is. You are
quite correct. The issue of taking Parliament to the people is very
important. Many people thought that it is about having an outing to see
relatives. Now that Mr Le Roux has clarified it, it means that the message
has reached a lot of people.

If, in all honesty, we regard taking Parliament to the people with utmost
seriousness, we must go and see the people who voted for us. We must not be
far away from them. That is my plea to you. Those of you who have not
realised this must watch the program called Khumbul’ekhaya on television,
and remember your home. I thank you.]

Nksz B N DLULANE: Sihlalo, ndicela ukuhlala phantsi kuba sendiyintlekisa
koogxa bam aba. Ndiyabulisa ngale njikalanga, endingaziyo nokuba ayiyo
yokugqibela na ndimi apha. Ukuba ndiya phi na, kuya kuxhomekeka kwiivoti ze-
ANC. Kodwa ndiyazi ukuba siseza kuphinda siphathe.

Ndinombulelo omkhulu kuye wonke umntu othe wathetha apha. Bekufanele ukuba
ndibe andithethi namhlanje, kuba ndandithethile ngaphambili. Kambe, ndiva
kamnandi xa oogxa bethu bephinda eza zinto saziva phaya eLady Frere.

Njengokuba saya eLady Frere siyile Ndlu, emva kokuba sasiqale ukusa
iPalamente ebantwini ngowama-2002, ndifumanise ukuba siye sathi chatha
kweli ithuba. Ibikokokugqibela ukuba sise iPalamente ebantwini kulo nyaka,
kwaye ndiqinisekile ukuba iqela elilandelayo liya kwenza nangaphezulu.

Ndifuna ukutsho ukuba ngokubhekisele kwezinye zezicelo ezenziwa ngabantu
phaya – nanjengoko uMhlalingaphambili esitsho – kuyimfuneko kwaye
kunyanzelekile ukuba sonke sizilandele, nokuba ubani uza kuba kule Ndlu,
kweyephondo okanye kumasipala.

Ndingalitsho litsole ukuba ngokubhekisele kwezinye zezicelo ezenziwa phaya,
sele kukho ingxowa-mali enyusiweyo enemali engangezigidi ezihlanu zeerandi,
eza kusetyenziselwa ukubonelela ngezindlu zangasese eziliwaka – zisuka
kwinkampani iSanitation Toilets – namanzi. Ezi zibonelelo ziza kuya
Emalahleni, eSakhisizwe naseNtsika Yethu. Ziza kuthunyelwa ngenyanga ka-
Apreli kulo nyaka wama-2009.

Ke ndicinga ukuba ubukho bethu phaya kwaba luncedo. Ngokungabi kho kwethu
phaya mhlawumbi sasingazi kukwazi ukunceda laa masipala ukuze abe ngoku
uncediswa ngoongxowa-nkulu ukunyusa ingxowa-mali ejongene noku.

Njengoko nisazi ukuba uthini na umqulu wonyulo we-ANC, ndiqinisekile ukuba
enye yezinto ekwathethwa ngazo phaya eLady Frere yimfundo. Siyazi ukuba
bekukho phaya izikolo emgangatho wazo ubungancumisi. Nomphathiswa
wezemfundo wephondo omtsha naye ebekho kwaye uthembise ngokuziqwalasela eza
zikolo zithathu. Ndithi ke ngoko iNdlu le ze imjonge umphathiswa lo ukuba
uza kusigcina na isithembiso sakhe ngokubhekisele koku.

Kukho iphulo iNceduluntu phaya, loomama. Ndingatsho namhlanje ukuba sisonke
sanceda ngokuya phaya ngoba inkqubo yokugrumba amanzi omthombo phaya kulaa
ntaba yaseNcedo Lwethu iyaqhuba.

Ndingatsho ukuba, njengoko etshilo ugxa wam osuka kwiphondo, ubonelelo
ngamanzi ngumsebenzi weSebe leMicimbi yaManzi naMahlathi kwaye eli sebe
lizibandakanyile kwezi nkqubo. Eli sebe linaso isiphakamiso elisenzileyo,
kwaye liwavavanyile namanzi. Ndithetha ukuba le yinto eyenzeka emva nje
kokuba sisandul’ ukusuka phaya. Ndinethemba lokuba iNdlu le iza kuwulandela
lo mba.

Kukwakho nesixa-mali esisilelayo kwiinkonzo zezentlalo ekwakukhalwa ngaso
ngexa sasijikeleza phaya kwiphulo iNceduluntu Development Project. Abantu
babekhala ngokuba banikwa isixa-mali esiyi-R750 000. Kweso sixa-mali
kwafumaneka imali eyi-R375 000 kuphela; intsalela yayo zange iziswe. Ndimi
apha nje ndingumlomo wephondo lam; iyile loo mali. Mhlawumbi ngeyingayanga
ukubangaba naningazange nithathe inxaxheba, nasuka apha naya phaya eLady
Frere. Maz’ enethole, Bhunga laMaphondo leSizwe!

Phakathi kwezinye izinto eziphakanyiswayo kulaa ngxelo sisicelo sokuba
ngokubhekisele kwizibonelelo zikarhulumente, noko singa singathi nyi,
singapheleli kubantwana abaminyaka ili-14.

Thina ke singumbutho kaKhongolozi sesisinyusile esi sibonelelo. Sizivile
izicelo zabo, sathetha nabaphetheyo. Ndiyazi ke ukuba njengokuba siphethe
nje, siyabaphulaphula abantu ze sixelele abaPhathiswa. Kambe, niyabona
ukuba siyababonelela abantwana ukuya kuthi gaa kwabaminyaka ili-18. Sizisa
iinkonzo ebantwini, andithi? Iyabonakala loo nto.

Kukho nengxaki esiyive phaya enxulumene noMsobomvu. Andithi apha
besisandul’ ukuvotela ubuArhente beSizwe boPhuhliso loLutsha, i-National
Youth Development Agency. Kuyabonakala ukuba bathethile abantu base-
Emalahleni, yeva i-ANC. Ndithetha nje simka kule Ndlu siyiphumezile into
yokuba uMsobomvu mawube luncedo njengoko kukhalwa ngawo.

Kukho abantu abasoloko befundekela besithi uMsobomvu unika kuphela
abantakwethu abakwi-ANC. Ayiyo nyani ke leyo. Sithe sakuva ukuba kukho into
ekufuneka siyilungisile kuMsobomvu, saphumeza ezo zicwangciso.

Phaya kumqulu wonyulo we-ANC, sithetha ngophuhliso lwemimandla
yasemaphandleni. Bonke abantakwethu abebemi apha bathethe ngesixa-mali
esiyi ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms B N DLULANE: Chairperson, may I please sit down, because my colleagues
are really making fun of me. I greet you all this evening, and I do not
know whether or not this is the last time I stand here as an elected
representative. The number of votes cast for the ANC will determine my
future. However, I know that the ANC will still be the ruling party.

I am grateful to everyone who has addressed the House. I am not supposed to
be speaking today, because I had an opportunity to speak before.
Nevertheless, I feel good when our colleagues again mention the things that
we had heard at Lady Frere.

As this House, we took Parliament to the people of Lady Frere, after we had
initiated the programme in 2002. I have discovered that this time we have
outdone ourselves. It was the last session of Taking Parliament to the
People for this year, and I am sure that the next group will do even
better.
With regard to some of the requests from the people of Lady Frere, it is
necessary and a matter of must that, as the Chairperson has indicated, we
indeed follow up on them, regardless of whether one will be deployed in
this House, the provincial legislature or at municipal level.

Let me state categorically that, with regard to some of the requests that
were made by the communities there, a fund has already been set up and it
now stands at R5 million, which will be utilised to provide 1 000 toilets -
to be provided by Sanitation Toilets - and water. These toilets will be
allocated to the communities of Emalahleni, Sakhisizwe and Ntsika Yethu.
They will be delivered in April 2009.

So, I think our visit there has been helpful. If we had not gone there, we
would not have been in a position to assist the municipality to such an
extent that the business community is now also helping to boost the said
fund.

I am sure one of the things that were mentioned at Lady Frere was
education, because, as the ANC manifesto declares, education is important.
We know that there were schools there which did not meet the required
standard. The new MEC for education was also present there and he promised
to look at those three schools. Therefore, I say the House should hold the
MEC to his word as far as those schools are concerned.
There is also a women’s project, called Nceduluntu Development Project.
Today I can say that it was a good thing that all of us went there, because
now the project of diverting water from the fountain at Ncedo Lwethu
mountain is in progress.

As my colleague from the province has indicated, provision of water is the
responsibility of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. The
department has been involved in these programmes. The department has tested
the water and has made recommendations. This happened shortly after we had
left the area. I hope that the House will follow up on this matter.

When we visited the Nceduluntu Development Project, there were complaints
regarding a shortfall in the social services budget. The people complained
that they had been allocated an amount of R750 000, but they only received
R375 000. The balance thereof had never been transferred to the project. I
stand here as the mouthpiece of my province; that outstanding amount has
now been paid. Perhaps it would not have been paid if you had not gone to
Lady Frere. We are grateful to the NCOP for that.

Amongst other things highlighted in this report, is a request regarding the
extension of the child support grant to include children who are older than
14 years.

We, as the ANC, have already granted this wish. We have listened to their
requests and we have spoken to the authorities. As the ruling party, we
listen to the people and take their requests to Ministers. However, you can
see that the child support grant includes children who are 18 years old. We
bring services to the people, don’t we? That is clear.

We had also heard that there was a problem with regard to the Umsobomvu
Youth Fund. We have just voted for the National Youth Development Agency.
It is clear that the community of Emalahleni has spoken, and the ANC has
listened. As I speak, this House has succeeded in ensuring that the
Umsobumvu Youth Fund delivers on its mandate because the people were
complaining.

There are people who are always making noises alleging that the Umsobomvu
Youth Fund approves loans to our brothers in the ANC only. This is not
true. When we heard these allegations levelled against the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund, we took corrective measures.

In the ANC manifesto we talk about the development of rural areas. All my
colleagues who spoke before me referred to an amount of ...]

... R1,7 billion, set aside for food and security.

Sisekhondweni. Walala, wasala ke wena mntu ungawuboniyo umbutho obonelela
iimfuno zabantu. Mandibulele. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [We are on track. You snooze,
you lose, especially if you do not see which party provides for the
people’s needs. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES – AGREEMENT
    BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF RSA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF KINGDOM OF LESOTHO ON
    FACILITATION OF CROSS-BORDER MOVEMENT OF CITIZENS OF RSA AND LESOTHO

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Angibonge Sihlalo. Ngibonge abahlonishwa abakhona
kulendawo. [Chairperson, I thank you. I also thank the hon members present
in this House.]

This agreement is between the government of the Republic of South Africa
and the government of the Kingdom of Lesotho on the facilitation of cross-
border movement of citizens of the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom
of Lesotho. The agreement itself seeks to allow for the fairly free
movement of citizens between these two countries. It does so by allowing
citizens to enter and depart from these countries without visa
applications, permitting them to enter these countries and endorsing such
entries and departures.

However, the agreement takes into account the security risks involved in
such movements by providing for the verification of passports to validate
and authenticate entry into these countries, especially if such entry is
the first-ever entry.

It puts responsibility on these countries to ensure that its citizens are
aware of the contents of this agreement and monitor compliance to it as
well. It also recognises that people commute between countries for
employment purposes and makes provision for such movement to take place
fairly freely. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                   WESTERN CAPE INHERITED DEBT RELIEF BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, the 1998 Inherited Debt Relief Act 54 of 1998
authorised and effectively cleared the inherited debt of provinces affected
by the expenditure of the former Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda and
Ciskei, the TBVC states, while the Finance Act, Act 35 of 2000 authorised
the overexpenditure of former regional structures, the former Transvaal, in
order to clear the relevant account, but the inherited debt of the Western
Cape was not cleared.

This inherited debt was expenditure incurred by former TBVC states, Ciskei,
as well as parts of the old regional structures; namely, the Cape
Provincial Administration and the House of Representatives or the
Department of Education and Culture. This is the money bill that authorises
the overexpenditure to facilitate the accounting process necessary to clear
the overdrawn accounts of the former Cape Province structures in line with
similar arrangements in the 1998 Inherited Debt Relief Act and the 2000
Finance Act of 2000.

During the public hearings the committee was briefed about the implications
of the Bill, namely that there are no cash flow implications; there is no
impact on general government debt; and that there are also no interest
implications. The Select Committee on Finance also considered the
submissions that were made. Having applied its collective mind, the
committee recommends the passing of this Bill. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE FOR APPOINTMENT OF
           MEMBERS TO THE NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BOARD

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. Ikomidi lesikhashana ebelibekelwe
ukwenza izincomo zamalunga ebhodi lawo awesiKhungo sikaZwelonke
Sokuthuthukiswa Kwentsha, liyabonga ukuthi iPhalamende liyaqonda ukuthi
izidingo zentsha ziyanakekelwa futhi liyaphumelelisa izifiso zentsha lapha
eNingizimu Afrika.

Ibhodi leli le-National Youth Development Agency lizoba namalunga
ayisikhombisa. Ibhodi yilona elizohambisa izinhlelo zaso lesikhungo.
Alizukuhlala lingafaki ngisho nombiko kwiPhalamende nakuMongameli. Kepha-ke
lizobe liphoqelekile ukuthi lenze njalo. Sizokhumbula ukuthi ibhodi leli
noma isikhungo sizobe siphathe izigidi zamarandi ukwenza ukuthi intsha
ikwazi ukuziphucula ngazo.

UMongameli yena uzokwethula umbiko lapha kwiPhalamende. Ngithemba ukuthi
amalunga ePhalamende wona azokwenza umsebenzi wawo wokwengamela kanye
nokuqapha.

Mangibonge amalunga asebenze ngokuzikhandla kusukela esontweni eliphelile
ukufinyelela kuso lesi sikhathi sanamhlanje. Ngibonga wona amalunga, omama
uHelen Matlanyana kanye noPriscilla Themba; obaba uPapi Tau, uMkhono kanye
noMzizi ngokunjalo. Amanye amalunga lawa awamaqenjana amancanyanyana
awazange alibhade emihlanganweni ngoba vele abanayo imigomo ephathelene
nezentsha, nguKhongolose kuphela onayo.

Mangisho-ke ukuthi emva kokuthi kuyekwavezwa emaphephandabeni ukuthi
sidinga intsha isondele ngaphambili. Siyesathola 173 curriculum vitae avela
entsheni kulo lonke leli laseNingizimu Afrika.

Iningi labo babebadala kukhona nababo 1958 kodwa omncane ubeneminyaka
engamashumi amane ubudala isibongo sakhe ngowakwaKhan. Siyesachazeka
kakhulu singamalunga ekomidi ngoba kuyabonisa ukuthi intsha iyaluthanda
lolu hlelo elwenziwayo lapha ePhalamende ngoba nayo ibamba iqhaza.
Kuyekwahlungwa. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Chairperson. The ad hoc committee that was
designated to make recommendations with regard to the appointment of
members to the National Youth Development Agency Board, is grateful that
Parliament is ensuring that the needs of the youth are well taken care of
and that it is realising the aspirations of the youth here in South Africa.

The board of the National Youth Development Agency will consist of seven
members. The board will be responsible for the functioning of this agency.
They will not just sit idly and not even present a report to Parliament and
to the President. They will be obliged to do so. We will remember that this
board or agency will be responsible for millions of rands that the youth
can use to better their lives.

The President is going to table the report here in Parliament. I hope that
the Members of Parliament will do their oversight and monitoring function.

Let me thank the members who have worked tirelessly since last week up
until this time. I thank these members, hon Helen Matlanyana and Priscilla
Themba, hon Papi Tau, Mkhono as well as Mzizi. Other members from these
small parties did not come to the meetings because it is well known that
they do not have policies concerning youth; it is only the ANC that has.

Let me say that after the announcement in the newspapers that we need youth
to come forward, we received 173 CVs from youth all over South Africa.
Most of them were very old; there were people who were born in 1958: The
youngest was 40 years old and his surname was Khan. We were very impressed
as members of the committee: It shows that the youth is interested in this
project which takes place here at Parliament and they also play a pivotal
role. Therefore, the short listing took place.]

We short listed them and remained with 26. Those are the candidates we
interviewed and as a result got seven members who met the requirements.

The ad hoc committee wishes to table in front of this House the
recommendation that the following young people be appointed as members of
the board. They reflect the dynamic demographics of the country, are young
and dynamic. One of them is disabled.

Kukhona ngisho nomlungu, kukhona nosuka kwelaseNdiya. [There is even a
white person and another one who is an Indian.]

They have no criminal record, have experience in youth development and are
between the ages of 18-35. Their names are Mcebo Rich Khumalo, Maria
Tshabalala ...

... lona oyewacashunwa ngabamaphephandaba bathi uyewakhuluma ngokusoma
umama uPholisa Makeleni, Andile Lungisa, Yershen Pillay, Innocentia Motau
kanye noFrancois Jacobus Slabber.
Uma ngiphetha mangisho ngithi uKhongolose ukhuthaza yonke intsha ukuthi
ingakhohlwa ukuthi ngomhlaka 22 Apreli kuyavotwa kulungiselelwa ukuthi
bavotele impilo engcono. Yingakho singuKhongolose sithi uma sibambisene
singenza ngcono ukuze siphucule izimpilo zentsha. Viva ANC! Viva!
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[...the one who was quoted by the newspapers as having talked about
performing sexual acts on the thighs, Mrs Pholisa Makeleni, Andile Lungisa,
Yershen Pillay, Innocentia Motau and Francois Jacobus Slabber.

In conclusion, let me say that the ANC encourages every young person not to
forget that 22 April 2009 is election day and they should prepare
themselves to vote for a better life. And that is why we, as the ANC, say
that together we can do more so that we can better the lives of the youth.
Viva, ANC! Viva!]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Reports be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Reports accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                     ORDER NO 9 REMOVED FROM ORDER PAPER

                               (Announcement)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): I’ve been informed that the
Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs did not meet to
finalise their report. Therefore Order No 9 has been taken off the Order
Paper.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
  AFFAIRS – MAGISTRATES’ COURTS: AMENDMENT OF RULES OF COURTS AND AMENDMENT
     OF RULES REGULATING CONDUCT OF PROCEEDINGS OF PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL
                 DIVISIONS OF THE HIGH COURT OF SOUTH AFRICA

Order disposed of without debate.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES -
              REGULATIONS MADE IN TERMS OF CHILDREN’S ACT, 2005

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, the Select Committee on Social Services dealt
with the regulations in terms of the Children’s Act, Act No 38 of 2005, and
the committee wants to recommend that this august House adopts the report.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE - OVERSIGHT AND
                            ACCOUNTABILITY MODEL

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): House Chairperson, hon members,
distinguished special delegates, the hon Mazibuko says that she hasn’t seen
the report. I must say that it is indeed a great privilege and honour to
table this report at this last sitting of the National Council of Provinces
in our third democratic Parliament, as printed on the ATC of 27 January
2009.

Believing that members have gone through this report – through its various
stages of development - let me take this opportunity to thank those who
made valuable contributions and inputs to this report. Particular regards
must go to Adv Jodi-Anne van Niekerk, Adv Lulama Matyolo-Dube and other
members of staff who spared no effort in ensuring the crystallisation of
this report into its final product.

Allow me to conclude by saying that, unlike many reports that were crafted
and developed by consultants, this report followed a different process. Its
journey began in 1999 when, pursuant to section 59 of the Constitution -
which clearly instructs Parliament, the National Assembly in particular, to
develop mechanisms that would ensure effective parliamentary oversight –
the Presiding Officers commissioned the report and a study was undertaken
by Prof Hugh Corder. Please note that Prof Hugh Corder did not develop the
oversight model. What the Prof has done was simply to study all
international best practices and, unfortunately, he could not find one -
globally. It is only our Constitution that links Parliament with an
oversight and accountability model.

This report is an expression of the collective experience of men and women
in the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces over a
period of 15 years, building on the work they have done, building on the
experiences they have gone through, identifying weaknesses, translating
those weaknesses into strengths, and systematising them into a coherent
framework that we call the oversight and accountability model.

So all of us can give ourselves a pat on the back in that we are the first
country to produce this kind of framework, which is yet to be tested in the
arena of struggle through the actual practical activities of our
committees. Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES 2004 –
                                    2009

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, once more I thank you for giving
me the opportunity to present the report for 2009 that we started in 2004
when we started the Third Parliament’s NCOP.

The NCOP, once more, has played a very critical role in the consideration
of the Bills initiated by Parliament, for example the Financial Management
of Parliament Bill, the money Bills and the Mandating Procedures of
Provinces Bill, which were passed in terms of section 65(2) of the
Constitution.

As a House, we have added value to a number of Bills by effecting proposed
amendments, including sections 75 and 76. For example, with regard to the
Broadcasting Amendment Bill, we upheld the principle of the separation of
powers, promoting the removal of the Speaker of the National Assembly as
part of the appointing authority. Those who had been dealing with the Bill
will remember.

The National Council of Provinces’ amendment to the Electricity Regulation
Amendment Bill - now an Act assented to by the President, in order to
provide municipalities with the right to administer the reticulation of
electricity within their areas of jurisdiction - has, according to the
Department of Minerals and Energy, expedited the supply of electricity to
poverty-stricken communities, for example farms, rural areas and informal
settlements. This is reflected in the report we are presenting here today.

However, we seem to have lagged behind in overseeing the implementation of
the laws that we passed in the National Council of Provinces or the entire
Parliament. I would want to challenge the members of this House that, in
the Fourth Parliament, the most important duty that we have to do is to go
down again and make sure that the laws that we are passing in this House
are being implemented on the ground. I think this is a core issue of our
work that we should be doing as well, and it is a bigger challenge. It
boils down to the capacity that we have to build around the committees. It
boils down to the human and financial resources that we have to give to
both Houses so that they can be in a position to do that particular work. I
think that is the biggest challenge to all of us as we prepare to come back
for the Fourth Parliament.

In terms of oversight, you are aware that we have done quite a number of
things, including Taking Parliament to the People, as we have been
discussing, site visits and the public meetings that we have been holding.
As the National Council of Provinces we have been doing the follow-ups
through our committees. We introduced, during the time of hon Windvoël, the
provincial weeks which proved to be very, very effective, because we then
go back to our provinces, interact with our leadership and, together with
the provinces, go out to do the oversight function. I think that has been
very, very critical, and I want to congratulate the hon Windvoël for having
come up with that particular suggestion. [Applause.]

On the question of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Review, let me once more
congratulate the hon Tutu Ralane. The action that he has taken was very
bold, to call us together in a workshop - with our colleagues in the
provinces - to come and have a deep introspection on the financial aspects
of how the provinces are spending in terms of their trends. I want to say
congratulations. That, together with the Minister, by the way, conducting
that particular workshop, is what we should be doing, and I think we should
gallop a little bit in the Fourth Parliament in tracing the expenditure
trends of the provinces.

Through outreach programmes, we were able then to pay attention to some of
the key service delivery issues, for example social transformation,
economic transformation, safety and security, governance, and local
government service delivery. These issues were always on our agenda,
including our visits to provinces in terms of the oversight.

In the public participation sphere, we facilitated public participation
through programmes such as the one I have just mentioned – Taking
Parliament to the People – introducing a follow-up to public meetings and
presenting the aspect of public involvement during the provincial weeks.
The overall challenge we are facing in respect of public participation is
to ensure that the public participation serves as a vehicle for the
involvement of communities in matters of governance that affect them on an
ongoing basis. This is the challenge that we are facing.

We, as the National Council of Provinces, have engaged in a lot of
international activities. You will remember that, since two years ago, we
have introduced a system of bilaterals between the National Council of
Provinces and the second Houses on the continent. For example, this term we
have done two countries on the continent. We have done the Republic of the
Congo, and we have done Rwanda as well. The NCOP has proved to be there to
assist. We were actually requested by Congo to assist them with setting up
their second House, and that is precisely what we would like to do. We
would like to assist our colleagues on the continent.

However, there is a need to improve capacity support for international
engagement by providing research support to members and by monitoring the
implementation of international agreements.

In terms of the special projects, you would understand that, ladies and
gentlemen, or hon members, we have completed three very important projects
during this term of Parliament: the 10th anniversary summit, which was held
in 2007; the institutional memory, which was published in the form of a
documentary; and the book that we have published – you were there and have
the book. We are now finalising the last project, which is the study on
Taking Parliament to the People. We hope to deliver it to you before the
elections. If we can’t, it will be delivered during the first term of the
Fourth Parliament. We are actually meeting next week Monday to go through
the first draft of this study, because when we come back, we want to say:
What has been achieved by Taking Parliament to the People? What can we do
to improve it, so that it becomes even more effective and gives more
assistance to the people that we are serving here at this level?

With regard to the study, we are soliciting the views of the people in the
provinces and all the stakeholders, and that is what the first draft is
containing. During the 10th anniversary, you would remember the summit
raised quite a number of issues, which I think are very critical issues
that we have to look into. One of the issues is the question of the size of
the National Council of Provinces. I can already tell this House that,
right now, this is receiving positive attention. We will be able, very
soon, to increase the size of this House. [Applause.]

Secondly, you would remember that there was an issue which was raised
regarding the question of the participation of Premiers as the leaders of
the special delegates to the NCOP. It is an ongoing issue that we are still
discussing. Last night I addressed the media on all of these issues, and we
had an intense debate with the media, because it was an informal discussion
and there were 25 newspapers that had actually attended this discussion
last night.

The other issue that we have deliberated on is the question of the Second
Rotating Deputy Chairperson. The question that we are raising is whether or
not this position is necessary. Now, these are some of the things .In my
view, I think this position is not necessary. I think we should abolish it,
and I think we should move with speed. That is the recommendation I will
put to the Council.

There are a few challenges that we are faced with that I want to sketch for
the House quickly. The challenge that the National Council of Provinces is
facing now is a role for organised local government. How can we, together,
really make Salga participate in the National Council of Provinces? We are
aware that they are not fully participating, and we know the problems they
have raised: They have part-time councillors in most instances, and
therefore, they cannot participate fully; and they say our system is too
clogged. We are too fast for them at times so we finalise the Bills before
they can make the actual input that they would like to make with regard to
the Bills. This is a discussion that we should perhaps begin to deliberate
in order to see how we can deal with it.

The second challenge is the oversight function in the sense that we need to
build capacity in our committees, because, when you do this oversight
function, you must be in a position to track what it is that we have
achieved. What is it that we have done? What is it that we have not
followed up on? We don’t have a tracking mechanism in between to alert the
chairperson of the committee and the committees themselves to say: “One,
two, and three are done. Tick it off. We are happy about those things, but
one, two, three, and four have not been done. These are the things that we
have to carry on doing.”

We have to increase the research capacity as well. We shouldn’t be
depending on the departments to do the research for us and give the
research to us. Then there is no oversight function. We should be
independent and be able to do these things ourselves and not depend on
them. We are actually now restructuring the legal service into what we now
want to call it, the constitutional and legal section, so that it can begin
to assist the committees in drafting even the Private Member’s Bills. They
should assist you to draft them. Chair, I am finishing off. I am aware that
my time has expired. The last two concern the formalisation of the
legislative sector. How do we work together with the provinces and
strengthen it together?

Lastly, scrutiny of the legislation by the presiding officers becomes very
important. So, I think that the 2009 programme has been very successful,
and it couldn’t have been successful without all of you implementing it. I
want to thank you very much for doing that. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

      CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST OF MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND
  TOURISM FOR RATIFICATION BY PARLIAMENT OF EXCLUSIONS FROM COASTAL PUBLIC
  PROPERTY, THE CONFINED PORT AREAS, IN TERMS OF SECTION 27(4) OF NATIONAL
      ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: INTEGRATED COASTAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 2008

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, section 27(4) of the National
Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management Act, Act 24 of 2008
allows the Minister to request for the ratification of Parliament, and both
the portfolio committee and the select committee. Therefore, the Minister
requests for the exclusion of port areas from coastal public property in
terms of this section. The Select Committee on Land and Environmental
Affairs has ratified this request and puts it before this House for
agreement. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the request of the Minister be ratified.

IN FAVOUR: Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape,
North West, Western Cape.

ABSTAIN: Eastern Cape, Free State.

Request accordingly ratified in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon members, today is our last
sitting before the elections. Therefore, I will now allow an opportunity
for farewell speeches because some of us will come back and some of us
won’t. But I think it will be a blessing if all of us can come back.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, thank you for the last
opportunity to speak in the Third Parliament. Somebody said to me yesterday
evening that I cannot plan for not coming back and that I must always plan
for coming back. I do not know what he meant by that. I am still trying to
analyse that statement, but the Chairperson has already indicated that some
of us may not come back and some of us may come back.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Deputy Chairperson of
the NCOP, hon Peggy Hollander, for the support she has given me and the
institution for the period of five years. Thanks to the Chairpersons, hon
Mildred Oliphant and hon Tsietsi Setona. I am always battling to pronounce
his name. They have done outstanding work in supporting the presiding
officers in making this institution function better and more effectively.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the former Chief Whip, the
hon Windvoël, who played a very important role in assisting me as a
presiding officer of this Council and other presiding officers. He did an
outstanding job. I want to thank you very much for the period you have
served. I also want to thank the current Chief Whip, the hon Nosipho
Ntwanambi, and all the Whips that work with her to make the programme of
this institution very effective and to deliver the services that this House
is expected to deliver in terms of the Constitution.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank all chairpersons of
committees. I thank all the members of this Parliament who belong to
different committees. To a certain extent, I also want to thank all
political parties. [Applause.] Although we come as a single delegation from
provinces, we do have our political parties. Thank you very much for the
support you gave to this House and your provinces. I think we have
delivered. We have done outstanding work as the NCOP within this five-year
period. I don’t doubt the work we have achieved in the institution.
[Applause.] I thank you for your sacrifice, dedication, determination,
energy, enthusiasm and everything you have done. This is the most wonderful
team I have ever worked with in the past five years. I think we ended the
term on a very high note, and that is what I expected. I am very happy in
my heart. I can go home and sleep peacefully because we have delivered as
the NCOP. [Applause.]

I would like to thank the staff of the NCOP for the wonderful work they
have done - the Table staff and everybody in the NCOP. I think you have
done a sterling job in supporting us. Without you we could not have
achieved the work we have done. [Applause.]

I have also been tasked to say to the committees, which have been very
energetic in going back and visiting provinces and doing oversight
functions under the good leadership of the chairpersons, that we noticed
the results of the work you have done on the ground. Thank you very much.
You are outstanding people. [Applause.]

I want to thank this institution for entrusting me and my organisation, the
ANC, with this responsibility as the Chairperson of the Council. I have
been elected by all of you to serve you. Thank you very much that you did
not elect me and then chase me away thereafter. Instead, you supported me
all the way until I finished my term. I wish to thank you very much.
Goodbye! [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon members. I hope
there will be no complaint that you are hungry.
Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I am sorry that I have do this, but I have to
start my speech on a bit of a sad note. It is indeed sad that we have to
end the year with both the Secretary of Parliament and the Secretary of the
NCOP under suspension. It is in reality symptomatic of the entire ANC
administration all over our beautiful South Africa.

And you will remember that I have warned from this podium on many occasions
that the administration of Parliament has usurped far too much power for
themselves and that the powers of Parliament belong with the duly elected
politicians.

Now I could use my three little minutes to tell you how to rectify the
matter, Chairperson, but that will not be necessary at this very late
stage, because we will do it ourselves as the DA after the elections.
[Interjections.]

The boasting of the Minister for Provincial and Local Government will
probably also be his famous last words, because the tide is changing and
the voters of South Africa are waking up to the reality. [Interjections.]
And all of you should also wake up: The scoreboard will look very different
this time around.

But enough of the serious stuff. Let me say that looking back over the past
five years, it has mostly been a very, very pleasant experience indeed. I
have had the privilege of also serving in the National Assembly, and I must
admit, Chair, that the collegiality and the dynamics of this smaller House
are better by far. So those of you who are going there: bad luck for you!
[Laughter.]

I agree with hon Le Roux that much of this pleasant atmosphere must be
attributed to the exceptional leadership of the Chairperson, Mr M J
Mahlangu, and I wish to thank him and his entire team on behalf of all the
DA permanent delegates. We wish you well in your future endeavours, whether
it be somewhere else or back here, Sir.

It has also been quite an experience working with all my other colleagues
in this House. Of course, all the experiences were not pleasant at all
times, because the majority of you unfortunately are programmed by your
parties’ ideologies and that does not mix so well with the free-thinking,
liberal spirit that you find among my DA colleagues and I. [Interjections.]
I will remember the witty interactions, and the very good friendships.

Let me end by also thanking my colleagues in the DA for the wonderful team
I have had. They have had to cope with me, and now I will have to cope with
myself. But I thank my wonderful team for their zeal in their daily tasks,
and also for their endeavours. It has been an inspiration to me, and the
personal support that I have had from them all has made my task lighter and
my life brighter. Thank you, my friends. May all of you be blessed by the
Heavenly Father and may all of your dreams come true.
May I end with something from long ago? There was a radio station called LM
Radio; some of the older people will remember it. The most famous guy on LM
Radio was a man called David Davies. You know, those days the radio would
close down at twelve o’clock - or was it ten o’clock, I can’t remember. But
in those days he ended his radio programme by greeting everybody by saying:
“And now to you, and to you, and especially to you, all the best for the
future!” Stay well, God bless you all. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson and colleagues, I take this opportunity to
thank you all for the good work and the good team spirit enjoyed during our
term of work, 2004 to date. I thank the Almighty God, who has been with us
through this time. I have already started my journey to retirement from
Parliament. [Interjections.] I will miss you all. Keep up the good work.

Ndlelanhle, mpilonhle kini nonke. Nivote kahle futhi nibuye kahle noma
abanye baliwe wuhla lwabazongenela ukhetho. [Uhleko.] Ngizoba nani nonke.
[Farewell, and keep well to all of you. Vote well and come back safely even
though some members are not on the candidates list. [Laughter.] I will be
with you all.]

I will be with you all. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! I now call hon K B Toni.
Order, please. I hope members will behave, because it is his maiden speech.

Mr K B TONI: Chair, it is ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! Hon members, can you
please behave and listen to the member?

Mr K B TONI: Chairperson, hon members, we have reached the end of another
session and it is perhaps the last time that this House meets prior to the
end of its term.

Looking back upon the past 15 years, this House has engaged in important
work and achieved many milestones. For such achievements as we have
attained, the management of Parliament and parliamentary staff members
played a pivotal role behind the scenes to ensure that we perform our
constitutional obligations. I have only recently been sworn in, but from
discussions it is clear that this Chamber plays a very important role in
advancing the Constitution. It would appear that we still need to do many
things to convey the role of this House.

Chair, in conclusion, one hopes that in the new term there will be rapid
progress to ensure that this House expands its oversight role as a checks
and balances mechanism in respect of the National Assembly, and its role in
representing the views of the provinces, and also its role in encouraging
public participation in the work of Parliament. May God bless you. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, hon members and my hon
comrades, in this last sitting of the National Council of Provinces in the
Third Parliament of our country, I, in my capacity as the Chief Whip,
consider it appropriate, but also an honour and a privilege to refer
briefly to the reasons for the existence, development and accomplishments
of the NCOP since its inception, and more specifically over the past five
years.

This institution is also referred to as the upper House of Parliament and
represents South Africa’s provinces to ensure that provincial interests are
taken into account in the national sphere of politics. It does this mainly
by participating in the national legislative process and by providing a
national forum for consideration of issues affecting the people in the
provinces.

It contributes to effective government by exercising oversight over the
national aspects of provincial and local government. It also ensures
recognition of provincial and local concerns in national policy-making and
that the three spheres of government function effectively together.

In this regard, I would like to agree with the late hon Joyce Kgoali, a
former Chairperson of the NCOP, when she said, and I quote:

   The NCOP, provinces and municipalities are the cutting edge of the
   national programme to build a better life for all.

Since the inception of the NCOP in 1997 in the new dispensation, which
marked a clear break with the old Senate that preceded it, it has evolved
into a key institution that is tasked with safeguarding South Africa’s
democracy. It serves as a sanctuary for the protection of the needs and
rights of the people of South Africa in the provinces.

During his tenure as Deputy President of South Africa, the one who is going
to be the President of this country, come April 22, hon Mr Jacob Zuma said:

   No other institution in the country can showcase our beautiful and rich
   diversity as a nation quite as succinctly as the NCOP. I am sure that the
   authors of our Constitution would be very pleased to see how their noble
   intentions are being realized. From giving life to the principle of co-
   operative governance to giving a powerful voice to the masses of our
   people in the various provinces and local areas, we are, through the
   efforts of the NCOP, building and consolidating a true participatory
   democracy.
I want to say that we’ve seen the good strides made by the NCOP in many
areas in the past. The Multiparty Whips’ Forum is one of the important
mechanisms and key instruments in ensuring multiparty democracy in the
NCOP. It does this by affording political parties a platform to share ideas
on measures to strengthen the functioning of the NCOP, while it contributes
immensely to multiparty co-operation.

Despite having taken over the management of the Whippery only a year ago, I
am convinced that it has an important role to play in supporting the NCOP
in meeting its constitutional mandate of representing the country’s
provinces. As a passionate member of the ANC, I am convinced that I am a
very passionate member of this House and a citizen of this country. I
therefore wish to thank all the members of my party who have given me the
strength to serve in this position, particularly during the past 18 months.
Being in this position has not been easy.

The opportunity to serve as the Chief Whip was a great honour for me. I
also express my profound appreciation to the hon M J Mahlangu, the
Chairperson of the NCOP, the Deputy Chairperson Mrs Hollander, and the two
House Chairpersons. Of course, I’m also grateful to the former Chief Whip,
Comrade V V Windvoël, for the work he had done before me.

Lastly, I want to conclude by saying ...

... ngomhla wama-22 kuTshazimpuzi, ngentsimbi ye-12 emini maqanda, kuza
kucaca ukuba ngubani ophetheyo. Ngelo xesha uMsholozi sakube simlungiselela
ukuya eMahlambandlovu.

I-ANC iza kuphatha, iphathe; ibuye iphathe. Ndifuna ke ukutsho kuwo onke
amalungu ale Ndlu ukuba, bekumnadi ukusebenza nani nonke. Ngelishwa, akukho
waziyo ukuba ngubani obuyayo; ingubani ongabuyiyo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... on 22 April, at twelve midday, we will know who is in charge. At that
time we will be preparing to take Msholozi to Mahlambandlovu.

The ANC shall govern, govern and govern again. I would like to say to all
the members of this House that I enjoyed working with all of you.
Unfortunately, no one knows who is coming back and who is not.]

Woza mhla ka-22 kuMbasa, abanye bazowukhomba umuzi onotshwala. [Come 22
April, others will face the consequences.]

Malibongwe! [Ihlombe.] [Praise! [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Ngifisa ukubethelela isipikili kulokhu okushiwo uSihlalo woMkhandlu wale
Ndlu ukuthi amalunga ale Ndlu abenokuzimisela noma ngesinye isikhathi
ebebanga umsindo. [Uhleko.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[I would like to accentuate what the Chairperson of this House said, that
the members of this House were obstinate even though at times they were
noisy. [Laughter.]]

I hope it’s because you were enjoying the debates in this House and that it
is also the way you have behaved in the committees when sharing the ideas
and views of different provinces. I believe that, whether or not you are
coming back, you must be proud of yourselves.

With those words I want to make an announcement: Immediately after we have
adjourned, there is going to be a photo shoot just outside the NCOP and the
Chairperson has invited all of us to have a working lunch.

I am not sure why, but the Chairperson will explain why he is calling it a
working lunch. I believe that you still have responsibilities as the NCOP,
because you will be members of the National Council of Provinces until the
legislatures are sworn in after elections. Therefore, you still have
responsibilities and that is why you are going to have a working lunch.
That concludes the business of the day.

The Council adjourned at 13:37.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         THURSDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8F – 2007] – Act No 52 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 18 February 2009).

      2) National Road Traffic Amendment Bill [B 39B – 2008] – Act No 64 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 15 February 2009).

      3) Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 42D – 2008] – Act No 65 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 16 February 2009).

      4) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48B – 2008] – Act No 66 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 15 February 2009).

      5) National Qualifications Framework Bill [B 33D – 2008] – Act No 67
         of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 15 February 2009).

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 19 February 2009:


          a) Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill [B
             75D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             b) National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment
                Bill
             [B 67B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).

          c) Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 27F – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          d) Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B 74B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council
    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 19 February 2009:


         (a)      Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 – 2009]
             (National Assembly – sec 77).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
             the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Government Notice No R. 832 published in Government Gazette No
        31302 dated 8 August 2008: Withdrawal of the Compulsory
        Specification for Articles Marked E.P.N.S. in terms of the
        Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

     b) Government Notice No 939 published in Government Gazette No 31389
        dated 5 September 2008: Standards matters in terms of the Standards
        Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 1298 published in Government Gazette No
        31658 dated 5 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Category M1, in terms of the
        Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).
    (d)     Government Notice No R. 1299 published in Government Gazette No
        31658 dated 5 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Category N1, in terms of the
        Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    (e)     Government Notice No R. 1392 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories 03/04, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).


    (f)     Government Notice No R. 1393 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories M2/3, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).


    (g)     Government Notice No R. 1394 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories N2/3, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).


    (h)     Government Notice No R. 1395 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for Motor Vehicles of Categories 01/02, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).


    (i)     Government Notice No R. 1396 published in Government Gazette No
        31735 dated 24 December 2008: Proposed introduction of a compulsory
        specification for Single-Capped Fluorescent Lamps, in terms of the
        National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 1993 (Act No
        29 of 1993).


    (j)     Proclamation No 33 published in Government Gazette No 31391
        dated 1 September 2008: Commencement of Standards Act, 2008 (Act No
        8 of 2008).


    (k)     Proclamation No 34 published in Government Gazette No 31391
        dated 1 September 2008: Commencement of the National Regulator for
        Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

                         THURSDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


      1) Membership of Committees

         The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Committees:


         Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises
         Appointed:          Mcgluwa, Mr J J
         Discharged:         Ntembe, Ms B L


         Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs


         Appointed:          Mcgluwa, Mr J J
         Discharged:         Ntembe, Ms B L


         Select Committee on Education and Recreation


         Appointed:          Toni, Mr K B
         Discharged:         Qikani, Ms A N D


         Select Committee on Social Services


         Appointed:          Toni, Mr K B
         Discharged:         Qikani, Ms A N D

    (2)    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

          1. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
             Social Services for consideration and report:


             (a) Regulations made in terms of the Children’s Act, 2005 (Act
                  No 38 of 2005), submitted in terms of section 3(3) of the
                  Act for approval by the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

      1) Financial and Fiscal Commission submission to the 2009 Division of
         Revenue Bill.


         Referred to the Select Committee on Finance for consideration.

                            MONDAY, 6 MARCH 2009

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Western Cape
    Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B6 - 2009] (National Assembly - Section
    77), dated 5 March 2009

    The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the Western Cape
    Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B6 - 2009] (National Assembly - Section 77)
    referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
    Section 77 Bill reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

                           TUESDAY, 10 MARCH 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security


      (a)   The Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate on Domestic
           Violence for the period January-June 2008, tabled in terms of
           section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116
           of 1998).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report on the suspension of Ms T C Oliphant, an additional
           magistrate at the Wynberg, Western Cape, in terms of section
           13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


      (b)   Progress report on the Inquiry into allegations of misconduct of
           MsA Bacharam, dated 16 February 2009, in terms of section
           13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).
3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast Water for the
           year ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
           2008.

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of BushbuckridgeWater for the
           year ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
           2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee for the Appointment of members
      to the NationalYouth Development Agency Board, dated 10 March 2009:

      The Committee placed adverts in national and provincial newspapers
      calling on members of the public to submit nominations, from 20
      February until 06 March 2009, of persons to serve on the Board of the
      NationalYouth Development Agency. 173 nominations were received by the
      Committee.

      The committee considered the nominations on the 9 and 10 March 2009
      and agreed that the following persons be shortlisted to be interviewed
      on the 12 and 13 March 2009:

      Mr V Sidali
      Mr EB Letsoalo
      Mr MW Thango
      Mr G Essop
      Mr VN Mbanga
      Mr S Nair
      Ms A Coetzee
      Ms N Ntanjana
      Mr PR Mnisi
      Ms N Moleko
      Mr MR Khumalo
      Mr L Marincowitz
      Mr O Sipuko
      Ms I Motau
      Mr LI Maile
      Mr S Khan
      Mr G Mackenzie
      Ms P Kadi
      Mr BR Buys
      Mr M Tyhali
      Mr FJ Slabber
      Ms M Tshabalala
      Ms P Makeleni
      Mr A Lungisa
      Mr Y Pillay
      Mr DD Adams

                          WEDNESDAY, 13 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72D – 2008] – Act No 4 of 2009
         (assented to and signed by President on 6 March 2009).


      2) National Environmental Management: Waste Bill [B 39D – 2007] – Act
         No 59 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 6 March
         2009).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

    1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report in terms of section 13(4) (b) of the Magistrates
             Act, 1993 (Act No. 90 of 1993): Suspension of a magistrate: Ms
             T C Oliphant.


        (b)      Progress Report dated 16 February 2009 to Parliament in
             terms of Section 13(3) (f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act
             No. 90 of 1993): Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Ms A
             Bacharam.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Second report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
    Affairs on the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B1-2009] (National
    Assembly –sec 74), dated 12 March 2009:

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B1-2009]
      (National Assembly – sec 74), referred to it, and having reported  the
      Bill without amendments, further recommends that:-

      • As South Africa is a unitary state, moving from one province to the
        other should not affect any municipality negatively.
      • The Transitional Committee should be able to deal with the finer
        details, including administration and financial implications as has
        happened in the North-West.
      • Protocols should have clear, set time-frames for implementation and
        achievement of certain goals/events.
      • The Department should submit a report in writing on how they are
        going to handle this transitional period.
      • The Department should brief the incoming Committee members on the
        progress of the Transitional Committee within six months.
      • The NCOP needs to set up a strong oversight mechanism that is
        effective and on-going. It should not merely be called in when
        there is a problem but must receive regular reports on protocols
        and other arrangements, and to avoid unnecessary red tape and
        bureaucracy and should provide guidance to the Transitional
        Committee.
      • We call upon those affected communities to avoid destroying their
        own properties regardless of how strong they feel about a
        particular decision.
      • The Department should develop a policy to deal with border disputes
        in future.
      • Communities that are negatively affected by being placed under one
        province or the other against their wish and will, are free to
        demonstrate but are encouraged to do so responsibly.


      Report to be considered.

 2. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs on
    the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B1-2009] (National Assembly -
    sec 74), dated 12 March 2009:


      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B1-2009]
      (National Assembly - sec 74) referred to it, reports that it has
      agreed to the Bill.

 3. Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration on
    the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
    Amendment Bill [B3B-2009] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 10 March
    2009:

      The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration, having
      considered the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
      Matters Amendment Bill [B 3B – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75))
      referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

 4. First Report of the Select Committee  on  Finance  on  the  Division  of
    Revenue Bill [B4 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 76),  dated  12  March
    2009

      The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of  the
      Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2009] (National Assembly  –  sec  76),
      referred to it, and classified by the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a
      Section 76 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

 5. Second Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Public  Hearings
    on the Division of Revenue Bill from 24 February to 3 March 2009,  dated
    12 March 2009

      Introduction


      The report deals with the hearings convened by the Select Committee on
      Finance on the Division of Revenue Bill [B4-2009], from 24 February to
      3 March 2009.


      The following stakeholders were invited to make submissions  on  their
      respective allocations with the specific emphasis on  the  conditional
      grants:
       • Department of Agriculture
       • Department of Education
       • Department of Health
       • Department of Minerals and Energy
       • Department of Provincial and Local Government
       • Department of Sport and Recreation
       • Department of Transport
       • Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
       • Department of Arts and Culture
       • Department of Public Works
       • National Treasury
       • South African Local Government Association (SALGA)
       • Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC)

To  foster  transparency  and  ensure  smooth  intergovernmental  relations,
section 214(1) of the Constitution requires that every year  a  Division  of
Revenue Act (DORA) determines the equitable division  of  nationally  raised
revenue among the three spheres of government. The Intergovernmental  Fiscal
Relations Act (1997) prescribes the process for  determining  the  equitable
sharing and allocation of revenue raised nationally. Sections 9 and  10  (4)
of the Act set  out  the  consultation  process  to  be  followed  with  the
Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC), including the process of  considering
recommendations made with regard to the  equitable  division  of  nationally
raised revenue.

The 2009/10 budget was  tabled  amidst  challenges  of  a  global  financial
crisis  and  the  deteriorating  international  environment,  noted  by  the
National Treasury  to  be  significantly  affecting  South  Africa’s  growth
prospects. In  its  reports  tabled  in  Parliament  the  National  Treasury
projected that the economic growth would slow down  to  1.2%  of  the  Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) in 2009.

The 2009 budget was framed by 5 objectives that  guide  government’s  policy
response over the medium term, namely to:
     a) protect the poor;
     b) build capacity for long term growth;
     c) sustain employment growth;
     d) maintain a sustainable debt level; and
     e) address sectoral barriers to growth and investment.


The total national budget for 2009/10 amounts to R738.5 billion, from  which
National Government is allocated R483.6 billion, provinces R231 billion  and
local government R23.8 billion over  each  of  the  medium-term  expenditure
framework (MTEF) period. These figures are inclusive  of  the  debt  service
costs and  the  contingency  reserve.  The  allocations  take  into  account
government’s  spending  priorities,   the   revenue-raising   capacity   and
functional  responsibilities  of  each  sphere,  and  inputs  from   various
intergovernmental forums and the recommendations of the FFC.

The explanatory memorandum of the Division of Revenue outlines  Government’s
priorities for the 2009 MTEF as follows:
     a) Enhancing the quality of education;
     b) Improving the provision of health care, particularly for  the  poor
        and to reduce infant, child and maternal mortality rates;
     c) Reducing the levels of crime and enhancing citizen safety;
     d) Expanding the built environment to  improve  public  transportation
        and meet universal access targets in  housing,  water,  electricity
        and sanitation; and
     e) Decreasing rural poverty by taking steps to raise rural incomes and
        improving livelihoods by extending access to land and  support  for
        emerging farmers.

CHANGES TO THE 2008 DORA

Technical changes have been effected on the Bill with a  view  to  improving
readability of the Act and different sections have been aligned  to  further
facilitate the implementation of the provisions of  the  Act.  Some  of  the
technical changes  effected  to  the  Bill  are  discussed  briefly  in  the
paragraphs below.

Grants introduced in the 2008/09 financial year:

    • The Agriculture’s Ilima / Letsema Projects  Grant  intended  to  boost
      food production by assisting previously  disadvantaged  South  African
      farming communities to achieve increase in agricultural production.  A
      total of R650 million over the MTEF period is allocated for this grant
      of which R50 million is for the 2009/10  financial  year.  A  transfer
      from the National Treasury in respect of this grant was only  done  to
      Northern Cape (R45 million) with the province  only  spending  R16,  8
      million of that total transfer as at 31 December 2008.


    • The Overload control Grant aimed at preserving road infrastructure  by
      ensuring that overloading practices are significantly reduced. With  a
      three year life span,  the  grant  is  allocated  R10.069  million  in
      2009/10 and R11.038 million in 2010/11. The allocation for 2009/10  is
      divided between Gauteng (R5.034 million) and Limpopo (R5.035 million),
      while the 2010/11 allocation will  go  to  the  Eastern  Cape  (R5.519
      million) and Mpumalanga (R5.519 million). While the grant has been  in
      existence since 2008/09, no  transfers  were  made  from  national  to
      province in respect of this grant.

    • The Sani Pass Grant aimed at developing road  infrastructure  projects
      to promote regional integration, development and connectivity  between
      neighbouring states. This grant ends in the 2009/10 financial year. An
      amount of R34.3 million is allocated for  2009/10.   No  spending  has
      occurred on this grant.


    • The Agriculture Disaster  Management  Grant  which  is  allocated  R60
      million in the 2009/10  financial  year  has,  as  its  objective,  to
      relieve farmers from the effects of drought / veldfires, cold  spells,
      hailstorms and flood in identified areas. This grant ends on 31  March
      2010. While there were no amounts transferred  from  national  to  the
      provinces in respect of this grant  for  the  financial  year  2008/9,
      Mpumalanga spent R8.1 million, Limpopo R60.1 million, North West  R6.4
      million, Free  State  R24.6  million  and  Western  Cape  spent  R17.3
      million.

Five new grants introduced in the 2009/10 budget:

    • A new type of  conditional  grant,  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme
      Incentive. This provincial grant has been allocated R1.4 billion  over
      the MTEF period. Payments in respect of this grant will be subject  to
      meeting threshold and performance targets.
    • The Public Transport Operations Grant is allocated R11.5 billion  over
      the MTEF period for subsidisation of commuter bus services.
    • The  Technical  Secondary  Schools  Recapitalisation  Grant  has  been
      allocated R280 million  for  equipment  and  facilities  at  technical
      schools.
    • The Health Disaster Response (Cholera) Grant has  been  allocated  R50
      million.
    • The Housing Disaster Relief Grant is allocated R150 million to respond
      to natural disasters.

Grants to be effected in the 2010/11 financial year:

    •  The  Technical  Secondary  Schools  Recapitalisation  Grant  will  be
      available to provinces from  2010/11.  This  grant  amounting  to  R80
      million in 2010/11 and  R200  million  in  2011/12  will  provide  for
      equipment and facilities in technical high schools.


Gautrain Rapid Rail Link Project

    • An amount of R4.2 billion has been allocated to the  Gauteng  Province
      for the implementation of the Gauteng Rapid Rail Link Project, subject
      to a loan agreement being entered into between the Minister of Finance
      and the Premier of Gauteng as well  as  to  the  province’s  continued
      compliance with the loan agreement once entered into.


The differentiation approach

Large scale migration is a common phenomenon in South Africa  where  over  a
third of the population, according to the National  Treasury’s  2009  Budget
Review,  currently  resides  in  the  nine  largest  urban  areas,  the  six
metropolitan municipalities (Ethekwini, Nelson Mandela  Bay,  Tshwane,  City
of Johannesburg, City of Cape Town and  Ekurhuleni)  as  well  as  Mangaung,
Msunduzi  and  Buffalo  City  municipalities.  This  trend  is  expected  to
increase in the years  ahead.  The  National  Treasury  reports  that  these
municipalities face a  dual  challenge  of  keeping  pace  with  demand  for
infrastructure expansion and  maintenance  while  serving  the  needs  of  a
growing population.

The 2009/10 Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) has been  amended  to  take
into  account  the  differences  between  large  urban  and  smaller   rural
municipalities. The grants will target the following areas respectively  for
the cities and for rural municipalities:

Cities-     Integrated planning;
            Effective leveraging of resources to eradicate backlogs;
           Improving performance in the  development  of  integrated  human
           settlements; and
           Effective  asset  management  in  line  with  Municipal  Finance
           Management Act (MFMA) requirements


           This grant will be phased in starting with the six  metropolitan
           municipalities in 2009/10 and bringing the 21 large cities  over
           the next two years.

Rural-           Addressing infrastructure needs for basic services
            Rural development

Other changes to the Bill include: the conversion of schedule  7  grants  to
schedule 6 grants during the course of the year to  prevent  under-spending;
duties relating to category C municipalities to ensure proper flow of  funds
between category C and B municipalities for providing  basic  services;  and
mechanisms added to  deal  with  the  implementation  of  re-demarcation  of
provincial and municipal boundaries which come into  effect  during  2009/10
e.g. Merafong.   From the 2009 budget the general fuel levy will  be  shared
between national  government  and  metropolitan  municipalities.  This  will
serve as an appropriate replacement for the Regional Service  Council  (RSC)
levy.

In order to facilitate a smooth transition  from  the  RSC  levy  system  to
sharing of the general fuel levy system, and to prevent any drastic  changes
to municipal revenues, implementation will be phased in  over  a  three-year
period. Full implementation will be achieved by 2012/13.

FFC RECOMMENDATIONS MADE IN JUNE 2008 AND THE RESPONSE BY GOVERNMENT

FFC Recommendations

In line with section 214(2) of the Constitution  and  the  Intergovernmental
Fiscal Relations Act (1997), the  FFC  tabled  its  recommendations  on  the
2009/10 Division of Revenue to Parliament in June 2008. The  recommendations
were divided into three parts:
Part  A:      dealt  with  national-provincial  fiscal   relations   matters
           relating to  financing  of  basic  education  and  health  care,
           transport and bottlenecks hampering housing delivery;
Part B:     dealt with local government fiscal relations matters  pertaining
           to augmenting local  government  revenue,  electricity  pricing,
           generation  and  distribution  and  World  Cup  2010   transport
           infrastructure; and
Part C:     dealt with intergovernmental data issues.

The Division of Revenue Bill [B4-2009]  (section  76(1))  outlines  the  FFC
recommendations as well as the responses by government as indicated below:

PART A: NATIONAL-PROVINCIAL FISCAL RELATIONS

The financing of basic education
Proposal on the re-ranking of schools

The FFC recommended that government should review the method used to  inform
the national quintile ranking of schools. Rather  than  classifying  schools
according to the ward or  neighbourhood  in  which  they  are  located,  the
method should take into account  the  socio-economic  circumstances  of  the
learners (with particular reference to inequality and poverty).

Government agrees with the FFC recommendation. The Department  of  Education
intends to, in addition to the two poorest quintiles (1  and  2),  phase  in
the no-fee schools policy to quintile 3, which will extend coverage  to  60%
of schools.  The DoE is also working on a policy to  provide  assistance  to
schools up to quintile 5 that accommodate very poor learners.

Proposal on learner transport

The FFC recommended that national norms and standards for the  provision  of
learners transport should  be  established.  It  added  that  this  will  be
possible once the location of this  function  has  been  clearly  demarcated
between the  national  departments  of  Education  and  Transport.  The  FFC
advised that this responsibility be clarified as a  matter  of  urgency.  In
the interim, all provinces  were  to  implement  statutory  provisions  that
ensured that learners were afforded equal access to education,  irrespective
of their province of residence and irrespective of whether they  resided  in
rural or urban areas.

Government   agrees   with   the   FFC   recommendation.   The    functional
responsibilities  with  respect  to  learner  transport  are  those  of  the
Department of Education, which is responsible for the provision  of  scholar
transport, while the Department of Transport is responsible  for  regulatory
requirements with respect to all public  transport.  Government  also  notes
that once the function has been clarified, scholar transport needs  will  be
included in the integrated transport plans at  local  government  level  and
aligned with the Public Transport Strategy.

The financing of health care

Proposal on fiscal performance of community health clinics sub-programme

The FFC recommended that, just as the 2008  DORA  requires  that  indicative
allocations to schools and hospitals and  hospitals  be  gazetted  with  the
tabling of provincial budgets, this practice  be  extended  to  clinics  and
other public health care facilities, as and when they fall under  provincial
control.

Government  agrees  with  the  FFC  recommendation.   Given   the   capacity
constraints in certain provinces, attention is currently given  to  ensuring
compliance  with  existing   requirements   with   respect   to   indicative
allocations for schools and hospitals.

Proposals on infrastructure for primary health care and health outcomes

The FFC recommended  that  greater  emphasis  be  placed  on  improving  the
quality of service provided  at  clinics  and  funding  the  maintenance  of
existing primary health care facilities. It  also  pointed  out  that  there
remained a need for the construction of clinics  in  poorly  serviced  rural
and  urban  informal  settlements.  The  FFC  recommends  that  the   health
component of the infrastructure grant to provinces (IGP) should  be  aligned
to the roll-out of infrastructure through  municipal  infrastructure  grants
(MIG).

Government agrees that emphasis should be placed on  improving  the  quality
of  health  services  provided  at  clinics.  In  this  regard,   government
introduced in  the  2008  Budget  a  special  allocation  for  complementary
infrastructure (water, sanitation  and  electricity)  that  targets  primary
health care facilities. In  addition  roads  expenditure  in  provinces  has
increased sharply over the past few years  and  this  trajectory  is  to  be
maintained over the MTEF.

Government also recognises that it is  exceedingly  important  that  outputs
(staffing, equipment, drugs and medicines)  be  managed  in  a  manner  that
ensures optimal outcomes.

Government agrees  that  appropriate  coordination  between  provincial  and
municipal  infrastructure  grants  will  result  in  optimal  outcomes  from
infrastructure investments. To address any  misalignment  where  it  exists,
government introduced electricity, water and  sanitation  grants  to  ensure
that   municipal   infrastructure   supports   health   and   the    schools
infrastructure programme.

Transport

The FFC comments on the classification and earmarking of roads

The FFC recommended that the process of classifying  roads  among  national,
provincial and local spheres of government should  be  accelerated  in  line
with the classification framework already established.  It  added  that  the
premiers of provinces with roads earmarked for incorporation  into  national
road system should make the necessary applications without further delays.
Government supports the recommendation that the road classification  process
be accelerated as proposed by the FFC  adding  that  delays  could  lead  to
unintended consequences, such as underinvestment in the function or lack  of
proper maintenance.


PART B: LOCAL FISCAL RELATIONS

Augmenting local government revenue

FFC comments on replacements for the Regional Service Council (RSC) levies

The FFC recommended that, in view of the abolition of the  RSC  levy,  which
formed a significant source of municipal revenue,  the  replacement  revenue
source for municipalities should be a tax that enhances the fiscal  autonomy
and discretion of  local  governments;  strengthens  the  accountability  of
local government regarding the administration and use of  the  proposed  tax
base; yields an adequate and buoyant revenue stream  for  municipalities  in
the face of cyclical instability; and maintains macroeconomic balance.

Government  agrees  with  the  FFC  recommendation;  however,  the   revenue
capacities of individual municipalities need to be  taken  into  account.  A
replacement revenue instrument that is purely  in  the  form  of  a  tax  is
unlikely to achieve the desired goal of enhancing  local  government  fiscal
autonomy for poorly resourced and rural municipalities. Government  suggests
that this  will  at  best  reproduce  the  existing  inequalities  in  local
government own-revenue generation.

As part of a package of reforms, the VAT zero-rating of  municipal  property
rates and other VAT reforms were introduced in July  2006.  Further  reforms
under consideration include the sharing of  the  general  fuel  levy  and/or
transfer duty in the medium term, a local business tax in  the  longer  term
as well as grants as a  guaranteed  revenue  source  for  municipalities  or
categories of municipalities.

Electricity pricing, generation and distribution
FFC comments on the restructuring of the electricity distribution industry

The FFC recommended that government should work  with  the  National  Energy
Regulator of South Africa to put together a financing framework  that  dealt
effectively with electricity pricing. It added that that  government  should
address the potential loss of a crucial revenue source for local  government
as a result of the establishment of the  Regional  Electricity  Distributors
(REDs). The commission also pointed out the need to  review  legislation  as
it concerned the transfer of assets, the national pricing framework and  the
establishment of the REDs.

Government acknowledges that the slow  pace  of  the  restructuring  of  the
electricity distribution industry is a concern and is  currently  addressing
the outstanding policy and  legislation  issues,  including  asset  transfer
framework for transferring Eskom’s and municipalities’ assets to  REDs.  The
asset transfer framework prescribed in the Municipal Finance Management  Act
(2003) deals with municipal asset transfers generally.   Possible  financial
and other risks for Eskom and  municipalities  will  also  be  addressed  by
government.

World Cup 2010 transport infrastructure

Recommendations of the financing of public transport

The FFC recommended that spending on  public  transport  infrastructure  for
2010 should be linked to broader  city  development  plans.  The  commission
proposes a better resourced  public  transport  infrastructure  and  systems
grant that must continue after the 2010 FIFA  World  Cup.   Projects  funded
under this  arrangement  would  be  selected  based  on  full  appraisal  of
economic, environmental and social cost/benefit; and funding  mechanisms  to
cover maintenance costs of constructed 2010 facilities should be  developed.


Government supports the recommendation  that  projects  funded  through  the
public transport infrastructure and systems grant should be  selected  based
on full appraisal of economic, environmental and  social  cost/benefit.  The
existing public transport infrastructure and  systems  grant  will  continue
beyond 2010.  The  grant  is  aligned  to  the  Public  Transport  Strategy.
Projects funded under this grant are part of the integrated transport  plans
contained in Integrated Development Plans (IDPs) of municipalities.

Government is of the view that the costs  relating  to  the  maintenance  of
2010 FIFA World Cup facilities should be provided by municipalities.

PART C: INTERGOVERNMENTAL DATA ISSUES

Performance monitoring framework

Proposal on Education

With respect to measuring the costs of basic education, the FFC  recommended
that to assess the pro-poor impact of school funding norms,  the  Department
of Education should make  publicly  available  and  accessible  the  funding
norms of no-fee schools in line with provisions  of  the  2008  Division  of
Revenue  Act  requiring  indicative  allocations   by   school.   Provincial
education departments should be enabled to report on  budgets  and  spending
on learner transport in line with the new economic reporting format.
Government agrees with the FFC recommendation  to  make  publicly  available
the funding norms for  no-fee  schools.  The  list  of  no-fee  schools  per
province, per allocation and per  location  is  published  annually  and  is
available on the department’s website.

COMMENTS OF THE NATIONAL DEPARTMENTS AND ENTITIES

During public hearings held by the Select Committee on Finance, departments
and entities made the following comments on the Bill:

FINANCIAL AND FISCAL COMMISSION (FFC)
Among strategic issues raised by the Commission were the following:
    • The DORA  was  becoming  complex  and  voluminous.  To  this  end  the
      commission called for a comprehensive review of the Bill;
    • There were too many conditional grants; and
    • The commission proposed  that  all  new  Bills  should  go  through  a
      rigorous analysis before introduction.

The Commission also observed that there was a need to evaluate the  Expanded
Public Works Programme, from the time of inception to establish  the  number
and quality of jobs created through the programme to date. To this  end  the
Commission, while welcoming  the  attempts  to  address  employment  through
government programmes, raised a flag of caution.

There were also concerns raised by the Commission in respect of the Bill  as
follows:

    •  Government’s  responses  did  not  provide   details   on   how   the
      recommendations agreed upon would be implemented;
    • The Commission recommended that the tax that  would  replace  the  RSC
      levy should be a good local tax. In its view, the fuel levy fell short
      of this requirement in that municipalities will   have  no  discretion
      over the base and rate of the tax

SOUTH AFRICAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION (SALGA)


SALGA in general welcomed  the  Bill  as  tabled  and  presented  a  set  of
comments in relation to both general and conditional grants.

The differentiated approach was, according to SALGA, needed in dealing  with
of  the  challenges  of  different  categories  of   municipalities   within
different geographic contexts.

Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP)

SALGA raised the following concerns  about  the  nature  of  the  EPWP  wage
incentives, the eligibility conditions and employment creation targets:
    • The proposed phasing in of EPWP targets and wage incentives included a
      minimum  threshold  target  (based  on  2008/09  achievements)   which
      municipalities needed to first meet, before they could be eligible  to
      receive the incentive.
    • These targets  were  retrospectively  applied  to  all  districts  and
      municipalities resulting in many being  disqualified  for  eligibility
      for the incentive.

SALGA therefore made the following proposal:
    • That all municipalities who have reported on EPWP be deemed  eligible,
      in order to benefit in the wage incentive; and
    • That the incremental performance from a  baseline  determined  by  the
      incentive formula for 2009/10 be encouraged.

Replacement levy for the RSC Levy

SALGA made the following comment in this regard:
    • The fuel levy allocation was guaranteed with inflation adjustment  for
      the next three years. From 2012/13  the  allocation  would  be  solely
      based on fuel sales per municipality. In the case of a decline in fuel
      sales, municipalities will receive less as there are no guarantees.
    • The reliance on fuel levy by metros could have unintended consequences
      (municipalities could promote use of private motor vehicles  to  boost
      fuel sales as opposed to promoting public transport and mechanisms  to
      reduce road traffic).
    • SALGA noted that it was investigating  a  Local  Business  Tax  as  an
      alternative/appropriate replacement for the RSC levy.
    • It also requested that the challenge of unfunded  mandates  be  looked
      into adding that functions that were not  local  government  functions
      (in terms of the Constitution) were assigned to  local  government  by
      way of sectoral legislation, without related adjustments to the fiscal
      framework – e.g.  Disaster  Management  (Disaster  Management  Act)  –
      Schedule 4 (A) of the Constitution.

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

In addition to  the  Comprehensive  Agricultural  Support  Programme  (CASP)
Grant and the Land Care Programme Grant, the  Department  also  manages  the
Agriculture Disaster Management Grant with a R60 million allocation for  the
2009/10 financial year and the Ilima/Letsema Projects  Grant  receiving  R50
million in 2009/10.

The Committee raised the following  areas  of  concern  in  respect  of  the
report by the Department of Agriculture:
    • There a was need for the programmes of  the  department  to  harmonise
      with those of the Department of Land Affairs;
    • It was the view of the Committee that there were projects  in  Eastern
      Cape, Free State, North West and many other  provinces  that  were  in
      dire need of the department’s assistance; and
    • CASP and the Land Care Grant were grossly underperforming.

The Committee was of the view that some departments did not grasp the  whole
purpose of the MTEF and as such there were  always  cases  where  the  plans
were not ready resulting in  under-spending.  Furthermore,  in  the  Eastern
Cape some agricultural projects were initiated and funded by the  Department
of Social Development.

The Committee emphasised the need to ensure that people  who  received  land
as part of the land redistribution and restitution programmes were  assisted
to become commercial farmers.

The Ilima/Letsema Project was reported to  be  underway  targeting  140  000
households to boost food production. The Committee requested the  Department
to furnish it with a list indicating where  the  140  000  people  were  for
purposes of conducting oversight.

Given that the provincial spending on the CASP was at 62%  and  66%  on  the
Land Care Grant at the end of January, the Committee was concerned that  the
department would under-spend. The Department noted that  there  was  gradual
improvement as it had strengthened its monitoring of the grant. A  challenge
reported by the Department was that procurement plans were not finalised  on
time by the provinces leading to under-spending.

The National Treasury committed  to  providing  information  indicating  the
extent to which the department was compliant  with  the  provisions  of  the
DORA in respect of submission of plans as outlined in  the  framework  under
processes for approval of business plan.
Agriculture spending in provinces was  about  7%  of  the  total  provincial
spending. The National Treasury pleaded with the  Committee  not  to  reduce
the allocations to the department as this would affect the areas  that  were
in dire need of the department’s support. The Committee noted that it  would
compile a report for the  incoming  Committee  on  the  performance  of  the
Department of Agriculture.

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

The Minister of Education approved implementation of revised  minimum  norms
with effect from 1 April 2009 for the 2009/10 financial year as follows:

    • Continued feeding of all learners in Quintiles  1,  2  and  3  primary
      schools
    • Programme to be implemented in Quintile 1 secondary schools;
    • Feeding must take place on every school day; and

Approved implementation over the two outer years of  the  2009  MTEF  is  as
follows:
    • Further implementation in secondary schools:
            Quintile 2 (2010/11); and
            Quintile 3 (2011/12)
    • Average meal cost to increase as follows:
            Primary:   2010/11 (R2, 10); 2011/12 (R2,30)
             Secondary:        Increased  to  1,75  times  that  of  primary
learner:                          2010/11 (R3,80); 2011/12 (R4,10)
Funds have also been allocated to provinces to  assist  with  implementation
cost for feeding in secondary schools

NEW GRANT - Technical Secondary Schools Recapitalisation Grant
The preliminary allocations for the grant are as follows:
      2009/10:   R4,602 million
      2010/11:   R80 million
      2011/12:   R200 million
The amount of R4,602 million allocated in 2009/10 will  be  used  to  assist
the Department in the preparation phase to implement the grant. One  hundred
(100) schools are targeted over the MTEF period.

Recommendations of the Committee in respect of the Department of Education

The Committee recommends that the Department looks into the following:
 • Follow up on the R2.7 billion  allocated  to  provincial  departments  of
   education in the 2008/9 financial year;
 • To ascertain that the money is allocated to the relevant  recipient  FETs
   by the provincial departments;
 • Follow up on the implementation of  the  school  nutrition  programme  at
   secondary schools and to establish norms and standard in respect  of  the
   feeding mechanisms to ensure uniformity across the provinces;
 • To investigate the reasons for poor spending across the provinces
The National Treasury was requested to assist in these matters.

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

The Department manages six conditional grants which  make  up  approximately
95% of its total budget. These grants are:
    • HIV and AIDS
    • Forensic Pathology Services [Schedule 5]
    • Hospital Revitalization
    • National Tertiary Services
    • Health Professions Training and  Schedule 4 Development
    • Health Disaster Response (Cholera) - New grant

The  department  reported  the  following  variances  in  terms  of  amounts
requested from the National Treasury and the amounts received in respect  of
the Comprehensive HIV and AIDS Plan:

2008/09 requested:     R938 million and received R300 million
2009/10 requested:     R1.4 billion and received R200 million
2010/11 requested: R2.1 billion and received R325 million
2011/12 requested: R1.7 billion and received R407 million

The Committee  raised  a  concern  about  the  underfunding  of  the  health
department in respect of HIV and AIDS and requested  the  National  Treasury
to note this concern since health was a national priority.

Furthermore it was pointed out that there needed to be clarity on  what  the
implications were for underfunding in service  delivery  and  whether  there
were any guarantees for compensation  in  cases  where  the  department  was
underfunded.

In respect of health professionals  working  abroad,  the  department  noted
that its challenge was not in preventing the  health  workers  from  working
outside the country, but whether the  country  was  training  enough  health
professionals for itself and for exporting to other countries.

National Tertiary Services Grant

Final allocations  from  the  funding  requests  submitted  for  this  grant
resulted in the following funding gaps for the  respective  financial  years
listed below:
    • 2008/09 : R2.2 billion
    • 2009/10 : R2.6 billion
    • 2010/11 : R3.6 billion


Implications for under funding:

-     The provinces had to use their provincial equitable share to fund  the
   gaps;
 - Under developed provinces did not achieve the goal of equity and capacity
   building; and
-     The aim of  relieving  pressure  on  the  costs  related  to  tertiary
   services from bigger provinces was not achieved.

DEPARTMENT OF PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (DPLG)

While the department noted that some of its inputs had been incorporated  in
the Bill, it noted the inputs that were not included:

    • Infrastructure grant for cities – the DPLG interpreted the new  clause
      (section 9(1) and (2)) in the Bill  to  mean  that  transfers  to  the
      provinces go through the DPLG vote but the  monitoring  and  reporting
      only to the National Treasury. This was contrary  to  the  mandate  of
      Vote 29 and duties of the national transferring officer (in this  case
      DPLG);
    • The need to increase funds for municipal systems improvements;
    •  Enabling  mechanisms  for  the  DPLG  to  report  to  Parliament   on
      performance of municipalities with regard to  conditional  grants.  It
      was reported that the current framework did not  enable  the  DPLG  to
      reallocate funds to municipalities which had the  capacity  to  spend;
      and
    • Addressing MIG performance audit findings, as indicated below:
      The crafting of DoRA  in  relation  to  municipal  infrastructure  was
      restricting the DPLG’s role in the management of the grant.


Issues raised by the Auditor-General

    •  The  DPLG  had  limited  powers  to  address   under-performance   by
      municipalities;
    • Funds from conditional grants should be deposited into a separate bank
      account by each municipality to ensure proper monitoring; and
    • Based on the above proposal, VAT reimbursements from SARS and interest
      received with respect to MIG funds should  be  ploughed  back  to  MIG
      projects by each municipality.

Recommendations of the Committee in respect of the DPLG

The Committee recommended that the DPLG and the National  Treasury  to  look
into:
    • the concerns raised by the DPLG and to ensure that greater effort  was
      put  into  ensuring  the  well-being   of   poor   or   low   capacity
      municipalities;
    • the funding for Municipal Systems Improvement Grant  (MSIG)  that  was
      not growing;
    • section 9(2) of the Bill as it relates to the  function  of  the  DPLG
      (transferring national officer) with the view  to  ensuring  that  the
      department was given latitude to perform its role; and
    • A possible contradiction between section 9(1) and 15(6) as reported by
      the DPLG.

The two departments met and reported back to the Committee that a  paragraph
outlining reporting procedures to both the DPLG and  the  National  Treasury
would be inserted in the framework of the Bill.  This  would  eliminate  any
uncertainties as to which  department  the  provinces  would  or  would  not
report to.

DEPARTMENT OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (DWAF)

In its submission the department raised the following areas  of  concern  in
respect of the Bill:

    • There was limited direct control by sector departments  on  how  funds
      were spent and shortcomings  in  reporting  at  municipal  level  made
      control impossible;
    • Essential planning was not mandated in the  Bill  and  this  prevented
      effective performance evaluation;
    • The allocations  were  not  being  adjusted  in  accordance  with  the
      delivery performance of the Municipalities;
    • The need for the differentiated approach in Section  23  where  cities
      were to  play  a  more  prominent  role  in  service  delivery  to  be
      investigated;
    • More funding would be needed than was provided in order  to  eradicate
      backlogs,  especially  in  Regional  Bulk   Infrastructure   and   for
      eradicating rural backlogs; and
    • Ring-fencing of water services budgets, especially in rural areas, was
      excluded from the Bill.

The department made the following recommendations:

    • Reporting responsibilities of municipalities needed to be improved  to
      effectively measure performance;
    • The possible role of DWAF and other national departments in supporting
      planning and implementation of water services  in  rural  areas  where
      municipalities lacked capacity needed to be investigated;
    • A differentiated approach for smaller rural municipalities  needed  to
      be initiated;
    • Section 11, 2(c) should require  the  submission  of  monthly  reports
      within 20 days after the end of each month;
    • Section 18 (Integrated housing) should  include  the  same  monitoring
      conditions as Sections 11 and 16;
    • Section 24 (b1) must include control measures  to  ensure  that  grant
      conditions were met and that proper planning took place.
    • The MIG framework needed to be adjusted to  align  to  the  objectives
      attained in the DORA;
    • The conditions and framework of the Bill needed to be revised to  take
      into account requirements for an  integrated  approach  towards  basic
      services;
    • The initiation of the differentiated approach and the supporting  City
      Budget Forum; and
    • Delivery through Water Services Authorities (WSA)  to  continue  where
      the capacity has been demonstrated.


The DWAF noted that it was best placed  to  deliver  in  low-capacity  rural
areas and the differentiated approach was silent on this. It added that  the
DOR Bill strengthened the role of cities in  delivering  services  in  their
areas but was silent on areas/municipalities where there was no capacity  to
deliver.

DWAF believed it was best placed to support  delivery  in  rural  areas  and
could initiate processes to do so to ensure that funding  was  placed  where
there was capacity to deliver as demonstrated through bucket eradication.

DEPARTMENT OF MINERALS AND ENERGY

The department’s electrification allocations for the 2009/10 financial  year
were highest in the Eastern Cape at R234.3 million, Limpopo  R139.7  million
and R123.3 million in KwaZulu-Natal. These were  the  three  provinces  with
the highest levels of electrification backlogs.

The Free State, Gauteng, Western Cape  and  Northern  Cape  had  no  schools
electrification backlogs. R67 million was allocated to the Eastern  Cape  to
address backlogs in the electrification of schools  and  clinics  while  R83
million was allocated to KwaZulu-Natal for the same purpose.

A concern raised by the Committee in respect of the Eastern Cape  allocation
was that the province was  only  targeting  50  schools  for  infrastructure
development.

The department reported that it did not electrify mud schools.

Energy Efficiency Demand Side Management Grant (EEDSM)

The Energy Efficiency Demand Side Management Grant (EEDSM) received a  total
of R675 million over the MTEF period with R175 million of that being in  the
2009/10 budget. The objective  of  the  grant  is  to  implement  the  EEDSM
programme  by  providing  capital  subsidies  to  licensed  distributors  to
address EEDSM in residential dwellings, community and  commercial  buildings
in order to mitigate the risk of load shedding. The grant is also  aimed  at
assisting municipalities with the development  of  capacity  to  deliver  on
EEDSM smart metering projects.

DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS

Two conditional grants are managed by the Department of  Public  Works:  the
new Expanded Public Works Programme Incentive Grant for  provinces  and  the
Devolution of Property Rate Funds Grant which was introduced in the  2008/09
financial year.

Expanded Public Works Programme Incentive Grant
The objective of the Bill is to increase the number of full-time  equivalent
(FTE) employment through labour  intensive  employment  by  provinces.  This
grant will continue until 2014. Its allocations over  the  MTEF  are  R151.4
million in 2009/10, R400 million in 2010/11 and R800 million in 2011/12.

The department explained that its target is to create  2  million  FTE  jobs
for poor and unemployed people in  South  Africa  so  as  to  contribute  to
halving  unemployment  by  2014.  The  Committee  was  informed   that   the
department was targeting municipalities that were  receiving  the  municipal
infrastructure grant (MIG).

The framework of the Bill outlines conditions that must be met prior to  the
incentive being paid out. Allocations to the provinces will be based on  the
targeted number of FTE’s for each province. The incentive will be  paid  out
based on performance  in  the  previous  financial  year.   Furthermore  the
incentive amount from under-performing provinces  will  be  re-allocated  to
performing provinces.

An example of some of the municipalities targeted by the department for  the
grant was in the Eastern Cape:

 • Nelson Mandela Metropolitan Municipality
 • Amathole District Municipality
 • Tsolwana
 • Intsika Yethu
 • Emalahleni
 • Sakhisizwe
 • Chris Hani District Municipality
 • Ukhahlamba District Municipality
 • Alfred Nzo District

It was the view of the Committee that some of these municipalities  did  not
need the incentive and that focus should  be  channelled  towards  assisting
the low-capacity municipalities which were mostly rural.
The Committee tasked the National  Treasury,  DPLG  and  the  Department  of
Public Works to revisit  the  framework  and  look  at  how  the  129  rural
municipalities appearing in the AG’s report as low  capacity  municipalities
can be incentivised  through  this  programme.  They  were  tasked  to  also
revisit the targeted figure of only 45 municipalities.
Devolution of Property Rate Funds Grant

This grant is aimed at enabling provincial accounting officers to  be  fully
accountable for their expenditure and payment of provincial property  rates.
The process was reported to  be  fully  implemented  with  transfers  taking
place according to set timeframes.

Some of the challenges expressed by the department in respect of this  grant
were:
 • Challenges relating to obtaining funding from the  National  Treasury  to
   settle arrears in the Western Cape,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Mpumalanga,  Eastern
   Cape and Limpopo;
 • Challenges with the reconciliation and validation of the claimed arrears;
   and
 • The department’s lack of capacity to conduct the validations.

The following amounts were allocated to the grant over the MTEF:
R996.5 million in 2009/10
R1 096.2 million in 2010/11
R1 162 million in 2011/12

DEPARTMENT OF ARTS AND CULTURE

Libraries  and  the  transformation  thereof   were   critical   among   the
responsibilities of the department and ensuring  availability  of  materials
in indigenous languages formed a part of that  transformation  process.  The
department  was  also  involved  in  efforts  of  ensuring  that  indigenous
languages were fused into the computer language in the country.

Priorities of the department for the 2009/10 financial year included:
 • Increasing books and reading material (especially for younger readers)
 • Upgrading and construction of library buildings
 • Appointment of more staff as well as extensions of contracts
 • ICT – New integrated library management system

Further priorities were:
 • The construction of a model library in Mdantsane, Eastern Cape;
 •  Facilitation  of  the  planning  and  building  of  two   libraries   in
   Khayelitsha, Cape Town;
 • Cooperation with correctional services regarding youth at risk;
 • Publishing in indigenous languages; and
 • Cooperation with Arts, Social Development  regarding  the  production  of
   tactile books.

In respect of conditional grants,  the  department  reported  that  for  the
2008/9 financial year, four provinces  had  applied  for  roll-overs.  These
were the Free State (R199 000), Limpopo (R5 478 000), Mpumalanga (R286  000)
and Northern Cape (R683 000). The Free State and Mpumalanga had  spent  less
than 50% of their allocations by the end of  the  third  quarter  while  the
department’s overall expenditure was at 68% by the end of the third term.
The National Treasury noted that the figures presented  were  based  on  the
funds transferred and not on the overall  allocation.  Taking  into  account
the allocation would bring the spending down from 68% to about 58%.

Challenges reported by the department were:
 • high staff turnover;
 • delays in concluding Service Level Agreements with municipalities;
 • supply chain issues in relation to procurement and acquisition of  books;
   and
 • Infrastructure related problems.

The Committee noted that,  given  the  strong  link  between  libraries  and
schools, the Department Arts and Culture needed to  engage  rigorously  with
the Department of Education  to  ensure  that  libraries  were  built  while
addressing  the  provision  of  reading  material.  Libraries,   which   are
community structures, needed to be made accessible to communities.

THE DEPARTMENT OF SPORT AND RECREATION SOUTH AFRICA (SRSA)

This department is responsible for managing the Mass  Sport  and  Recreation
Participation Programme Grant. The  framework  of  the  2008/9  Division  of
Revenue  Bill  outlined   the   following   measurable   outputs   for   the
abovementioned  grant:  Siyadlala,  Legacy  and  the  Schools   Sport   Mass
Participation  Programme.  Encompassed  in  the  legacy  output   were   the
establishment and/or development of 300 sport specific clubs.

The 2009/10 Division of Revenue Bill outlines the purpose  of  the  Bill  as
that of promoting mass participation within communities and schools  through
selected sport and recreation activities,  empowerment  of  communities  and
schools in conjunction with stakeholders and  that  of  the  development  of
communities through sport.

The department was to receive an amount of R402.3  million  in  the  2009/10
financial year towards Mass Sport  and  Recreation  Participation  Programme
Grant. It was reported that the  following  provinces  had  requested  roll-
overs of unspent 2008/9 funds:  Limpopo  (R2.3  million),  Mpumalanga  (R191
000), Northern Cape (R812 000) and Western Cape (R278 000).
The Department reported the following challenges:
 • Slow spending by provinces;
 • Lack of capacity for monitoring and evaluation Sport and Recreation South
   Africa (SRSA); and
 • Lack of capacity in provinces

The  department  also  reported  that  there  was  a  slow   turnaround   in
recruitment processes and that the vetting  of  applicants  further  delayed
the process.

The Committee was concerned that the  department  did  not  report  on  club
development, which was a common feature in the work  of  the  department  in
the previous financial year. It appeared that this had  been  replaced  with
the Legacy Grant. The Committee was  not  satisfied  with  the  department’s
explanation that club development was encompassed in the  Legacy.  It  added
that during an oversight visit  to  Limpopo  in  May  2008,  the  provincial
department had spent 48% of the club development grant albeit there  was  no
visible club development observed during the visit.

The Committee also raised concerns with the Department that  provinces  were
hosting professional games which were not their core competence.  The  North
West was funding teams in the Vodacom Cup. Gauteng was funding  the  Gauteng
Challenge  and  the  Eastern   Cape   was   funding   international   boxing
competitions

Questions were also raised on whether  there  were  any  links  between  the
department and the  private  sector  initiatives  in  terms  of  the  Public
Private Partnership.

Recommendations of the  Committee  in  respect  of  SRSA  and  the  National
Treasury:

 • The two departments to jointly evaluate whether the structures and  clubs
   developed from the club development grant existed;
 • Ensure ongoing support for those clubs;
 • Clarify the purpose of the Legacy Grant and monitor it accordingly.
 • Establish whether the legacy was in respect of 2010 only, meaning soccer,
   and establish whether this was targeting host  cities  or  the  provinces
   generally.

While soccer would be the main beneficiary, the department was of  the  view
that other sporting codes would also take advantage  of  the  Legacy  Grant.
The Committee proposed that it would assist  to  have  an  indaba  with  the
relevant stakeholders to look into how they can  jointly  benefit  from  the
legacy grant.

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT

The Department of Transport manages five conditional grants. These are the:

 • Gauteng Rapid Rail Link Grant receiving R2 832.7 million in 2009/10;
 • Overload Control Grant (new) receiving R10.069 million in 2009/10;
 • Public Transport Operations Grant receiving R3 531.9 million in 2009/10;
 • Sani Pass Grant receiving R34.3 million in 2009/10; and
 • Transport Disaster Management Grant (new) receiving  R11.5  billion  over
   the MTEF.

The department reported that since the 2005/06 financial year  it  had  been
running at a shortfall until in November 2008  the  department  ran  out  of
funds. This was not as a  result  of  under-budgeting  but  rather  that  of
underfunding. The matter had been largely resolved through the courts.
The department had agreements with the provinces to provide the services  to
people who  needed  the  service.  Various  contracts  were  used  in  these
arrangements ranging from  tendering  contracts,  negotiated  contracts  and
interim contracts. It was reported that the bus operators preferred  interim
contracts (driven by ticket sales), but the department was now  moving  from
these agency agreements towards  conditional  grants  provided  for  in  the
DORA. This would ensure that there were  strict  conditions  that  operators
would adhere to. Non-compliance would  lead  to  termination  of  contracts.
This would be closely monitored to avoid increasing unemployment.

The department also noted  that  focus  in  terms  of  technical  assistance
needed to be directed towards Mangaung but more  so  towards  Tshwane  which
had major problems.

The  National  Treasury  reported  that  its  plans  were  to  complete  the
contractual engagements by September 2009.

The National Treasury committed to provide a report on the  consequences  of
underfunding reported by the Department of Transport.  The  Department  also
committed to provide the Committee with a detailed report tabled before  the
Portfolio Committee on Transport. It  added  that  the  implication  of  the
underfunding was the deterioration of  services  provided  as  well  as  bus
operators who do not maintain their vehicles.

It was also the view of the department that the DORA only  created  a  rigid
framework and did not provide a solution for providing bus services  to  the
people who needed it.

The National Treasury pointed out that government needed to decide  how,  in
the context of limited resources, it would ensure that settlements  were  in
close proximity to work areas in order to reduce the  need  for  funding  in
the form of bus subsidies.

National Treasury and the Department were requested to engage on  the  issue
of underfunding and report to the incoming SCOF and PC Transport.

The department was also restructuring the Road Accident Fund (RAF)  in  such
a way that the processes eliminate the need for  lawyers.  It  was  reported
that structures representing lawyers were opposing  this  move  through  the
courts.

CONCLUSION

Given  the  significance  of  the  Division  of  Revenue  Bill  in  ensuring
equitable division of nationally raised funds among  the  three  spheres  of
government, the Committee thanks all stakeholders  for  their  comments  and
participation in the public hearings that took place over three days.

REFERENCES

   1. Division of Revenue Bill [B4-2009] (section 76(1))
   2. Budget Review 2009
   3. Presentations submitted by participating departments and stakeholders
   4.  National  Treasury’s  3rd  Quarter  Report  on   conditional   grants
      transferred from the national departments and actual payments made  by
      the provinces

                            MONDAY, 16 MARCH 2009

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

   1. The Chairperson

CREDA INSERT - T090316e-insert1 – PAGES 667-741

   2. The Chairperson

      a) NCOP Report 2004 to 2009

CREDA INSERT - T090316e-insert2 –PAGES 742-847

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


   Report of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on the appointment of members to the
   National Youth Development Agency Board, dated 16 March 2009:
   The Committee was established on the 5 February 2009 by a  resolution  of
   the National Assembly and 10 February 2009 by resolution of the  National
   Council of Provinces to consider the appointment of members of the  Board
   to the National Youth Development Agency.


   The Committee consisted of the following members:


   NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


   Mr JJ Combrinck                ANC
   Mr M Johnson        ANC
   Mr BM Mkongi   ANC
   MS NR Mokoto   ANC
   Ms WS Newhoudt – Druchen  ANC
   Ms NN Sibhidla ANC
   Mr Y Wang      ANC
   Mr GR Morgan   DA
   Mr MM Swathe   DA
   Ms SP Lebenya – Ntanzi    IFP
   Mr LW Greyling ID
   Mr IE Jenner   ID


   NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
   Western Cape
   Mr W Douglas


   Kwazulu - Natal
   Mr DD Gamede


   Limpopo
   Ms HF Matlanyane


   Gauteng
   Ms F Mazibuko
   Mzizi, Mr MA (alt)


   Eastern Cape
   Mr DG Mkono
   Mr MO Robertsen (alt)


   Northern Cape
   Mr RJ Tau
   Mr MC Goeieman (alt)


   Mpumalanga
   Ms MP Themba




   North West
   Ms JF Terblanche


   Free State
   Dr FJ Van Heerden
   Mr TS Setona (alt)


   The committee placed adverts in the national  and  provincial  newspapers
   calling on members of the public to submit nominations, from 20  February
   until 06 March 2009, of persons to serve on the  Board  of  the  National
   Youth Development Agency. It was required that the nominees should:
         • be South African citizens
         • comply  with  any  other  requirements  prescribed  by  national
           legislation, in particular the National Youth Development Agency
           Act, 2008
         • possess suitable qualifications, expertise and experience in the
           area of the youth.


   The adverts appeared in the following newspapers:


   National Newspapers
   City Press
   Rapport
   Sunday Times


   Provincial Newspapers
   Argus
   Burger-Wes
   Daily Dispatch
   Diamond Field   Advertisers
   EP Herald
   Ilanga
   Limpopo Mirror
   Mail & Guardian
   Mpumalanga News
   Pretoria News
   Potchefstroom Herald
   Sunday Tribune
   Sowetan
   Star
   Volksblad


   173 nominations from  the  members  of  the  public  and  from  different
   institutions were received by the Committee.


   The Committee considered all the nominations on the 9 and 10  March  2009
   and agreed that the following 26 persons be shortlisted. The names of the
   shortlisted candidates were published in the  Announcement  Tablings  and
   Committee (ATC) Reports of the 10 March 2009.  The  following  candidates
   were interviewed on the 12 and 13 March 2009:


   Mr V Sidali
   Mr EB Letsoalo
   Mr MW Thango
   Mr G Essop
   Mr VN Mbanga
   Mr S Nair
   Ms A Coetzee
   Ms N Ntanjana
   Mr PR Mnisi
   Ms N Moleko
   Mr MR Khumalo
   Mr L Marincowitz
   Mr O Sipuka
   Ms I Motau
   Mr LI Maile
   Mr S Khan
   Mr G Mackenzie
   Ms P Kadi
   Mr BR Buys
   Mr M Tyhali
   Mr FJ Slabber
   Ms M Tshabalala
   Ms P Makeleni
   Mr A Lungisa
   Mr Y Pillay
   Ms DD Adams


   The youngest candidate was a 14 year old boy, a grade eight (8) pupil, Mr
   S Khan from Rondebosch High School. He showed confidence by applying  and
   took time off from school.  He  displayed  leadership  qualities  and  is
   looking forward to be a Junior Mayor  of  the  City  of  Cape  Town.  The
   Committee acknowledged and commended  him  for  his  confidence  and  his
   involvement in developmental activities in his community.


   It was worth noting that his interest and eventual participation  in  the
   interviews was a confirmation of living  up  to  the  theme  of  People’s
   Parliament in action.


   Young women and people living with disabilities were also shortlisted and
   interviewed. The Committee acknowledged their qualities of leadership.


   Having interviewed the candidates and deliberated on the  performance  of
   each, the Committee recommends to the National Assembly and the  National
   Council of Provinces that the following persons be appointed to the Board
   of the National Youth Development Agency:


1. Mr MR Khumalo
2. Ms M Tshabalala
3. Ms P Makeleni
4. Mr A Lungisa
5. Mr Y Pillay
6. Ms I Motau
7. Mr FJ Slabber


   Report to be considered.


                           TUESDAY, 17 MARCH 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Proclamation No 2 published in Government Gazette No 31808 dated 21
        January 2009: Referral of matters to existing special investigating
        unit and special tribunal, in terms of the Special Investigating
        Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

    (b)    Proclamation No R. 3 published in Government Gazette No 31811
        dated 22 January 2009: Commencement of the South African Judicial
        Education Institute Act, 2008 (Act No 14 of 2008).

     c) Government Notice No R. 43 published in Government Gazette No 31809
        dated 22 January 2009: Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the
        Judges’ Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No
        47 of 2001).

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     a) Albany Coast Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2009-10,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).
    (b)     Amatola Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (c)     Bloem Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2009-
        10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (d)     Botshelo Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (e)     Bushbuckridge Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2009-10,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


     f) Lepelle Northern Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
        for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     g) Magalies Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2009-
        10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


     h) Mhlathuze Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2009-
        10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (i)     Namakwa Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (j)     Overberg Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (k)     Pelladrift Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2009-10,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (l)     Rand Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2009-
        10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (m)     Sedibeng Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (n)     Umgeni Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2009-10, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) Government Notice No 182 published in Government Gazette No 31933
        dated 20 February 2009: Publication of a board for Isimangaliso
        Wetland Park Authority, in terms of the World Heritage Convention
        Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


     b) Government Notice No 190 published in Government Gazette No 31912
        dated 20 February 2009: Notice of intention to make regulations
        regarding fees for the provision of aviation meteorological
        services in terms of section 28 (b) of the South African Weather
        Services Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).

     c) Government Notice No R.209 published in Government Gazette No 31962
        dated 27 February 2009: Threatened or Protected Species Amendment
        Regulations, 2009 in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

     d) Government Notice No R.210 published in Government Gazette No 31963
        dated 27 February 2009: Threatened or Protected Species Second
        Amendment Regulations, 2009 in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Agreement
    between the government of the Republic of South Africa and the
    Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho on the Facilitation of Cross-
    Border Movement of Citizens of the Republic of South Africa and the
    Kingdom of Lesotho , dated 17 March 2009:

    The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the request
    for approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government of
    the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of
    Lesotho on the Facilitation of Cross-Border Movement of Citizens of the
    Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of Lesotho, referred to it,
    recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the
    Constitution, approve the said Agreement.

 2. Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Regulations
    made in terms of the Children’s Act, 2005 (Act No. 38 of 2005), dated
    17 March 2009:

    The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the request
    for approval by the Council on the Regulations made in terms of the
    Children’s Act, 2005 (Act No. 38 of 2005),  referred to it, recommends
    that the Council, in terms of Section 3 (3), read with Section 3 (2)
    (b) of the Act, approve the Regulations.

                          WEDNESDAY, 18 MARCH 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committee of paper tabled

    (a)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

         Code of Good Administrative Conduct: Section 10(5A) of the
         Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
        Government Association (SALGA) for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 151-2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
    dated 18 November 2008:


    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
    considered the Magistrates’ Courts: Amendment of Rules of Court and the
    Amendment of the Rules regulating the conduct of the proceedings of the
    Provincial and Local Divisions of the High Court of South Africa, in
    accordance with section 7(c) of the Criminal Procedure Amendment Act,
    2003 (Act No 42 of 2003), recommends that the Rules be approved.


    The Select Committee, however, wishes to make the following further
    comments:


    The Committee regrets the delay in the finalization of these Rules.
    The Committee does accept the explanations given by the Rules Board and
    the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development and
    understands that much of the delay has been caused by the procedure
    that has been followed.  The Committee further notes that the Rules
    Board and the Department have determined a less cumbersome procedure in
    the process of amending Rules in future.


    The Committee would suggest that, with regards to the procedure, any
    discussions and consultation around amendments to the Rules should take
    place at an earlier stage. In other words, that the Rules Board should
    consult various roleplayers and should ideally reach agreement with the
    Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development before formally
    submitting the Rules to the Minister for approval.


    It would also make sense if, in future, the Committee was provided with
    the opportunity to comment, albeit informally, before any amendments to
    the Rules are tabled in Parliament for approval.


    The Committee will also raise the issue of procedure in its exit report
    for the attention of the Committee in the new term of Parliament in
    2009.


    The Committee wishes to note that the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill
    is likely to be passed by Parliament in due course and may possibly
    necessitate further amendments to these Rules in future.


    Report to be considered.


 2.   Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
    the Request for the Ratification of the Decision by the Minister of
    Environmental Affairs and Tourism to Exclude from Coastal Public
    Property the confined Port Areas, in terms of section 27(4) of the
    National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management Act,
    2008 (Act No 24 of 2008), dated 18 March 2009:


    The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
    considered the request by the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
    Tourism, to Exclude from Coastal Public Property the confined Port
    Areas, in terms of section 27(4) of the National Environmental
    Management: Integrated Coastal Management Act, 2008 (Act No 24 of 2008)
    referred to it, recommends that the House ratifies the said request by
    the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
    Report to be considered.


                           THURSDAY, 19 MARCH 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 19 March 2009:


         (a)      Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B 1 – 2009]
         (National Assembly – sec 74).


          b) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
             Amendment Bill [B 3B – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75)


        c) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec
           76)


        d) Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 – 2009] (National
           Assembly – sec 77)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Pelladrift Water Board for
        the year ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
        30 June 2008.



