---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-11-11
---

                         WEDNESDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____
The House met at 16:12.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms S P KOPANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the need for a coherent food security policy as a
   matter of urgency, considering that scientists predict that 40% to 50% of
   undernourished people are expected to be living in sub-Saharan Africa by
   2080, and the agricultural yields may decrease by as much as 50% by 2020.

Ms H LAMOELA: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the impact of wasteful expenditure in various
   government departments and the serious impacts it has on service
   delivery.

                             NELSON MANDELA DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House–


    1) notes with great appreciation the approval by the United Nations of
       naming 18 July Nelson Mandela International Day;

    2) further notes that Nelson Mandela Day has already been declared an
       annual community work day for the cultivation of ubuntu values and
       principles that our icon, Nelson Mandela, worked for and lived by;

    3) believes that Mandela’s dedication to progressive values of human
       and social solidarity without regard to race, class and gender will
       continue to guide us in our efforts to create a nonracial,
       nonsexist, united, democratic and prosperous society in which the
       value of all citizens is measured by our common humanity;

    4) recognises that President Mandela’s commitment to progressive values
       is encapsulated in the words of Lord Khem, an African sage, who
       says, “... the Light that is God resides in each and every one of us
       ... ” and further says to us, “Thou art the Light that shines upon
       others ... ”;

    5) further recognises that our icon, Nelson Mandela, has been the light
       that shines upon others; and

    6) supports and joins President Jacob Zuma in welcoming the recognition
       by the UN of Nelson Mandela Day and encourages the peoples and
       nations of the world to recognise the power within themselves to do
       something to improve the quality of life of others in celebration of
       Nelson Mandela’s International Day.

Agreed to.

                     ANNIVERSARY OF SIGNING OF ARMISTICE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:
   That the House–

    1) notes that today, the 11th hour on the 11th day of the 11th month,
       marked the 91st anniversary of the signing of the Armistice on 11
       November 1918, to signal the end of World War I;

    2) further notes that at 11:00 on 11 November 1918 the guns of the
       Western Front fell silent after more than four years of continuous
       warfare;

    3) commemorates not only all those men and women who were killed during
       the war, but all those who have fallen in the many tragic and often
       devastating conflicts that have occurred throughout the world since
       then; and

    4) honours those who sacrificed themselves in these conflicts by
       wearing artificial poppies in remembrance of their sacrifices.

Agreed to.

                  AFRICAN PRESIDENT OF THE YEAR AWARD 2009

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House–

    1) notes with admiration and excitement the news that President Jacob
       Zuma has been chosen as Africa’s finest leader and has had the
       prestigious African President of the Year Award 2009 bestowed on him
       on Tuesday, 10 November 2009, at the African Consciousness Media
       Leadership Awards ceremony in Johannesburg;

    2) further notes that the award, founded by the African Consciousness
       Media and the Kenneth Kaunda Foundation, recognises achievement and
       serves to honour African leaders;

    3) believes that the award is one of the instruments used on our
       continent to promote good governance and to foster economic
       integration and development;

    4) further believes that this award will help remind African leaders of
       their responsibilities to the people, as true leaders are guided by
       the needs and the collective wisdom of the people, and this award
       should, therefore, not be about status or prestige, but service and
       sacrifice; and

    5) congratulates President Zuma for winning the award for his
       outstanding leadership, humility, dedication and commitment to serve
       and listen to the people of South Africa and Africa, and his efforts
       for a better life for all.

Agreed to.

  CELEBRATION OF INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR THE ELIMINATION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST
                                    WOMEN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House-

    1) notes that on 25 November 2009 the international community will
       celebrate the International Day for the Elimination of Violence
       Against Women was adopted at the 54th session of the United Nations
       General Assembly in December 1999;

    2) further notes that the origin of the date 25 November goes back to
       1960, when three Mirabal sisters from the Dominican Republic, also
       known as the Unforgettable Butterflies, were violently assassinated
       for their political activism;
    3) recognises that violence against women and girls is a problem of
       pandemic proportions and that the legal systems and community
       attitudes add to the trauma violated women and girls go through on a
       daily basis;

    4) further recognises that this pandemic is not only physical and
       mental violence against women and children, but includes human and
       child trafficking and sexual exploitation;

    5) acknowledges that although every effort is being made to eliminate
       violence against women and girls, statistics show that more women
       and children are being violated on a daily basis; and

    6) commits itself to ensure that we will continue our efforts  to
       ensure that violence against women and children is eliminated, and
       that women and children who have been violated are given the support
       they require.

Agreed to.

                      CELEBRATION OF WORLD DIABETES DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE:  Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:
   That the House –


    1) notes that 14 November marks the celebration of World Diabetes Day
       which is led by the International Diabetes Federation;

    2) further notes that there are currently approximately 6,5 million
       South Africans living with diabetes;

    3) further notes that diabetes can be managed and people who are well
       informed about the illness are able to adapt their eating habits to
       the demands of diabetes; and

    4) calls upon all South Africans to observe World Diabetes Day and play
       an active role in promoting healthier lifestyles.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                       (The late Comrade Ronnie Press)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

    1) notes with profound sadness the passing away of Comrade Ronnie Press
       on 28 October 2009 in Bristol, England;

    2) recalls that Comrade Ronnie joined the Congress of Democrats in
       1953, played an active role in Cosatu, the ANC, Umkhonto we Sizwe
       and the SACP, and also served as Secretary of the Textile Workers’
       Industrial Union;

    3) remembers that comrade Ronnie, alongside Nelson Mandela and others,
       was amongst those comrades charged with high treason in the famous
       1956 treason trial and after the trial, went into exile in the
       United Kingdom where he continued to assist in operations against
       the apartheid state and was instrumental in the development of the
       Bristol Anti-Apartheid Movement;

    4) further remembers that Comrade Ronnie was a trained chemical
       engineer and has contributed immensely to the struggle by providing
       much – needed technical expertise and helped to smuggle equipment
       and weapons into South Africa and was involved in the movement’s
       technical committee which created a variety of devices that were
       used in operations against the apartheid state; and

    5) conveys its condolences to the Press family and friends, the ANC,
       the SACP and Cosatu.

Agreed to.

          CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
                   ON MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

       CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS
                   ON MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

                                  (Debate)

Mr T A MUFAMADI: Deputy Speaker, hon members and Ministers present will
recall that on 27 October 2009, the Minister of Finance complied with
section 28 of the Public Finance Management Act, which obligates him and
his department to present to the House a multiyear budget projection. The
purpose of this projection is to give certainty and predictability to the
country’s finances and indicate its sustainability, particularly in terms
of revenue and expenditure patterns and, most importantly, in terms of the
macroeconomic outlook that seeks to locate our country’s place and space in
the world economy.

The relevant committees responsible for finances in this House were
assigned to process the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement and recommend
and report back to this House. On behalf of the Standing Committee on
Finance, allow me to say that it is an honour for us in the committee to be
part of a team from this Parliament, entrusted with the task of overseeing
the processes and management of our economy and its finances.

I am therefore pleased and privileged to present the committee’s report and
recommendations, which I will deal with later in my submissions.

We need to submit, upfront, that the committee had to perform its duties
within a very short space of time, given the busy schedule of our
parliamentary work. Nonetheless, the committee managed to receive
substantive comments and very useful inputs from businesses, organised
labour and respectable economists affiliated to reputable institutions.

In processing its work, the committee reflected on the following important
topics: the state of the economy; the economic policy outlook; fiscal and
monetary policies; spending priorities; and budget deficits.

The 2009 main Budget, like many budgets over the whole world, was
formulated under very severe economic conditions and in an environment that
could be described as being hostile towards the poor and emerging
economies, through no fault of their own.

It is not my intention to dwell much on the historical deficiencies of our
macroeconomic challenges. However, it must be said that the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement and its recommendations are being debated under
slightly improved economic conditions compared to six months ago. There are
signs of cautious hope of an economic recovery, which means the country’s
national framework response to the global crisis is beginning to yield
positive results. However, we must warn that it is not yet time to
celebrate. The projected economic growth, that would suggest the roll-overs
of yesteryear, is not yet in sight.

Our work as parliamentarians is clearly defined under these current
economic challenges. We are called upon, through our various standing and
portfolio committees, to monitor vigorously expenditure patterns in
government departments and parastatals, and support Operation Clean Audit –
the courageous effort by the Minister of Cooperative Governance and
Traditional Affairs to improve service delivery and accountability at local
government level.

In terms of our economic recovery, this can only be realised if proper and
sound economic policies, with better co-ordination between all spheres of
government, are implemented, monitored and evaluated within the context of
a coherent and sustainable plan co-ordinated from a central point - in this
instance, the Presidency.

We have noted that government has provided support to several key sectors
of the economy through development and finance institutions, while
simultaneously enabling economic adjustment. Development Finance
Institutions, DFIs, have assisted in boosting public sector infrastructure
and investments, without which the much celebrated 2010 Fifa World Cup
activities and 2010 legacy projects would have been impossible.

Before I submit the committee’s recommendation it is critical that we
explain how we see the steps that South Africa is taking to support its
recovery plan through the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement proposals in
the current global crisis.

Firstly, we need to commend the Minister and his team for protecting the
key priority areas outlined in the state of the nation address. These are:
creation of decent jobs and protection of existing jobs; investment in
public and economic infrastructure; education; a sustainable rural
development strategy; stepping up the fight against crime and corruption;
and prioritising the fight against the HIV/Aids pandemic.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement also indicates a strong intention
to maintain expansionary fiscal and monetary policies into the outer years
of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. One of the key lessons that
corporate South Africa and corporations the world over should learn from
the current economic crisis is that heedless, selfish, amoral economic
interests, particularly in terms of business practices, leads to bad
economic outcomes with unintended consequences that affects mostly the poor
and the working people.
Financial institutions designed to carry out functions of the bank should
do so within the designed regulatory framework. If they desire to
deliberately avoid and evade regulations, they wreak havoc on the very same
economy and markets that they are supposed to support and sustain.

Secondly, the creation of subprime lending to the unbankable in order to
support profitability and award huge bonuses to executives in the banking
or financial institutions, is not sustainable.

The third lesson that we should learn from this economic crisis is that
overvalued corporate assets and stock market shares also lead to distortion
of the economy and undermine the same economy that seeks to be promoted and
sustained.

The sad part of everything is that all these mistakes hurt the poor and
working class people the most. As we proceed into the future in terms of
our economic recovery, it will be important that we deliberately seek state
intervention in the economy to reduce and eliminate inequalities in society
and also seek to equalise incomes between the poor and the rich.

As far as our recommendations are concerned, I would like to focus mainly
on three or more things that the committee has looked at. In order for
Parliament to engage substantially and more intelligently with the budget
before it, there is a need to expedite the setting up of a Parliamentary
Budget Office in the near future in order to support the work of the Select
Committee on Finance and Appropriations, especially during the value-for-
money oversight and accountability exercise. It will therefore be ideal for
the Director of the Parliamentary Budget Office to be appointed as soon as
possible. This should be done no later than March next year. [Applause.]

The committee also believes that it is important to provide sufficient
administrative content and research support capacity to Parliament in order
for it to fulfil its legislative obligations and oversight functions over
the work of the executive. It is also critical that Parliamentary
programmes allow time for Parliamentary committees to engage with the
Medium-Term Policy Statement and Budget matters, otherwise we pay lip
service to public participation.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the committee members for their
participation and for their dedication in making sure that the committee
executes its responsibilities. We therefore recommend that this House
consider and accept our recommendations as proposed in our report. Thank
you. [Time expired.]

Dr D T GEORGE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement confirms what the average South African household already knows:
The job market has declined sharply; disposable income has fallen;
indebtedness remains high; and government excess has been exposed.
There is no doubt that the global financial crisis has hit home and has had
a far worse impact on our fiscal framework than anticipated only a few
months ago. Conditions have deteriorated very quickly. The steady progress
made over the past 15 years to develop a robust economy capable of
withstanding constantly changing globally integrated markets, has been
reversed. The Budget deficit, at 7,6% of Gross Domestic Product, GDP, or
R184 billion, will need to be financed by the people.

Government plans to expand its debt from a current 29% of GDP to 41% in
2012-13, mostly sourced on the domestic credit market. This will impact on
the availability and price of credit for other participants in the economy.
This 12 percentage point increase is a significant expansion in rand terms,
given that the GDP is expected to grow from next year. The room left to
manoeuvre is getting tighter, especially given that assumptions underlining
the fiscal framework may well prove to be optimistic. If our economy does
not grow as expected, we are heading for debt servicing expenditure that
will slow down service delivery even further.

Given the service delivery protests that have erupted recently, it is clear
that the people are growing restless over the absence of delivery caused by
government’s failure and inability to efficiently spend the money that is
available. Matters will be far worse when money is not available.

Although the tax revenue shortfall amounts to R70,3 billion, a further
R10,8 billion shortfall arises from sources in the provinces, social
security funds and state-owned enterprises. This reduces government revenue
to 27,3% of GDP. Government expenditure, however, increased nearly 5
percentage points from last year, to 35% of GDP. The numbers point to the
emergence of a dysfunctional developmental state. The size of government
participation in the economy is increasing, but government functionality
and service delivery output is not.

The DA supports the counter-cyclical fiscal stance adopted by government.
This does mean that government will be spending more at a time when its
revenue is shrinking and the result will be a deficit and an increase in
borrowing. The crucial issue, however, is that an increase in government
spending during a recession should benefit the economy in the longer term
and yield maximum post-recession benefits. Increased spending to fund
government inefficiency and luxury lifestyles for the government élite is
not acceptable and defeats the purpose.

The preliminary report by the Government Task Team to Effect Savings makes
bold and welcome statements. We also welcome the Minister’s firm commitment
to not tolerate corruption; act forcibly against wastage; insist on value
for money; and act against those who feed selfishly off the state.

Increases in government spending do not demonstrate this commitment. The
R589 million set aside for new government departments and the appointment
of additional Ministers and Deputy Ministers appears to be little more than
a political exercise to appease the various factions within the government
alliance with the perks and privileges of executive office. Ten thousand
RDP houses could have been built instead. That would have represented a
real and tangible impact on the lives of ordinary South Africans.

The R1 billion recapitalisation of the Land Bank would not be necessary if
government had taken steps to prevent deployed cadres from infecting the
institution with a culture of kleptocracy that is extremely difficult to
eradicate, given that it is widen-spread across the state-owned
enterprises. These entities are funded with taxpayers’ money intended to
improve the lives of the poor. We expect the Minister to do as he says he
will do and ensure that the parasites who steal the people’s money are
identified and prosecuted.

The R12 billion increase in the state payroll – not provided for in the
main Budget – demonstrates that government does not manage its human
capital effectively. There are too many public servants in unproductive
jobs within a bloated bureaucracy, and too few in critical service delivery
areas. The state payroll is steadily increasing, without tangible benefits
to taxpayers and service recipients. This is not value for money.
Not long ago in a place not far away, a government forgot that it exists to
serve its people. It adopted unworkable policies that brought a once-
thriving economy to collapse; it violated property rights; it ignored its
constitution; it spent more than it received; it used the people’s money to
fund luxury lifestyles for some; it printed money to fund its debts and
rendered it currency worthless. And now, Zimbabwe awaits financial rescue.
We must prevent this from happening to us.

Now that Minister Manuel has vacated his position as Minister of Finance,
the public will no longer have an opportunity to offer their “Tips for
Trevor” in the lead up to the annual Budget. It therefore seems likely that
this would be replaced by “pointers” for the present Minister. The DA would
like to offer the first one to the Minister: The social contract between
government and taxpayers is already strained because taxpayers must fund
inefficient government spending and luxury lifestyles for some while they
struggle daily to put food in their children’s stomachs and a roof over
their heads. Tax increases will not be necessary if government spends the
people’s money wisely. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF: Madam Deputy Speaker, we are all aware that this
policy statement by the hon Minister of Finance was made against the
backdrop of a very uncertain economic time, compounded by a behind-the-
scenes ideological debate regarding the direction of economic policy.
The hon Minister has passed this hurdle looking like the boss we expect a
Finance Minister to be. His consistent approach, in not diverting from
previous policies, has won him Cope’s support.

It was 20 years ago that the world was reborn when the Berlin Wall
collapsed and the face of the world changed forever. The current debate,
fuelled by Cosatu and the SACP on who should be the boss on economic
policy, is ironic. Cosatu must realise that the real opposition in South
Africa’s economy is not us or them, but the financial markets.

Cosatu must be wary not to overplay their hand with the new government and
need to pick their battles with government with greater care. Battles
should never be personal. Cosatu and the SACP should stop this debate now,
support the Treasury under the guidance of the hon Minister and get on with
the job to address our serious economic challenges. We do have serious
challenges.

Firstly, South Africa will have a hesitant economic recovery. We are going
to lag behind the world’s economic recovery and some downward risks remain
in our economy. Therefore, our growth forecast should be conservative.

Secondly, the uncertain effect of rising energy prices over the next 12
months affects inflation forecasts and creates uncertainty. Until we have
sorted out Eskom’s capital requirements, the market will remain volatile.

Thirdly, the question remains as to whether our fiscal stimulus package is
correct and not too late. So far, this government has relied extensively on
public spending increases and not on any tax cuts. This programme is too
silent on private sector involvement.

A large portion of this expenditure increase is the growing salary bill,
approaching like a swarm of locust throwing a dark cloud over our economy.
Government has acknowledged that the increase in the salary bill is not
sustainable. Let’s now see action to curb it.

Economists have warned that our fiscal deficit increase is one of the
highest. It is comparable to that of the United States. Because of that,
our public debt will increase dramatically, shifting the burden of this
debt to future generations.

Cope would like to see a clear plan, even if it needs to take a longer
view, to ensure that we shall be out of this debt. Only a conservative and
consistent approach by government to cut the salary bill and to grow the
economy will spare our future generations from hardship.

Failure to improve efficiency in government spending will delay our
recovery and prolong further borrowing.
We need specific investments. We need to speed up access to the Internet.
Government does not have the fiscal space to create jobs alone. We need the
private sector. We need low inflation targets, high productivity and
competitiveness. We need to ensure that the small and medium-sized
enterprises, SMEs, become the main engine of job growth by getting the
banks to fund them, cut the red tape and make the internet more affordable.
It is vital that we focus on expenditure programmes that will improve
competitiveness.

It will be the hon Minister’s duty to control our soaring debts so as to
avoid serious discomfort for our economy. We wish him all the best and Cope
will support him in these efforts. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP would today like to
present two dissenting views on the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement,
MTBPS.

First, the IFP cannot associate itself with the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement’s total reliance on the economy turning around this fourth
quarter and thereafter maintaining a high rate of sustained economic growth
for the next three years.

This too optimistic a scenario is pegged on selected positive signs, on the
uncorroborated belief in a sudden increase in consumer spending and on the
assumption that the South African economy will be raised by the raising of
the US economy.

It underplays signs which suggest that the depression will continue next
year, such as the projected decline in construction and the recessionary
effect of the completion of the 2010 Fifa World Cup infrastructural and
commercial preparation.

It is risky to boost consumer confidence with the untested promise that the
hard days are over, rather than with real interest rate cuts and measures
countering the credit crunch. Instead of trying to serve the national
interest by expecting the best while preparing for the worst, the MTBPS is
ignoring the worst while relying on the best.

Secondly, realising, as one should, that even though the global depression
started as a financial crisis, it has now become an industrial crisis, the
IFP criticises the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement’s failure to make
the required structural adjustments to create a new and globally
competitive industrial basis and to cut on chronic government-created
industrial problems.
The depression should have given the impetus to abolish the entire system
of exchange controls – which serves no purpose at this country’s stage of
development; to introduce the flexibility of the labour market which
government has been talking about since 1998; and to reform the
underperforming parastatal sectors.

The MTBPS speaks of necessary relief for our economy, such as the
devaluation of the Rand and cuts in interest rates, but none have yet been
effected in any relevant manner, as if there were time for it. The MTBPS
should bring tax reliefs and a new package of long-term incentives for the
creation of new viable economic sectors, such as assistance in Research and
Development, but it contains none of them specifically. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Speaker, in an interview shortly after the hon Minister
delivered his speech, I was told by one journalist that the worst nightmare
for opposition parties would be if the Budget signalled a shift to the
left. He then asked me if my worst nightmare had come true.

I immediately thought about the fact that, with a projected deficit of
7,6%, by any account, this is indeed a left budget statement. It sends a
very strong signal that social spending will not be cut during this
recessionary period. It makes financial provision for the extension of the
Child Support Grant to all children under the age of 18 and provides an
extra R900 million for antiretroviral treatment for HIV patients.

In addition, it gives our cash-strapped local government sphere an extra
R12,6 billion and ensures that our infrastructure built programme will act
as an economic stimulus during this recessionary period.

If this is supposed to be my worst nightmare – I thought to myself – then I
would like to state for the record that I believe there is a very fine line
between nightmares and dreams.

The fact is that the terms “left” and “right” do not apply in their
traditional sense anymore. Proof of this lies in the fact that, on that
same day, I heard the economist Brian Kantor – not a leftist by any means –
state that he was against rigid inflation targeting, the supposed holy cow
of the right.

It is clear therefore that we need an economic policy that does not
preserve the status quo of half our people living in poverty, 40%
unemployment and rising inequalities.

The ID supports the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement and the Minister’s
commitment to reign in wasteful expenditure while expanding provisions to
the poor. Perhaps now the hon Minister can start the difficult task of
getting the message across to his Cabinet colleagues that it is not the car
that maketh the Minister, but their solidarity with the poor. I thank you.

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Deputy Speaker, hon members, the UDM is concerned about the
effects of the recession on the average South African. People are
struggling to make ends meet. Therefore we condemn wasteful and extravagant
expenditure by government.

The economic situation is dire, as reflected by the shortfall of billions
of Rand in tax revenues, which proves that government simply cannot afford
to waste precious funding. The UDM is concerned about the growing Budget
deficit. It is not healthy to incur such a long-term debt, which future
generations will inevitably inherit.

The UDM is also concerned that the Minister will face an uphill battle
against the left wing of the ruling alliance, which seems to be launching
an all out attack on the idea of a free market. Now more than ever the UDM
believes that a responsible and caring government should also be a
government that allows the entrepreneurial drive of the man in the street
to flourish. Now is the time to encourage people to create new wealth and
prosperity. The UDM support this Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. I
thank you.

Adv D A ALBERTS: Adjunkspeaker, Minister Pravin Gordhan se
mediumtermynbegrotingsbeleid getuig van ’n ewewigtige benadering tot
ekonomiese beleid en daarmee kan die VF Plus hom geluk wens. Daar flikker
egter ’n paar gevaartekens op die horison.

Indien die Minister wil hê dat die belastingbetaler waarde vir sy geld moet
kry – soos hy onderneem – moet hy nie net korrupsie bekamp nie, maar die
onsinnige besteding op irrelevante items, soos oorsese reise in alle
staatsdepartemente, vasvat.

’n Verdere voorbeeld: Om R200 miljoen vir die SAUK te gee as gevolg van
wanbestuur, is nie waarde vir geld nie.

Daar sal ook indringend gekyk moet word na die sfeer van plaaslike
regering, waar stadsrade miljoene rande spandeer op luukse partytjies en
konferensies terwyl gewone mense nie kos het om te eet nie.

Daarom is dit net billik dat, as daar verwag word van die belastingbetaler
om sy gordel in te trek, die staatsdepartemente dit ook sal doen.

Verder sal die Minister ook indringend daarna moet kyk om die
belastingbasis uit te brei, aangesien 7 miljoen mense nie aanhoudend kan
betaal vir 50 miljoen mense nie.

Die Minister se vooruitskatting van ’n groeikoers van 3,2% oor drie jaar is
’n realistiese benadering. Wat wel kommerwekkend is, is dat die
leningsbedrag oor drie jaar vanaf 23% van die bruto binnelandse produk,
BBP, na 41% sal groei. Geld wat geleen word moet terugbetaal word met
rente, en dit sal die belastingbetaler wees wat daarvoor moet opdok. Soos
dit is, kan die belastingbetaler nie die huidige belastinglas hanteer nie,
en dit is sonder die beplande Eskom verhogings. Daarom sal die regering
baie meer kreatief moet wees ten opsigte van die aangaan en terugbetaling
van skuld. Indien die belastingbetaler, insluitend besighede, verder swaar
belas word, sal die skepping van 4,5 miljoen werksgeleenthede oor die
volgende vyf jaar bloot ’n hersenskim kan bly. Ons hoop dit is nie die
geval nie. Ons bid jou wysheid toe, Minister Gordhan. Dankie. (Translation
of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Adv D A ALBERTS: Deputy Speaker, Minister Pravin Gordhan’s Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement bears testimony to a balanced approach to economic
policy and with this the FF Plus would like to congratulate him. However,
several danger signals are flashing on the horizon.

If the Minister wants the taxpayer to get value for his money- as he is
undertaking- he would not only have to combat corruption, but he will also
have to clamp down on the senseless spending on irrelevant items, such as
overseas travelling, in all of the government departments.

Another illustration of this: To give R200 million to the SABC owing to
mismanagement, is not value for money.

There should also be a thorough investigation of the local sphere of
government, where city councils are spending millions of rand on lavish
parties and conferences, while ordinary people do not have food to eat.

It is, therefore, only fair that, if it is expected of the taxpayer to
tighten his belt, the government departments should also be doing this.

In addition, the Minister should also have a thorough investigation with
regard to expanding the tax base, in view of the fact that 7 million people
cannot continue paying for 50 million people.

The Minister’s forecast of a growth rate of 3,2% is a realistic
approximation. What is alarming, however, is that over three years the loan
amount will increase from 23% of the Gross Domestic Product, GDP, to 41%.
Money that is borrowed has to be paid back with interests, and it will be
the taxpayer who will have to cough up for this. As it is, the taxpayer is
not able to cope with the current tax burden, and this is without the
planned increases by Eskom. Therefore, Government will have to be a lot
more creative with regard to incurring and the repayment of debt. If the
taxpayer, including business, continues to be heavily taxed, the creation
of 4,5 million job opportunities over the next five years will have to
continue to be merely a pipe-dream. We hope that this is not the case. We
pray that you will be bestowed with wisdom, Minister Gordhan. Thank you.]

Ms Z S DUBAZANA: Deputy Speaker, the executives and hon members,
“Sanibonani.” [Good afternoon.] Internationally, there is a growing
consensus that good governance can promote pro-poor distributive outcomes
and also reduce corruption. Budgets are particularly powerful instruments
in socioeconomic transformation, redirecting public resources to benefit
the poor and other vulnerable groups, particularly in the provision of
public services.

The 52nd ANC conference in Polokwane made it clear that the bulk
infrastructure tender processes did not take care of the emerging
contractors. It also indicated the dying need for the centralisation
planning. The latter has been achieved, much as the DA does not see the
need for R500 million to be spent on the new divisions.

In the apartheid era, budgeting and budget processes were characterised by
secrecy and lack of transparency, with negligible participation by
Parliament or civil society. Thank you to the ANC who brought back our
dignity and respect. This is indicated by the innovations included, the
introduction of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, and also the
establishment of the Minister’s Committee on Budgets so as to enhance
political oversight and the allocation of resources.

The committees on finance had an opportunity to listen to different public
hearings on the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, MTBPS. Some
presentations were quite informative, while others were neither here nor
there.

Let me share one of the perceptions that were raised by one of the
presenters. This presenter said, “the patient is in the operation theatre,
and the operation went well, but the patient died.”
The ANC is aware that the country is experiencing an economic downturn, but
that doesn’t mean that the patient is going to die, rather, the patient is
in the recovery room. This means that we are recovering, but recuperation
will depend on the commitment and the determination from all of us in this
Chamber.

The ANC believes that an individual contribution will contribute towards
the survival of the whole, which are our communities. The ANC’s programme
document, called the Freedom Charter, indicated very well that poverty and
inequality must be eradicated. Indeed, the ANC-led government, within the
15 years, has tried to combat the problem, but there is still a lot to be
done.

Let me share some achievements. The Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP,
is targeted at creating 1 million job opportunities in 5 years, to be
implemented across the 4 sectors. If you listen and compare the network
opportunities created in the financial year 2008-09, the total is 568 224,
and the cumulative total comes to, within the 5 years, 1,6 million. Indeed,
the ANC does not make a wish list when it sets up its programmes or its
objectives.

The ANC also promised during its 52nd conference in Polokwane that it would
halve poverty between 2004 and 2014. The real annual mean per capita
analysis shows an improvement in the incomes of the poorest, rising from
R783 to R1 141 in 2008.

The ANC has also acknowledged that the gap between the rich and the poor is
increasingly growing. This is a sign that the deep structural nature of
poverty and inequality in South Africa has a racial underpinning. It seems
also that the lowest rate of improvement that I’m talking about is in the
middle-income range.

The ANC-led government has provided appropriate social assistance support
to all eligible beneficiaries. As of March 2009, just over 13 million
people received social grants, which takes about 5,5% of our gross domestic
product, GDP. The ANC supports this, much as the members on my left hand
side strongly believe that the ANC shall create a social welfare state.

In 2007, a community survey estimated that people with disability
constitute 4% of South Africa’s population, and while opportunities have
increased, there are still insufficient services and opportunities for
people with disabilities to participate equally in economic transformation
or development. The Constitution envisages a role for the legislature both
in influencing the Budget and exercising oversight to ensure the
effectiveness and the efficiency of the economy service delivery.

The ANC supports the Medium-Term Policy Statement. God bless you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP broadly supports the three-year plan
which has had to factor in a massive shortfall in tax revenues. We agree
that, while borrowing now does seem to be the right thing to do, it is
unsustainable in the long run.

We recognise, however, that fiscal expansion and, in particular,
infrastructure spending have contributed to long-term capacity and short-
term job creation. We welcome the additional R70 billion over 3 years to
improve education, health services, the fight against crime, job creation,
social services, infrastructure, etc.

Reducing unemployment and addressing poverty must remain our single biggest
priority. The ACDP shares the Minister’s concerns that the output and
outcomes are lagging given the massive investments we are making. We
support government’s commitment to reducing wastage and achieving greater
savings in departments.
The ACDP will support the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement which is
presented against the backdrop of shrinking economic growth, a ballooning
Budget deficit, and a mounting pressure on the new government. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms M N MATLADI: Deputy Speaker, it is ironic that, according to the speech
of the Minister of Finance on the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement,
500 000 people have lost jobs while on 3 June 2009, the President promised
that, “between now and December 2009, we plan to create about 500 000 job
opportunities.” Instead people are left with economic devastation and the
human tragedy of job losses.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement for 2009 spells out several issues
of concern; the decline of income tax at R21 billion, VAT at R31 billion,
and Customs and Excise Duties at R9 billion lower than estimated in
February. This leads to the country’s borrowing requirement of R285 billion
against the R89 billion of the previous financial year.

The procurement system has to be reformed to avoid fraudulent activities in
the departments, including R615 million paid to employees doing business
with departments. The government is losing billions of Rand on consultants
who are not hired temporarily for specific expertise, but are hired to
perform the duties of the employed officials – which is a double
expenditure.

Finally, there is a concern with regard to the exorbitant salaries of
municipal managers, their expensive vehicles and their highly-paid
bodyguards. These have to be monitored during these hard times. I thank
you. [Time expired.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Deputy Speaker, the MF strongly believes that the deficit
will have tremendous implications for and a negative impact on service
delivery. The austerity measures such as saving schemes and
reprioritisation of departmental programmes, non-core versus core
functions, as a way and means of instilling financial management and
discipline are welcome.

The MF feels that the austerity measures are not adequately addressed in
all the areas of government, including the executive, like going on
insignificant international trips, etc. However, the MF believes that this
is a good initiative, but it should start from the executive level where
more funds are spent.

KwaZulu-Natal is heading towards an overdraft of R4 billion as a result of
poor financial planning. This has a detrimental impact on the money that is
budgeted for service delivery. This means that less money is spent on
service delivery and more on the executive, whereas, in actual fact, it is
suppose to be the other way around. This will assist government if it is
serious about transforming the economy and restructuring the public service
and economic recovery. The MF will support the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement.
Mr E M SOGONI: Deputy Speaker and hon Members of Parliament, the world has
experienced the worst financial and economic contraction, some say since
1930, others would say 1992 or 1993. Although the medium-term growth is
low, South Africa’s good economic choices over the past decade have allowed
it room for the bold response that was presented in the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement, MTBPS, by the hon Minister of Finance, hon Pravin
Gordhan.

The Minister has tabled a series of policy measures that should contribute
towards pushing back the frontiers of poverty. The Minister of Finance, in
his foreword on the MTBPS, quoted the constitutional vision that enjoins
us:


   ... to improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential
   of each person as we build a nation based on democratic values, social
   justice and human rights.

This is in line with the ANC’s vision of creating a better life for all,
understanding the challenges of confronting decades of subjugation,
unemployment and the widening gap of inequalities between the rich and the
poor. The Gini coefficient has now moved beyond 0,5 signalling the
worsening inequalities.

In the past few months, an estimated 500 000 jobs have been lost, adding to
the already high unemployment rate. This only serves to increase the
challenges that face South Africa as a developmental state. That is why the
ANC at the 52nd National Conference resolved to capacitate and build a
developmental state that today has set bold policy measures to enable South
Africa to respond to the changed economic environment and construct a more
robust platform for growth as the world economy recovers.

In fact, the International Monetary Fund, IMF, believes that the world
economy is beginning to turn the corner. This MTBPS enjoins the government
to ensure that limited resources are utilised to produce maximum outputs
without compromising the quality of services delivered.

An additional Budget of R78 billion over the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework, MTEF, is certainly most welcome. As the ANC, we congratulate the
Minister for not revising down the Budget estimates, but boldly keeping
them intact and ensuring that the priorities of the government are advanced
to ensure that rural development, amongst others, is firmly placed on the
agenda of service delivery.

The challenge facing the ones robbed of their land is the absence of a
budget for land restitution and the creation of new farmers. Obviously,
rural development cannot be relegated to one department as all departments
have a role to play, including the Department of Economic Development, so
that those who want to remain in the rural areas are allowed to do so. Many
beneficiaries of land restitution have to wait for years before they can be
compensated because of lack of budget. This is unacceptable.

We invited the Human Sciences Research Council, HSRC, who shared their warm
appreciation for the vision and MTBPS, although they raised certain
reservations. One of the reservations, amongst others, is funding for
health.

The ANC acknowledges the MTBPS for taking into account the importance of
local governments by ensuring that the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, MIG,
grows over the MTEF period. It may not be enough, but it will go a long way
in ensuring that, one day, there will not be much difference in
infrastructure development between rural and urban areas.

The commitment of this government in creating sustainable and descent jobs
is very clear in the MTBPS, if you look at the budgetary commitment for
infrastructure.

The strategy and tactics document states:

   The central task in the current period is the eradication of the
   socioeconomic legacy of apartheid; and this will remain so for many years
   to come. However, the establishment of a government based on the will of
   the people, progress in the transformation of the state, the codification
   of rights and implementation of progressive socioeconomic programmes
   represent a major change in the sociopolitical environment.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank members of the Standing
Committee on Appropriations, across political parties, and staff for their
support in ensuring that the MTBPS report was produced timeously and
adopted unanimously by the committee members.

I also thank my secretary for going the extra mile to ensure that
everything ran smoothly. The ANC support the MTBPS. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers and hon Members of
Parliament, South Africa, like a number of other emerging economies, finds
itself in a recession. Our tax revenue declined form R740,4 billion to
R657,5 billion, while expenditure decreased from R843,3 billion to R841
billion. Budget deficit increased from an estimated 3,8% to 7,6% of Gross
Domestic Product, GDP.

The DA agrees with the hon Minister of Finance that the increase in the
Public Sector Wage Bill, which is higher than the official inflation rate,
may lead to higher inflation pressure. Another inhibiting factor is the
possible escalation in the price of electricity of 45%, which will
adversely affect the entire economy. In a nutshell, further job losses are
inevitable.

We compete in a global market where a competitive advantage of manufactured
goods is influenced by the cost of energy. For instance, it’s estimated
that the cost of producing one ounce of gold will increase by 30% if the
price of electricity increases by 45% in three years. At the current gold
price production it will no longer be viable, leading to mine closures and
job losses.

The greatest threat to the present South African economy, however, is
unemployment. Estimates of job losses vary from 20% to 40%. Chronic
unemployment has become a fact of life to millions of South Africans. It
was estimated that in June 2004, 4,1 million workers were without jobs.
What we need is an economic policy that makes South Africa independent
from, and not dependent upon social grants.

More than ever before, we need a broad, holistic and strategic economic
policy and leadership, and not irresponsible populist verbal attacks on our
current fiscal and monetary policies. It appears that the Congress of South
African Trade Unions, Cosatu, and the African National Congress Youth
League, ANCYL, are determined to question the credibility of a senior
member of Cabinet whose portfolio relates to planning, rather than to
provide solutions to alleviate poverty, improve service delivery, curb the
breakdown in law and order, and retain the independence of the judiciary -
key components for sustained future economic growth.

The DA is in a position to provide a viable alternative economic policy. We
acknowledge that apartheid was wrong. It used race to discriminate,
embitter and drive millions of South Africans apart. Let us not repeat the
mistakes of the past. Let us create an open society with equal
opportunities where choice and merit are used, and not race quotas and
cronyism, to provide an economic environment with positive growth and
employment.

Incessant government intervention inhibits economic growth. The core
function of the government is to co-ordinate and regulate. We need an
effective and efficient public sector, free of corruption, which endeavours
to develop our human capital, not to enrich a small close - knit élite with
political ties to the ruling party. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D D VAN ROOYEN: Hon Deputy Speaker, Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
fellow colleagues, central to our developmental agenda as the ANC, the
leading party in government, is the mammoth task of ensuring that all South
Africans are provided with an opportunity to pursue economic growth,
development and redistribution so as to realise a better life for all.

Our government’s fiscal policy is the axis around which this developmental
mandate orbits. It enables us to deliver on this mandate by providing
resources in a manner that is sustainable and that complements the much-
needed stability of the economy. As the ruling party, our beloved
organisation the ANC has, since coming into power, striven for the
realisation of a strategic perspective of contributing to a stable economy,
which we understand to be crucial for creating an environment in which job
creation can accelerate, entrepreneurial activities can flourish, and
companies and households can invest with confidence.

The current global economic contraction has placed all governments’
revenues under severe pressure at a time when economies require fiscal
support the most, and at a time when liquidity is very scarce. As a result
of our sound countercyclical fiscal policy, unlike many other countries in
the world where budget deficits have increased, our healthy public finances
enabled us to support growth and spending on infrastructure and social
services.

In fact, our fiscal response to the economic recession is regarded as one
of the largest in the world. The fact that our fiscal and monetary policy
cushioned the impact of the budget deficit, which we are all aware moved
from 1% of our GDP in the 2008-09 financial year to a projected deficit of
7,6% this financial year, is a much-welcomed reaction and confirms the
correctness of the fiscal path we have opted for as the ruling party. We
regard this development as a positive step forward towards the realisation
of our massive programme to build economic and social infrastructure.

As the ANC we concur that the current expenditure trend will widen
government borrowing requirements in order for the government to continue
with its noble agenda of bettering the lives of our people. The fact that
we entered the economic downturn with a budget surplus is a big plus for us
as it creates space for us to continue with our long-term investment plans
without having to worry too much about the recession’s impact on such
plans. It is in the same context that, as the ANC, we support the projected
consolidated borrowing requirement of R285 billion.

The ability of government to finance its expenditure programme in a
sustainable way is a very central principle of any fiscal policy. A key
indicator of sustainability are debt-service costs. Hon Speaker and
respectable House, if these costs are left to rise as a percentage of GDP
over the long term, we will find it difficult to stick to our expenditure
programme. To avoid the possibility of such an occurrence, we urge the
Ministry to ensure that related spending is driven by real physical
investment projects that will assist us to create jobs that will lead to
growth in household expenditure, that will lead to injections to the tax
revenue and that will make a positive contribution to the much-deserved
economic growth.

It is our belief that such an approach will enable us to treat borrowing as
a temporary solution that cannot be allowed to burden generations and
inhibit future growth and service delivery. We agree that sustaining higher
borrowing will lead to our having spiralling debt costs and eventually to a
costly adjustment through lower spending on service delivery or, the most
unfortunate situation, to increasing tax rates. This might have a very
serious adverse effect on economic stability and growth.

Central to our attempt to curb a budget deficit will be the oversight
capacity of both the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces. As cited in the report of the Standing Committee on Finance, it
is our submission as the ANC that, inter alia, the proposed measures be
adhered to. The intended expansion of public sector capital expenditure is
seen as a good enabler for economic productivity capacity, which will
empower the state to continue providing required services and goods.

The expansion in public infrastructure expenditure is also welcomed as an
initiative that will enhance the government agenda of economic growth and
transformation of the economy in order to create decent work and
sustainable livelihoods. We are convinced as the ANC that the newly
introduced Ministries of the National Planning Commission and of
Performance Monitoring and Evaluation will assist us in dealing with the
problem of integrated implementation of all earmarked infrastructure
programmes.

Indeed, our economic and social development is about our collective
commitment as government, the private sector and civil society to realising
the cited priorities of our government. It will be of the utmost importance
to work together. Working together we can do. “Eendrag maak mag.” [There is
strength in unity.]

Hence, it is necessary for all of us to pay tax. Tax revenue has emerged as
the key contributor to national income. Therefore it is extremely important
for all taxpaying South Africans and companies to prioritise the payment of
tax. In order to cater for current development needs and narrowing the
worrisome budget deficit we really need to double our efforts and do things
differently to boost tax revenue. We therefore welcome the tireless efforts
in the form of penalties that are to be introduced by our hard-working,
South African Revenue Service, Sars team. As commanded by the holy book,
let’s make sure that we owe no man anything and continue to shower the
downtrodden with our love by abiding by the law by paying tax.

Taking our cue from the high-growth strategy studies conducted on 13
economies, we must use the five established growth reasons to further
harness the economic moment we are currently in. These are: shifting
resources to labour-intensive sectors; having fiscal and monetary policies
that promote balanced, sustainable growth; increasing competitiveness,
raising productivity, lowering costs; having trade and industrial policies
that lower costs and create jobs; and improving public-sector performance
and service delivery.

As the ANC we support the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, the MTBPS,
and remain convinced that it is a budgetary and fiscal declaration of
intent that has the full potential of ensuring that collectively we deliver
on our mandate as assigned by the South African majority. Indeed, this
MTBPS is an appropriate foundation for an economically sound Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, MTEF. Ke a leboga, Mmusa-kgotla. [Thank you, Deputy
Speaker.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, hon members, allow me firstly to
thank all of the speakers for their very valuable contributions and for
their support of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, MTBPS. I must
say, we could have saved a lot of time if they had only said, “we support”,
but I understand that this is a debating chamber, and so we have to debate!

Allow me also to thank the heads of the various committees: Mr Mufamadi, Mr
Sogoni and Mr De Beer from the NCOP for their contribution towards
implementing the new role that Parliament has and for their thoughtful
approach to what we have before us.

Today is actually the day on which we – this executive that sits on my
right – have been in office for six months. You can see that, in a very
short six months, we have had a crisis, we have had a response to that
crisis, and we have had some very insightful contributions from the ruling
party and others on how best to manage that crisis so that South Africans,
whether they be rich or poor, can actually cope with it much better.

In essence, I think what we would like to say to South Africa today as we
debate the MTBPS, is that we reiterate the fact that we will deliver on our
priorities as government. These priorities are: better health care; better
education; more work opportunities – notwithstanding the current loss of
jobs; our focus on rural development; and our determination to eliminate
the crime and corruption that so bedevils South Africa.

We are saying that we will spend the R78 billion allocated over the next
three years in a prudent way and take into account all of the many factors
that have been raised by all the parties that have spoken here today.

We are also assuring South Africans and this House that the prudence, which
has marked our previous management of finances, will continue to
characterise the way in which we approach our responsibilities. We want to
assure you that South Africa’s fiscus is in good hands – that being the
hands of Cabinet as a whole – and that we are very mindful of the tough
situation we find ourselves in, and of the responsibilities that we carry.

Notwithstanding the difficulties that we have, we are also mindful of the
fact that we have to take South Africa back on to a growth path. As the
MTBPS said itself, President Zuma is quite determined that we don’t just go
back to the old norm, but that all of us, as South Africans, contribute to
finding a new way of growing our economy to create many more jobs for many
generations of South Africans who have been excluded from this possibility.


We are also committed – and we welcome the commitment of all of the parties
in Parliament – to stopping waste and corruption, getting value for money,
and to ensuring that the 1,5 million civil servants that work in government
will join us in this particular campaign.

Above all, I think we need to send a message to South Africa that we will
look after people who have lost their jobs and help them to either get
retrained or to benefit from the UIF or from other measures that are
available from the state.

We also want to send a message to the poor that their social grants will
not be cut as far as we can help it, certainly not for the foreseeable
future, and in fact we want to protect their income so that they can
continue to have the benefit of state support.

We also want to send a message to our small, medium and large businesses,
and the entrepreneurs who manage them, that they need to become a lot more
innovative and bold – notwithstanding the climate we find ourselves in –
and create jobs which will ensure that South Africans can have the dignity
of a job, rather than just being dependent on welfare.

Let me also then give you some context. There was a G20 meeting over the
weekend in St Andrews. Those of you who are golfers will know that St
Andrews is supposed to be the home of golf. All I could do was stand at a
distance and watch the golf course. I am sure that there are people in this
Chamber who would have enjoyed being on the green grass.

Arising from that G20 meeting, a set of messages begin to emerge. The first
is that the stimulus has certainly helped the world to cope with this
recession better than what it would have. Our own efforts at a stimulus
package – if you want to call it that – have helped South Africa as well.

The second message is that there is a recovery on the way, but it is a very
cautious recovery. All of the graphs around the world are ticking upwards.
But that ticking is a very gradual one; it’s a very small one and no one
can say for certain that it will amount to the “V” that everybody would
like to see.

The third message is that there is agreement that the exit strategy that we
all speak of and that some are beginning to venture towards, is not at our
doorstep just yet. There needs to be continuous co-ordination within the
G20 and around the G20 to ensure that we don’t have the “W” that Mr Rubini
and others spoke of.

It is of particular concern for us in South Africa and other developing
countries if developed countries randomly exit from their stimulus
strategies, as that could actually have a devastating effect on developing
countries.

The fourth message is that there is a discussion going on now in the G20
and in other quarters which says that we need a new growth path, not just
for South Africa but, indeed, for the world as a whole. There needs to be
greater inclusivity, more balance in a multiple sense and the necessity to
look for new what I call sources of growth.

We also talked about climate financing, but only to decide not to talk
about it too much. There is still a huge debate going on about who bears
responsibility for the climate challenges that we face, who should support
the developing countries and how, in respect of both adaptation financing
and mitigation financing, this support should be rendered.

Finally, there was a lot of discussion around regulation of the global
financial system, around bonuses and some of the issues that hon members
have actually raised here.

More specifically, I think we need to agree with members that we need to be
cautious; we need to stabilise our economy; we need to ensure that we lay a
new basis for the way in which South Africa grows. But laying that new
basis is not going to come from one side of the House or from one social
partner; it has to come from all of us, and that is what I hope this House
will begin to focus its mind on and ensure that we get the debate that we
require.

The new growth path that we speak of provides an opportunity for all sides
of the House to co-create this new growth path. We have several parties who
have said, “we have ideas”. Well, let us try to create a forum where those
ideas can be shared and let us tap into the creativity of all South
Africans so that all of us can actually benefit.

We all agree with Mr Koornhof and others that our economy needs to be more
competitive and that our small and medium-sized enterprises, SMEs, need to
be supported more. We also agree with Mr Oriani-Ambrosini that we actually
need a balance between spending, saving and debt management at the
household. But there is no one answer to all of these things. There is a
new balance that is required. There are times when we need to spend more
and there are times when we need to save more. As the Christmas season
comes up, that’s the balance that we actually require.

We agree with Dr Rabie that the 45% electricity tariff increase is not the
ideal for South Africa. The assurance that we, as Treasury and other
departments, can give is that there is a collective in government that is
working very hard under Ministers Hogan and Peters to ensure that we
minimise the impact and tariff increase itself. We can also assure you that
that work will actually carry on.

Let me assure you that the deficit is going to be managed. Debt is going to
be managed very carefully. While we are also concerned about imposing upon
future generations, these are, unfortunately, necessary things that we have
to do to make sure that government can meet its commitments and the
expectations of our people as well.

I want to agree with those colleagues who talked about service delivery and
the need for improvement. The ruling party does not tolerate nepotism. It
will not tolerate cronyism and wants to fight corruption as eagerly as
anybody else.

I think what we need to focus on is, not who is better than the other, but
rather on generating a collective commitment in this House, signed by all
400 members, in which we undertake to do everything each of us can do –
regardless of the political party – to create a new culture in this
country. That’s what we need. Not competition about who has the better
idea. [Applause.]

So, let me throw out an offer to all of us: let us find a way – and perhaps
the whips of the parties need to meet to discuss this – to create the basis
for a collective agreement on how we could fight corruption in this country
in all its manifestations. Remember – and I repeat this – it is not just
public servants who are corrupt; corruption comes from all forms and sides
of our economy. It requires a total cultural change in terms of the way we
approach business in South Africa and particularly, business with
government.

So, let me invite all political parties to join us in this campaign.
[Applause.]

We also don’t want a bloated bureaucracy that does not deliver and that is
low in its productivity. Let us also, together with Minister Baloyi, share
ideas about how we move from where we are. We want more people to be
employed in the frontline of service delivery, as teachers, as nurses, as
doctors and as people delivering services rather than sitting behind desks.
I’m sure he is going to come back to Parliament and give us more feedback
in terms of what we are going to do concretely.

Finally, I want to agree that we urgently need to help Parliament set up
the Parliamentary Budget Office. The budget allocations have been made to
Parliament to enable this to happen. We would like to play whatever
supportive role we can play, because this is the only way in which
Parliament can hold not only the executive, but also various departments,
to account and understand what is involved in budgets and ask people the
right kinds of questions.

Oversight by Parliament takes another step through this current process
with the Money Bills Amendment legislation allowing Parliament, through the
appropriation committee – as we will discuss in a moment – to look into
whether and what kind of role Parliament can play in amending budget
allocations.

So, Parliament has an important responsibility. We welcome that
responsibility and, over the next few years, we hope to work with you to
ensure that there is greater accountability.

Once again, my thanks to all of the people who have contributed to the
MTBPS and the debate on it. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to raise a point, hon members, while hon
Sogoni is making his way here. The level of noise is unbearable. Please, I
am not saying that you shouldn’t talk, but we must be able to hear the
speaker.

Mr E M SOGONI: Deputy Speaker, colleagues, again the tabling of the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill affords Parliament and the people of South
Africa the opportunity to reflect and build on the progress that has been
made to change the lives of ordinary people, specifically the poorest of
the poor. The Bill is tabled in the context of a devastating recession that
led to a declining budget, when a number of firms had to close shop and
thousands of workers lost their jobs.

The economic situation has resulted in the slowing down of economic growth
and obviously reduced fiscal space. However, we take solace from the fact
that the ANC-led government voluntarily maintained sound financial
management and prudent fiscal financial choices that should caution us
against the worst effects of the recession.

The national Adjustment Budget is tabled in line with section 12 of the
Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, Act 9 of 2009, and
section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of 1999. The Money
Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act enjoins the Minister to
present the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, MTBPS, and the Adjustment
Appropriation Bill to a joint sitting of the finance committees of
Parliament, which was done. I will not go into the rest of the procedures
of the Act. It is safe to say that the committees held hearings with a few
departments.

The first department to be worked with... in fact, I will just go through a
few departments. My colleagues will cover the other departments. The
Department of Public Works received, amongst others, R353 million, intended
for the implementation of the devolution of the Local Government: Municipal
Property Rates Act. The monies will be passed on to the provinces which
will, in turn, allocate it to municipalities to evaluate all properties in
their jurisdiction, so that they can finally charge levies or give
exemption for certain properties that do not qualify. Members need to
support this process in their constituencies, because communities resist,
because they receive notices that do not explain the purpose of those
notices.

The first challenge the department faces is the roll-out of the Re Kgabisa
Tshwane project, which is supposed to be extended to other cities. The roll-
over requested has been accepted by the committee, but the department needs
to spend this money, as this roll-over is being approved for the second
time. We propose that the Portfolio Committee on Public Works engages the
department on their clear plans of spending these funds. Their second
challenge is to address the capacity challenges in the department, to
deliver on the expectations of their client departments, as their client
departments seriously underspend in capital projects. We discovered that
there are no service level agreements between the departments. Many
departments underspend on capital expenditure, because the department lacks
the necessary capacity.

The other department that was visited was the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs, which has also been allocated over R500
million to assist with provisional free basic services for the poor
households. Despite major achievements since 1994, many communities and
households still remain trapped in poverty. This should go a long way
towards achieving a better life for all.

The department also applied, that is the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs, for a roll-over of R287 million of the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant, MIG. We were informed that 33
municipalities underspent. However, the department wants to reallocate this
money to 50 other municipalities that have capacity to spend. This is in
contradiction with the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of 1999.
Section 43(4)(a) of that Act says it “does not authorise the utilisation of
a saving in (a) an amount specifically and exclusively appropriated for a
purpose mentioned under a main vote”. Clause 6.1.4(a) of the Treasury
Regulations on roll-overs states that unspent funds on payments for capital
assets may only be rolled over to finalise projects or assets acquisitions
still in progress.

So, the objective of the MIG is to address backlogs with regard to
infrastructure. In fact, we were informed by the official of the department
that they want to redirect this money, as indicated, to these 50
municipalities. But the objective of MIG is to address backlogs with regard
to infrastructure. Now, if you take this money away, it means that the poor
communities of those municipalities will remain deprived of the necessary
infrastructure development. In many cases, those officials do not
understand the situation in different municipalities. At the end of the
year, people get bonuses for not having delivered. Section 154(1) of the
Constitution states – no, I am just ... it is all parties – and I quote,
“The national and provincial governments, by legislative and other
measures, must support and strengthen the capacity of municipalities to
manage their own affairs, to exercise their powers and to perform their
functions”. Section 34(1) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
Management Act, Act 56 of 2003, states that, “the national and provincial
governments must by agreement assist municipalities for efficient,
effective and transparent financial management”. So, the Department of Co-
perative Governance and Traditional Affairs must co-ordinate provincial and
local departments and Treasury, to establish support committees for
municipalities. The 50 well-spending municipalities should actually be
assisted to access the Expanded Public Works Programme incentive scheme.

We also met with the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform, which
informed us that they are unable to accelerate land restitution, as they
have run out of funds. At the end of the second quarter, they were at 91%.
I think the Minister indicated that in the House one day. Treasury has not
made any adjustments towards land restitution. It is difficult to
understand why. The biggest challenge of this department is the price they
have to pay for land, which is three times the market value. So, clearly,
the willing-buyer and willing-seller approach does not work. In fact, the
department refers to this willing buyer and willing seller approach as a
willing buyer and unwilling seller approach. So, the alternative for
government is the legal expropriation route. The ANC’s Polokwane resolution
says, amongst others, “where necessary, expropriate property in the public
interest or for public purpose in accordance with the Constitution to
achieve equity, redress, social justice and sustainable development. All
legislation pertaining to expropriation must be aligned with the
Constitution”. So, we are not talking about wholesale expropriation. We are
talking about expropriation in line with the Constitution. [Interjections.]
Yes! [Laughter.]

Also, the request by the Department of Home Affairs for a roll-over of R150
million, to acquire the advanced passenger processing system, and also the
“Who am I Online” project, should be granted, as these programmes are
necessary for both the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup and the smartcard
identity documents. However, the Department of Home Affairs need to move
fast in resolving the tender issues associated with these projects. During
the hearings of the first quarterly reports, the department indicated to
the committee that they would like to take over the responsibility of this
tender from the State Information Technology Agency, Sita. The committee
agreed with that. The process needs to be fast-tracked as the 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup is just around the corner.

I would like to take this opportunity to again thank the members of the
committee and the staff, for the long hours they spent in compiling their
reports. So, the African National Congress supports the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M SWART: Deputy Speaker, the worldwide recession affected South Africa
much more than we expected. Economic recovery will be slow and uneven, and
the recession has resulted in job losses, business closures, reduced
consumer spending and, therefore, much reduced income for the state. The
expected revenue shortfall of some R70 billion plus will have a serious
impact on the spending ability of government and discipline is required in
this regard.

I would like to ask the hon Dubazana to listen to this, and when looking at
the appropriations, one finds considerable spending by government on social
security, which the DA welcomes, hon Dubazana. It remains a matter of
concern, however, that provision is made once more to bail out poor
performing and poorly managed state-owned enterprises such as the SABC and
the Land Bank. How long will government persist in using taxpayers’ money
to hide poor management, ascribable mainly to affirmative action and cadre
deployment?

Considering the expected shortfall in revenue, the Minister had to do a
fine balancing act when compiling the appropriations. Thought had to be
given to ways of financing the shortfall. The decision to initially do so
by way of loans is acceptable, but it will be necessary to bring
expenditure into line with revenue as soon as possible. The main options
open to the Minister are to either cut spending or raise taxes or both. If
government manages taxpayer money wisely, however, tax increases can be
avoided. Major financial losses occur by way of corruption, as presented to
us by the Public Service Commission.

In this regard, they said that 868 cases of financial misconduct by public
servants were reported to them in the 2007-08 financial year. The total
cost reported emanates from unauthorised, irregular, fruitless and wasteful
expenditure, as well as losses resulting from criminal conduct amounting to
R21,77 million in that year. Employees were found guilty in 709 of the 868
finalised cases of financial misconduct. However, only 163, which is
22,75%, of the employees found guilty were dismissed and an amount of just
R8,8 million could be recouped. Criminal proceedings were instituted
against only 210 of the employees found guilty.

During that same financial year, 249 senior managers in the Public Service
failed to submit financial disclosures to the Public Service Commission.
This leads one to believe that they might have something to hide and that
we may have seen only the tip of the corruption iceberg in the Public
Service. The Auditor-General’s finding then is, therefore, not surprising,
that as many as 2 300 public servants benefited from contracts valued at
R615 million. Mr Minister, we know that you, personally, are serious about
rooting out corruption. You have stressed that, as Members of Parliament,
we should all assist in the fight against and disclosing of any form of
corruption, irrespective of political affiliation. We agree with you on
this, Mr Minister, and we will disclose corruption wherever possible.

You have also asked, just now, that corruption be depoliticised. Once
again, we agree with the principle, as corruption affects everybody,
especially the poor. Corruption, after all, is stealing money from those
who need it most. As parliamentarians, however, it is difficult to claim
the moral high ground, when we sit here with colleagues guilty of
corruption in Travelgate and in all likelihood many other shady deals.
[Interjections.] It becomes even more difficult when we learn of taxpayers’
money being wasted on the protection of political officials outside of
government, such as Julius Malema. [Interjections.]

Little or no action has been taken on these issues, other than protecting
comrades in the ANC. The question then is whether we, as parliamentarians,
are setting the right example. The answer is clearly no. Politics will,
therefore, unfortunately remain the name of the game until such time as we
have cleaned up our own act right here in Parliament. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Deputy Speaker, let me just say, on behalf of Cope, that
we will take up the challenge, together with the Minister, to fight
corruption. We won’t be found wanting. We will join that campaign to fight
corruption. Whenever corruption is unveiled, it is me talking. Whenever we
see and unravel that, we believe that the Ministers will take action on it.
So, we take that call very seriously, and we will bring it to your
attention.

Deputy Speaker, dealing with the Appropriation Budget is basically to deal
with the Budget and also address departments on unforeseen expenditure
which departments have to budget for and the shifting of programmes. But
what we have seen in this Adjustments Appropriation Bill is basically a new
trend, on a scale that has not been seen before, of departments using the
words “unforeseen expenditure” and “unavoidable expenditure” when talking
about huge amounts of money. This, actually, isn’t necessarily due to
“unforeseen expenditure”, but bad planning.

The second thing that we are worried about is a trend that we have seen in
this department of a shift towards and building up of top-heavy Ministries.
We wonder whether this is not the necessary management of political
divergence and the management of various political interests in the party.
Actually, we are worried about the bloating and top-heavy structures. We
are worried about the fact that some of these shifts are creating top-heavy
structures - the shift of money from functions.
The last thing that we want to say, Minister, is that it is not everything
about the shift and the creation of the new departments or the unbundling
thereof is wrong. For example, one can look at education. It is good that
in education the issue of post-school skills is going to be transferred.
The 23 Sector Education and Training Authorities, Setas, are going to be
transferred from the Department of Labour to the Department of Higher
Education and Training. That’s good. We need to support that, because it is
about addressing the challenges that we have.

Then, the period ahead of us is going to be bumpy, because we are going to
make sure that there is accountability. In heeding the call of the
Minister, there will be oversight to ensure that the department actually
sticks to its plans, sticks to its programmes and that Ministers be held
accountable, by appearing before the committees when they are called and
not hide behind the Public Finance Management Act. The Public Finance
Management Act afforded us the presence of department officials or
accounting officers, not Ministers. Accountability means you appear; you
take political responsibility, because the buck stops with the Minister.

Therefore, as Cope, we want to say we are going to stand up and rise to
those particular challenges, Minister. We want to come to your committee. I
am sure you are going to listen to that. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP carries in the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill its misgivings about the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement, MTBPS, as this Bill reflects the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement’s missed opportunities and lack of urgency.

The Bill should have been the tool to begin bringing about the required
structural adjustments which we feel are necessary. This would have been
the time to begin merging the many senior government institutions,
providing essentially the same services to Small, Medium and Micro
Enterprises, SMMEs, thereby avoiding committing R1,7 billion in the future
for the Khula Direct when, effectively, the National Empowerment Fund can
provide the same services, and all their agencies can be assembled in a
matter of weeks or, perhaps, months, as commercial entities do when merged
into a single entity.

This would be the time to shut down the commercially nonviable aero-
manufacturing division of Denel, to avoid recapitalising something that
continues to lose money. It would be the time to privatise South African
Airways, SAA, SAA entities and older state-owned enterprises, SOEs, as an
alternative to rising public debt, wherever it is possible.

It would be the time to transform the Land Bank into a specialised division
of the Industrial Development Corporation, IDC, rather than recapitalising
it with R1 billion, to perpetrate its 20 year management crises and
corruption track record. It is really a matter, at this point, of putting
good money after bad money, rather than providing it with the management it
needs.

This would be the time to relook government-assisted economical sectors,
which are not viable in the global market place, rather than increasing
their subsidies, and focus it, as it had to be, on social services. Since
1994, South Africa has not undertaken a structural transformation of its
parastatals and of government’s industrial policies, with the end result
that the pre-1994 mould is being kept alive, in fear that anything
replacing it may be worse. More suggestions, as the Minister asked, will be
coming by letters. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms B T NGCOBO: Deputy Speaker and members, the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement, MTBPS, which we are debating here today is a statement of
courage and hope in the most turbulent time in recent economic history. We
must look beyond this crisis and encourage the expansion of public
services, especially in the areas of education and health. It is in this
spirit that we welcome the MTBPS within the current difficulties we face.

In this regard, the ANC has set up a programme to improve education by:
progressively expanding the nutrition programme to include high school
learners in poorer communities; improving the national norms and standards
in teaching and learning including providing learner-support material and
adequate education infrastructure; reviewing our curriculum to best suit
the needs of the developmental state; reviewing Adult Basic Education and
Training to ensure that it better responds to the skills demands of the
country; establishing a National Education Evaluation and Development Unit
for purposes of monitoring, evaluation and support; expanding the number of
no-fee schools and progressively introducing free education for the poor up
to undergraduate level; improving the conditions of service of teachers;
fast-tracking early childhood development to ensure universal access to
Grade R by 2010 and doubling the number of facilities available for 0 to 4-
year-old children by 2014; and to enhance the quality of education and
skills development focusing on improving the foundation phase literacy and
numeracy and on increasing the number of learners that pass Grade 12,
particularly in mathematics and science.

We welcome the additional adjustment of R524 million allocated for
workloads on literacy and numeracy for Grade 1 to 6 in Quintile 1-3
schools, and the total adjustment of R561,6 million. An adjustment of R12
billion for salaries to provinces has been given, however, this is not
specifically for education.

One of the critical areas of spending that will require more resources over
the medium-term is our health care system. We therefore welcome the
department’s ten-point plan and hope that this will lay the foundation for
the universal access to free quality health care supported by the National
Health System, and revitalisation of hospitals.

We recommend that our spending on health care over the medium-term must
focus on developing a reliable single health information system;
intervention to reduce the high cost of health provision; developing
recruitment and human resource development strategy for health
professionals and preventing the exodus of health professionals to other
countries; accelerating the roll-out of the comprehensive health care
programme, such as provision of antiretroviral treatment which will be
dispensed at all health facilities; and accelerating the programme for
hospital recapitalisation and revitalisation including innovative solutions
that will accommodate private public partnership.

The adjusted estimates reflect that the total increase for the department
amounts to R1,3 billion, which includes 17% roll-over funds from 2008-09.

One of the biggest challenges facing our health care system and which poses
a significant threat to our future is HIV and Aids. The current death rate
from HIV and Aids-related deaths is becoming higher than that of the birth
rate. We must urgently address this matter with a focus on prevention and
treatment.

Adjusted estimates include R900 million for antiretroviral treatment and
Comprehensive HIV and Aids Care Management and Treatment; R160 million for
H1N1 influenza; R20 million for countrywide measles and polio mass
immunisation campaign; R30 million for 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup Health
preparation strategy grant; general salary adjustments for the national
Department of Health is R11 million; and for the public entities National
Health Laboratory Service and Medical Research Council, R7,3 and R5,8
million respectively.

We support the adjusted appropriation of R18 billion for health care. We
welcome the MTBPS and wish to congratulate the Minister of Finance on
achieving his tasks under these difficult conditions. We further welcome
the reallocation of resources towards our five key priorities and look
forward to a government that spends more effectively without cutting back
on service delivery. The ANC supports the MTBPS. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M N MATLADI: Chairperson, the UCDP accepts the adjustments made in the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill. We, however, would like to highlight the
following: Very few departments do get a clean bill on audit opinion, which
means that most of the units in financial managements are still wanting. I
could give an example of the Department of Science and Technology, which
has received a clean audit opinion for the previous financial year. Well
done! However, eleven departments still received a qualified audit opinion.

Of serious concern is the Department of Defence, which received a qualified
audit opinion for seven consecutive years followed by the Department of
Labour, which has four years of qualified audit opinion and the Department
of Public Works had an irregular expenditure of R5,4 billion.

Underspending by departments is another concern which has resulted into
roll-overs of R1,5 billion for infrastructure and building projects, and it
spells out that work has not been done.

There are major strides taken to improve the Department of Home Affairs
which still has to pay attention to the following: Its revenue collections
- about R356 million revenue couldn’t be supported by documents in this
department; there was an irregular expenditure of R198,2 million; and
corruption is still the main challenge in the Department of Home Affairs.
With these remarks, we support the Adjustments Appropriation Bill. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon Members of Parliament,
the brief of the appropriations committee is that of parliamentary
oversight. Allow me to mention that the committee had a number of public
hearings with all government departments, the Human Science Research
Council, the Financial and Fiscal Commission and a number of independent
economists.

Before I discuss appropriations within a number of departments, allow me to
mention the following - and it has been mentioned before - the tax revenue
has declined and what we need is a leaner and more efficient Public
Service. The downturn in the economy has adversely affected millions of
South Africans and is estimated that by 2009-10 9,7 million, almost 10
million, South Africans, will depend upon social grants.

I agree with the hon Minister of Finance that our present social welfare
system places a heavy burden upon a relatively narrow tax base. Hon
members, be assured that the DA is very much in favour of our present
welfare system. The question, however, is, will we be able to afford this
in future? I think, therefore, that it is extremely important that we
encourage sustained future economic growth if we want to alleviate the
plight of the poor. What we need is a holistic growth strategy which will
represent the public and the private sectors, and will have to take
proactive decisions to address irregularities regarding corruption, fraud,
factors which inhibit service delivery and growth. This came to the fore
during the public hearings.

In an excellent submission to the Portfolio Committee on Appropriations,
the Human Sciences Research Council reported that 50% of all households in
rural areas experience hunger on a daily basis and that 50% to 80% could
not afford minimum nutrition prices. It was also reported that rural
households spend 9% to 15% more than urban ones for the same basket of
food. What was extremely worrying is that 51% of all severely hungry rural
households qualified for grants, but they did not receive them according to
Human Sciences Research Council. The DA concurs with the committee that
rural development, household food production and food security need serious
re-examination seen in the light of the steep rise in the price of basic
food.

I represent a rural constituency. Rural economic development must become a
key priority over the next three years. To illustrate the plight of the
rural areas, the Human Sciences Research Council submitted that of the 18
Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development projects, only two are
still in place. All the others have collapsed. Now, the question is why?
Somebody must account for that. I think it is of utmost importance that we
address this.

Forty per cent of all South Africans live in rural areas, but less than 10%
are economically active. This untenable state of affairs cannot be allowed
to continue.

Education and higher education will have to address the fact that more than
50% of the youth leaving school today are unemployed. The Human Sciences
Research Council suggested in this regard that we must discuss the
possibility of a youth transitional job scheme and rethink the present
school curriculum.

A number of issues regarding the Department of Health are the alarming
exodus of doctors, dentists, nurses, pharmacists and emergency personnel.
It’s always also mentioned to us that the campaign against HIV is important
and it is expected that more than 900 000 people will receive
antiretroviral treatment by the year 2012.

It is also indicated that for the past eight years there has been an
underfunding of the public health sector, which has led to deterioration in
the Public Health Service. The proposed new health insurance will have to
be properly costed in the forthcoming financial year ... Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J P GELDERBLOM: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members of the House, we
are indeed living in exciting times with a lot of change and renewal taking
place, also in our government and society at large. I share the sentiments
of all who are grateful for the hard work that went into the preparation of
the Adjustments Appropriation Bill. This was done in a difficult time where
we have to cut, save and shave in order to tighten our belts.

Many of the so-called adjustments we saw in the Bill - I will mention but
three - provided for the shifting of money to the new departments to
continue uninterruptedly with their functions. This was, in particular, the
case for the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries that
replaced the old Department of Agriculture, which will cease to exist due
to the reorganisation, and a total of almost R2,8 billion had to be shifted
from Vote 23 to Vote 35. A further R487,6 million is shifted to this new
department from the old Department of Water Affairs and Forestry for the
same reason as the funding follows the function.

The new Department of Water and Environmental Affairs under Vote 43 get
R7,4 million from the old department’s Vote 34. For the same reason, due to
function shift, R2,3 million shifted from the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs - the old Provincial and Local
Government department - to the new Department of Rural Development and Land
Reform. The whole of the former Department of Land Affairs is part of the
dowry of its successor.

We welcome the changeover to the new model where essential services are
clumped together under agriculture, where water had to shed forestry to
agriculture, and land took over the new function. Most will continue their
tasks without problems.

Under the strains of the current economic climate, we, together with our
officials, have to work smarter with the money allocated in order to derive
the maximum benefit for our people.

As Parliament and the relevant committees, we will have to keep an eye on
developments and make sure targets are adhered to when we get to the
quarterly reports.

On the roll-overs, an amount of R227 million for the construction of the De
Hoop Dam was necessary. This is to be welcomed as water is such a precious
commodity and we have to provide for future use under increasingly
challenging conditions.

Water and the availability of high quality drinking water stay a priority
and we should not run into any problems in future. Therefore, it is prudent
for us to invest now in water infrastructure, not only to stimulate
economic development, but to also supply those that still do not have
sufficient clean running water and to prevent our country from running into
any tight corners. We all know of the changes our climate undergoes. We
also know how much we are dependent on this precious resource to sustain
life and future growth. There are also vast sums of money rolled over to
keep the agricultural sector healthy. This is vital for food security and
sustainability.

A major point of focus for the future of our country is rural development.
Agriculture and water will play a very important role in this. We are happy
as the ANC that vast amounts of money had been contributed to the reform of
agriculture. Let me remind this House that in the state of the nation
address, the hon President Zuma said:

   People in the rural areas also have a right to electricity and water,
   flush toilets, roads, entertainment and sport centres as well as better
   shopping centres like those in the cities. They, too, have a right to be
   helped in farming so that they can grow vegetables and other things; and
   raise livestock so that they can feed themselves.

We have developed strategic thinking around rural development, but we also
have to consider many practical directions and new thinking of how we will
take on this challenge against the complex background of land reform and
transformation. It has to address the injustices of the past, foster
reconciliation and stability, stimulate economic growth and alleviate
poverty by improving household welfare.

We need all South Africans to revise their approach to rural reform. We
need innovative thinking as to how we go about acquiring land, settling
people with a view to succeed and be sustainable, but most important, it is
vital to do it in such a way that we arrive at harmonious and sustainable
solutions.

We do not need people who employ resistance tactics, but progressive ways
of solving problems. In this regard there is enough expertise available to
assist in negotiations and concluding the many outstanding matters. We have
to work together to improve our output in this regard. This is where we
should employ the innovative thinking I mentioned earlier.

From our side of the House, that is now the ANC side, we will stay on
course to the goals set out in our founding documents that also followed
its historic course through Polokwane into a modern and exciting state,
gearing for the future that we all long for. A joint future that brings
hope and a better life for all who live in South Africa. As South Africans,
we are a people full of optimism and working together we can do more to
stay relevant in the global village through discipline, dedication and hard
work. We support the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, we need to, firstly, remind ourselves
that the Adjustment Budget merely allows for unavoidable and unforeseeable
expenditure to be taken account of.

Let me, firstly, give an assurance to those members who raised concerns
about whether this provision has been applied correctly. I want to say that
it has, that we have been very careful, and that, in fact, a number of
requisitions for funds to be allocated through this mechanism were turned
down, because the Treasury committee, not any individual, was unconvinced
that it amounted to unforeseen and unavoidable expenditure. There were also
a large number of applications for roll-overs. Not all of them were
approved. Only those that had legitimate reasons given, which is largely
about long-term commitments to projects, were actually allowed.

Secondly, let us also give credit where it is due. Many years ago,
underspending was a serious problem in many areas, at provincial and at
national level. Today, underspending in the old form is no longer a
problem. Now the question is the quality of spending and the quality of
outcomes, and whether we are getting the value for money that we would
actually require.

Some colleagues have raised issues about the Municipal Infrastructure
Grant, MIG, during the course of these hearings and the speeches made
today. We are in agreement that this is something that we need to look at
more carefully, given that we want better and more effective delivery at a
local government sphere level. My colleagues from the Department for Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs will be engaging with us in
further discussions on that.

Land restitution, rural development and agricultural development have been
mentioned by several hon members as well. Minister Nkwinti and we are very
mindful of the necessity for more money to be allocated to land
restitution. Let us be frank. We have reached a point in this process where
it is totally unaffordable to carry on on the old basis. Some new basis has
been found, and I am going to leave it to Minister Nkwinti to address those
issues when he interacts with Parliament again. Let us be assured that the
focus of government, as a whole, on agricultural development and rural
development is a very profound one, and, as we move on, we will see a lot
more reserves coming from these two areas. Many of the thoughts that have
been expressed at the podium today will see fruition I am sure, as we find
our feet in these areas. So, there is a very profound commitment to
ensuring that we do create better work opportunities for our people in the
rural areas.

Several colleagues have addressed the issue of bail-outs. Again, let’s be
quite emphatic: Bail-outs are not going to be an endless mechanism of
funding for foolishness, mismanagement, poor judgment, poor strategic
leadership or no leadership at all. We are absolutely clear about that. So,
all of the colleagues on this side of the House to whom I have
responsibilities for state-owned enterprises, SOEs, it is quite clear that
over the next period and, already, for the last few months, we have imposed
very tough terms on SOEs that require state assistance. Those terms mean
that this assistance is not an endless process. It has a very finite
purpose. We expect finite things to be done. We expect the right things to
happen within SOEs. Otherwise, the SOEs, themselves, must actually review
the purpose for their existence.

Cabinet has also decided that there will be a review process for all of the
SOEs, together with the relevant Cabinet colleagues, to decide whether they
still have a purpose, whether they operate as effectively as they can do,
whether they duplicate some of their functions, and whether there can be
greater efficiency in the way they operate. Minister Hogan and I, amongst
others, are responsible for initiating this process.

We also agree with colleagues that greater productivity is required from
the Public Service. Here again, we have to emphasise that we have to do
more with less. Once again, some of our colleagues have come back to the
question of corruption, and are equivocating. Corruption cannot be
qualified. I think we must be quite unequivocal and quite unqualified about
the necessity to root it out. Now, there are all sorts of ifs and buts that
all of us can put forward. The one message we need to be absolutely
categorical and unequivocal about is that it is not going to be tolerated
in any form, anywhere, by anybody, on any side of this House. [Applause.]
That is the message that we need to get through.

We agree with Dr Rabie, for example, that we want to get the right balance
between welfare and work, between those who are supported by social grants
and the tax base that they actually depend upon. That is why, over the next
while, we are going to have a lot more emphasis on enterprise creation,
entrepreneurship and job creation, so that we can actually widen our tax
base and have, not just for the purposes of supplying more grants to people
but rather to ensure that people have the dignity of their own income and
the ability to make decisions about their own welfare, on the basis of what
they get. A wider tax base will also enable us, as government and as
society, to take on many more challenges that we have, in respect of both
our legacy and our future challenges.

So, let me thank everyone concerned for their contributions and for their
positive support of the Adjustments Appropriation Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.


                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL


                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The proceedings will initially take
the form of a question and answer session. I shall put each Vote in respect
of which adjustments have been made in turn, whereupon members will have
the opportunity to ask questions to the relevant Ministers, in respect of
these adjustments. Each party has been allocated a global time for all
Votes. Once a party’s time has expired, they will not be allowed to put
further questions. Members must please press the request to speak button,
if they wish to ask a question. Hon members will please wait until I
recognise them before putting their questions.

Vote No 1 – The Presidency - put.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, the DA wishes to raise concern
over the extra R7,6 million that has been allocated for the establishment
of the hotline that was originally planned to be established for R4
million, especially around the fact that the operational functionality of
this hotline is seriously questioned. However, our greatest concern is the
additional R12 million allocated for outstanding legal fees. Our efforts to
determine what these fees are for have yielded nothing to date. In the
absence of this information, the DA cannot support this adjustment for this
unavoidable and unforeseeable legal expense.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY – NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chairperson,
in respect of the hotline, I think that the hon Trollip would be aware of
the fact that there were teething problems in the early period, but now it
is entirely transparent. There is a flow of information and the responses
are there. So, if the grounds that he opposes it on are the teething
problems before the actual launch in the pilot period, I want to submit
that the grounds are pretty spurious.

In respect of the legal fees, there are two aspects to this. The one is
that it is very hard to budget for legal fees, partly because fees are
generated, and you can’t, in the middle of the year, say this particular
litigation now has to end. In the course of an institution like The
Presidency, anywhere, that there is extensive litigation, not just in the
volume of litigation but also in the fees, it is something entirely outside
of the control of any arm of government. For this reason, the request was
put. The Treasury committee applied its mind to it, and I am pretty sure
that this will be money well spent.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Chairperson and hon Minister, the view of the Congress of
the People is that in the current economic and service delivery challenges
facing our country, we definitely would have preferred that priority is
given to funding service delivery programmes directly, rather than the
expansion of the Cabinet, which cost an estimate of R170 million. Was there
no alternative that could have been found to deal with the challenges
facing the Presidency?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY – NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Hon
Ngonyama, I am not quite sure where that view is from, because it might be
way down there. In the context of the number of Ministries, I think that
those who were around in 1994 will know that we moved straight in. All of
the offices were there. But in the course of the past 15 years, a detailed
evaluation was done, led by a team, which my colleague, Minister Chabane,
actually led, that looked at every Ministry and its performance. It even
went through the questions that I asked here in Parliament about them. Then
the team arrived at a very strong motivation for the expansion of each of
these.
In the position that I am in presently, in the Planning Commission, I think
it is something that we will debate on at some length tomorrow, but I think
that the one issue that is not in dispute is that we need a planning
capacity that hasn’t been there. I think, similarly, if you explore all of
the other Ministries, it is necessary to understand that we need to
strengthen those who take policy decisions and those who will be
accountable for those decisions, which is why the Cabinet was expanded in
the way it was. Thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, this is just a follow-up. We
remain concerned, hon Minister, that the cost of establishment was
estimated to be R4 million. We are now allocating double that again to the
hotline. The concern around the legal fees, and I accept that in the
Presidency legal fees are very difficult to budget for, but we would like
to know whether these legal fees have got anything to do with a legal case
that the President was involved in, personally?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY – NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Again, I
think that in the context of the conventions, if people are entitled to
legal representation within the rules, all of these are aggregated and the
decisions on the particular allocations are entirely fungible within the
administration. You cannot say that there was a case running, arising from
the point when his Excellency, Jacob Zuma, was Deputy President, and now he
becomes President and you cut this thing off. I think that in the
convention these things flow together, and it is necessary that we accept
that as a norm.

What you can’t escape from is that government runs in relation to
opposition on the basis of trust as well. I want to look the hon Trollip in
the eye and say that President Zuma, on a number of occasions, has taken
unprecedented steps to work with the opposition, to afford them
opportunities to ask their questions, to build trust, and it is very
important that that be the platform that we take forward. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! I see hon L Ramatlakane, hon
D Carter, and hon H Ndude from Cope. Is it on the same question? Not on the
same question? I am guided by the screen, because I only put Vote 1 so far,
and now you have all pressed. Are you coming?

Ms H N NDUDE: Chair, I am covered. My question was on the legal fees.

Mr P F SMITH: Chair, with regard to the adjustment, it is R170 million, of
which R96 million is for unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure,
pertaining largely to the setting up of the new department, I understand,
the new Ministries. My question, Minister, would be when is it expected
that the two Ministries will be fully up and running, the departments fully
up and running, as well as the third department? Are we going to be in a
position next year, for example, where we are also having unexpected,
unavoidable expenditure in respect of departments, which are still in the
process of being established, or will this exercise be completed by the
time of the main Budget next year?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY – NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chair, the
numbers for the three departments are quite different. The Ministry that
deals with performance monitoring and evaluation already has infrastructure
in place, because there was always a Ministry in the Presidency. In the
adjustments estimate, there is provision for the expansion of that unit, so
that should move through.

The Ministry of Women, Children and People with Disabilities will actually
exit from the Presidency and establish its own infrastructure. That should
be dealt with by the time of the Budget in February. Similarly, depending
on what transpires in this House tomorrow on the Green Paper and the debate
in the NCOP next week, we should, by the time of the Budget in February,
have a fixed number. I think that the relationship that the Treasury would
lead government into with Parliament is to try and provide maximum
certainty, so that the provision for unforeseen and unavoidable
expenditures is used sparingly. That would be the case now; it’s been the
tradition, and I would imagine that it would be a convention carried
forward. Thank you.

Vote No 2 – Parliament – put.

Ms J D KILIAN: Chairperson, can I just quickly ask you? One of our members,
member Carter still wanted to ask a question on Vote No 1. She was
mentioned.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Well, I did ask whether there were
any, and then hon Ndude gave up, but we can go back to it then. Let’s just
get you, hon Carter. [Interjections.]

No, no, it is their time that they are eating into. Just leave it that way.
It is the Rules.

Ms D CARTER: Chairperson, thank you. Cope’s concern is why has an
additional R13 million been allocated for travelling expenses, etc.
However, only R4 million has been allocated towards the Ministry of Women,
Children and People with Disabilities.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY – PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION AS
WELL AS ADMINISTRATION: You will notice that a number of new Ministries
have been allocated money to start setting up their administrations and, as
you know, most of them are new. That amount is basically for that purpose,
and, as we go into the new financial year, when the systems and the
administration have been put up by the various departments, including this
one, whether a new budget is going to be allocated in accordance with the
functions and the programmes, which will be in those departments.
Basically, that is what accounts for the difference. Thank you.

Vote No 3 – International Relations and Co-operation – put.

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – put.

Mr M MNQASELA: Chair, in the light of the fact that R213 million has been
allocated to the Department of Home Affairs, to a department that lacks
proper financial management, lacks financial leadership and, of course,
displays a consistent trend of qualified audits, I would like to ask the
Minister: How will you ensure that we prevent this poor financial
management in the future? For this reason we are opposing this increase.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, before I even answer the question, the
hon member has decided he is going to oppose. But anyway, I will answer the
question.

First of all, until about two months ago the Department of Home Affairs had
an acting chief financial officer, who had been seconded from somewhere.
Now we have a permanent chief financial officer who is going to look after
the finances of the department.
Secondly, it is very clear that the major problem in terms of the
qualification comes from the revenue. The revenue is collected, but it is
not reconciled. So we are training our people in the offices that they must
work almost like a bank, that every day they must say, this is the service
that was requested, this is the amount that goes with this service, and
reconcile every day. If they do that, we will be on our way to improving
the financial management.

The second area of qualification was around asset management. The assets
had been recorded, but the problem came when assets were moved. The problem
was partly that the asset management was centralised. You cannot sit in
Pretoria and be responsible for assets that are sitting in
Pietermaritzburg. In every office there must be somebody in charge of
assets, who will account for the assets in every office. But if you
centralise it, it is very difficult to maintain good management of those
assets. So we are doing that, but I think hon members must understand that
we are training people to do this. It is not going to be an overnight
thing. We are hoping that it won’t be long before we also have a clean
audit, but it is going to take a few months to do that.

I am just being honest with you, because I believe that I have to answer
questions honestly and give the House an honest perspective. But it is
regrettable that the hon member didn’t even want to hear the answer before
making up his mind. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Chairman, we heard today from the Minister of
Finance that the allocation to the immigration function of the Department
of Home Affairs is tied to the development of the card component of the
Hanis project. If I understood that correctly, the question is in
developing the Hanis Project. How much of this money has already been tied
into the decision to implement the smart card with its microchip component?
If that has been implemented, how much consideration was given to the
findings of the Buthelezi administration of the Department of Home Affairs
that the microchip was a waste of money and the findings of the Prof Haysom
Commission on the matter?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Ngicela angiphindele Sihlalo, angizwanga
kahle ukuthi uthini. [Could he please repeat himself Chairperson? I could
not properly understand what he was saying.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The Minister is asking you to repeat
the question so that she can understand the question properly.

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: With pleasure, Chairperson. The Minister of
Finance drew a connection to the smart card. The options on the smart card
are to have a microchip or no microchip. During the Buthelezi
administration of the Department of Home Affairs ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, hon members!

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: ... a commission was established, led by Prof
Nicholas Haysom, which looked into the issue and decided that it was a
waste of money, and that there were cheaper options. So the question is:
How much of this allocation is already tied to a microchip smart card to
complete the Hanis project?

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, on a point of order: The request came from
the hon Minister for the hon member to repeat his question. Will that not
eat into our time?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): No, it will not eat into your time.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Thank you.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZASEKHAYA: Sihlalo, ungibuza ngento eyenzeka mhlawumbe
ngangisase Mnyangweni Wezempilo, mhlawumbe ngangise Mnyangweni Wobudlelwane
Namazwe Omhlaba, angazi. Kunguye umluleki wayo yonke lento eyayenzeka.
Kodwa impendulo yami ithi: ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, he is asking me about something
that happened when I might have either been at the Department of Health or
at the Department of International Relations and Co-operation; I do not
remember. And he was the consultant for everything that was happening then.
But my answer is ...]

... regarding the smart card, we have decided, as was decided by my
predecessor, that the smart card is essential for the Department of Home
Affairs, and we continue with that decision. Obviously, when we start
putting together the smart card, we will decide whether it has a microchip
or not. I think it would be necessary to have a microchip, but we are not
there yet. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, Minister. I want to
really caution members that when you ask questions, they must be related to
the subject matter, which is the Adjustments Appropriation Bill. You should
not go all over, around those particular issues.

Mr P F SMITH: Chairperson, on a point of order: On the matter of
adjustments, is it possible for anybody to adjust the air conditioning in
here?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): They will attend to it. Thank you
for that.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Chairperson, the Minister of Home Affairs, in her budget
speech to Parliament, was frank on the challenges faced by the Department
of Home Affairs, and we gave an undertaking, as the portfolio committee, to
work hand in hand with the department. As a result of that process, we have
visited all major ports of entry to South Africa, and we have compiled a
report on our visits and the challenges faced by the Department of Home
Affairs.

When we started at the beginning of this year, there was a turnaround
strategy in place to deal with a multiplicity of challenges, but there have
also been successes. I am sure that the Minister would be able to brief the
House on progress that has been made in regard to challenges found at the
border posts and also the offices of the Department of Home Affairs. Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon Chair, and thank you to the
chairperson of the portfolio committee. Yes, members would remember that my
predecessor put together the turnaround strategy. Amongst other things, it
would look at how to make sure that an identity document, ID, instead of
taking 120 days or more, takes less time. Processes were put in place, and
indeed a process was also put in place called “Track and Trace”, which
allows the applicant to track and trace where his or her application is.
But the department also uses that “Track and Trace” process to inform
members. Any member here who has applied for an ID recently will tell you
that when they apply, they receive SMSes saying, “we have received your
application”, “now it is being printed”, “now it is being dispatched”, “now
it is in the office where you can collect it”.
The turnaround strategy for the ID has resulted in an improvement of about
50% on the 120 days it used to take ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: You have just asked members
to make sure that the questions are related to the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill. What we are dealing with now, is way beyond that, Sir.
I am asking you to instigate your ruling that in actual fact we focus on
the issue at hand, which is the Adjustments Appropriation Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I just said that members must be
cautious, so I am hoping that they will be cautious. Let us just proceed
and see the improvement.

Mr M J ELLIS: Sorry, Mr Chairman, it is not just a question of being
cautious.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Ellis, I did make that ruling. I
said caution should be taken.

Mr M J ELLIS: I am asking you, Sir, to implement the Rules as they should
be. This has to do with the Adjustments Appropriation Bill, and questions
should be related to it, and answers should be related to it. There is no
need for any long discussions on other matters.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Correct, hon Ellis. I said
cautionary measures should be taken by members when they ask questions. Can
we allow that then to begin to improve in the House. Hon members, I think I
will make that appeal. However, Minister, you are on the floor – continue.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Sihlalo, into embi ukuthi laba bantu bafuna
ukuthi kuphendulwe imibuzo yabo kuphela, eyabanye ingaphendulwa.
[Chairperson, the sad thing is that these people want me to respond only to
their questions, and not to other people’s questions.]

When it is their questions, relevant or irrelevant, they never stand up and
say, “that question is irrelevant”. When an hon member from this side has
asked the question and I am trying to answer ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: The hon Minister is
standing up now and accusing us of things that we actually don’t do. We are
saying that we are asking questions on the Adjustments Appropriation Bill,
and the Minister has no right to stand up and say that we don’t.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I get your point. But she never
referred to anybody; she was just generalising. So can we just allow the
Minister to finish? [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Should I continue? How much time do I have?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Ministers have unlimited time, in
terms of the Rules. [Interjections.] So can we just leave it? The more you
interject, the more you give them time yourselves. So just leave the
Minister to proceed. These are your Rules.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon Chair. Maybe the hon members
must understand what our mandate is. If we talk about improvement,
everything I have talked about is within the mandate of the Department of
Home Affairs, and is within the turnaround strategy. I have not moved away
from the question.

Secondly, I would like to say, since the hon Oriani-Ambrosini was talking
about the microchip, we now have state-of-the-art passports, which you get
in a very short time. I don’t know whether any of you have applied for a
passport recently. The state-of-the-art passport has a microchip, hon
Oriani-Ambrosini, and it has been turned around. Also, if you have lost
your ID, you can get a temporary ID on the spot. We can scan your finger,
and we can verify that you are on our population register, and we can give
you an ID.

Hon members, let me also take this opportunity to say that we have started,
and are going to accelerate, the registration of children at birth. I hope
hon members, during the recess, that you will take the opportunity to
encourage their constituents to register their children. We also want
everybody who doesn’t have a birth certificate to have it within a year. So
in your constituencies, hon members, make sure there is no single person
who doesn’t have a birth registration certificate. [Interjections.] At the
end of one year, we are going to do away with late registration. So they
must do it now.

Also, all people in your constituency must have an ID, because, as
politicians here, we are going to do away with the ID campaign during
elections ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, you are being out of
order. That is not parliamentary. You cannot disrupt the House by clapping
your hands, and you know that is completely out of order. The Minister is
responding to a question that was raised, so can we just allow her to
complete the response.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, again on a point of order: Sir, it is the same
point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Mr Ellis, I think you misunderstood
me. I did not say “do not”; I said “caution should be exercised”. And “do
not” and “caution should be exercised” are two different things. I just
said that “caution should be exercised” that we are discussing adjustments.
[Interjections.]
Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I want to question your ruling.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): So on the cautioning, I appealed to
members, but I did not say to members “do not”. I said “caution should be
exercised” that we are dealing with the adjustments. So the IFP did engage
on an issue, and I allowed it. The ANC has engaged on the issue, and I am
allowing them, so I am being balanced in the probabilities.

Mr M J ELLIS: On a point of order, Mr Chairman: I am questioning your
ruling. I am saying, Sir, that I believe that you are wrong. You should not
allow those questions that are not related to the Adjustments Appropriation
Bill to be put, and neither should Ministers be allowed to respond to them.
I am saying, Sir, that you should be directing this meeting according to
the Adjustments Appropriation Bill, and nothing else.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Ellis. Hon Ellis, I
didn’t say people “should not”, and I am repeating that. I said “caution
should be taken” that we don’t go all out. As much as possible, we should
confine ourselves to the matter where possible. And members will use their
judgment. Hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: In conclusion, hon Chair ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, hon members!

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: In conclusion, I want to caution all of us
here: There will be no ID campaign in 2011 during elections. It will not
happen. The ID campaign is now. In 2011 nobody is going to put Home Affairs
in a pressure cooker for an ID campaign. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, can we really proceed
with that caution that I have requested, to ask questions that are more
relevant to the adjustments? Secondly, I know that this is not the first
time that we are dealing with questions to the Ministers, but I know that
in the past the ANC has not participated. Now I think the ANC has decided
to participate. Let us just allow that procedure to take place and really
respect the running of the House and the Chair. I think the issue of slow-
clapping was really out of order.

Mr M MNQASELA: Chairperson, in the light of the explanation by the
Minister, I wonder what a bank does when a teller says, “I fail to
reconcile my account?” Does the bank keep the teller or fire the teller?
What do they do?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Baqalile ke, uma sengibaphendula bazosokola.
[Here they go again, and they will cry foul when I respond.]
Hon members, obviously when somebody doesn’t do their job, there are
procedures. You give them a first warning, and if they don’t perform,
eventually, you fire them. That is standard procedure. I am sure in the DA,
if people don’t perform and you don’t win elections, they must fire the
person who is supposed to do the work. But, yes, clearly, we are going to
fire people who don’t do the work, but we train them. As I said in my first
response, we are training them. Because it doesn’t help to just fire
somebody when you have not trained them. Give them an opportunity, train
them, and if, after training, they don’t perform, it means they are not
willing to do so. It is not because they do not know. So the first step is
training. Then after that, we make sure that they perform. Thank you.

Mnu B W DHLAMINI: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe ukhuluma into enkulu uma uthi
abantwana abazelwe ababhaliselwe izitifiketi zokuzalwa, kuthi abantu
abangenabo omazisi bababhalise manje.

La ngakhulela khona eBonjini eSoweto, lapho abantu abazalelwa khona
kungekho ngisho umtholampilo noma isibhedlela - umuntu angabi nasicucu nje
esithi wazalelwa lapho.

Ngabe uMnyango kaNgqongqoshe uzokwenza kubelula yini ukuthi abantu bakwazi
ukuthola usizo, kuthi nongakaze asonte kungashiwo ukuthi aye kumfundisi
ngoba akamazi umfundisi? Ngabe uMnyango wakho uzokwazi yini ukwenza kube
lula ukuthi abantu bakwazi ukubhalisa basizakale, njengokuthi amaLungu
ePhalamende, amakhosi, noma amakhansela, akwazi ukusiza abantu ngokuthi
babhaliseke? Ngoba inkinga ukuthi kunabantu abazalelwe ezindaweni
ezisemakhaya ezingenayo imitholampilo noma izibhedlela. Ngalokho-ke
kungabibikho sicucu sokuthi wazalwa, kodwa bube bukhona ubufakazi
bokuzalwa, ukuthi ubani uzalwa umabani nobani. Ngiyathokoza. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr B W DHLAMINI: Chairperson and hon Minister, what you told us here is
very good when you said that newborns should receive birth certificates and
that people who do not have IDs should register now to receive them.

In some places like Bonjini, Soweto, a place where I grew up, people give
birth to children without the necessary facilities like clinics or
hospitals, and people do not have any form of identification as proof of
having been born in those places.

Could your department make it easier for people to receive assistance, and
that even someone who has never belonged to any church should not be
referred to a minister of religion of some church as they do not have any?
Could your department make it easier for people to be registered and can
Members of Parliament, amakhosi, or councillors assist in getting them
registered? I am saying this because there are people who were born in
places where there are no clinics or hospitals. Therefore, they have no
proof of existence whilst there is testimony of having been born, that so
and so was born to Mrs and Mr so and so. Thank you.]

I will cautiously make a follow-up, Chair.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZASEKHAYA: Ngiyabonga Lungu eliHloniphekileyo. Yebo,
empeleni sesiqalile ukukwenza lokho. Senze amahhovisi angomahamba
nendlwana. Siqale eSisonke naseLusikisiki. Uma ngabe umuntu efika
engenasicucu simthumela emakomidini esiwakhile esisebenza nawo kulaba
bomahamba nendlwana, ukuzama ukusheshisa. Lawa makomidi akhiwe ngabantu
abahloniphekile abakhona emphakathini. Ngizokwenzela isibonelo nje, elinye
ikomidi linabantu ababengothishanhloko asebethatha umhlalaphansi,
abafundisi, kanye nabanye abantu abanesikhathi asebathatha umhlalaphansi,
ngoba sifuna ukuthi lo mkhankaso usheshe.

Uma siphuma ngalaba omahamba nendlwana, nekomidi liba khona. Esikhundleni
sokuthi uma ubhalisa kuthiwe hamba uyolanda lokhu, nalokhuya, uyaye uhlolwe
ubuzwe imibuzo khona lapho, kuze kuthathwe isinqumo khona lapho ngoba
abantu bomphakathi bayabazi abantu bakhona. Bayakwazi nokusheshe bambone
nomuntu othi engowakaSithole kodwa uma bethi kuye: o! unjani Jobe, kodwa
yena athi: hhayi! Jobe mina-Sithole. [Uhleko.] Bayaye basheshe bakwazi
ukuthi hhayi lona nokho...Ngaleyo ndlela, yinto vele ebesesiyiqalile.
Sizoyiqhuba kuzo zonke izindawo, kodwa besisazama ukuthi sibone ukuthi
yiziphi izinkinga esizohlangabezana nazo uma siyenza kanje. Kodwa
sizokwenza kube lula. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you hon member. Yes, as a matter of
fact, we have started doing that. We have come up with the idea of setting
up mobile offices. We have launched such offices in Sisonke and Lusikisiki.

When an individual comes without a piece of identification, we refer him or
her to the committees that we have established to work together with these
mobile offices. These committees are made up of respectable members of
communities. Let me make an example: One committee is made up of retired
principals, retired ministers of religion and other available retired
people, because we want to expedite this campaign.

When we go on site with these mobile offices, committees come with us. When
registering, instead of being sent from pillar to post, you are usually
assessed by being asked questions on the spot, and a decision is also taken
on the spot, because members of the communities know people from their own
areas. They are also able to quickly see an individual who happens to be a
Sithole, but when greeted by his clan name, by saying: oh! Jobe, how are
you? He or she responds in broken isiZulu by saying: No! I am not Jobe, but
Sithole. [Laughter.] They are quick to know that no, this one ... This is
what we have already started. And we are going to take this to other areas
as we were just putting this on trial to see what kind of problems we were
going to encounter if we did it this way. But we are going to make it easy.
Thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Minister.

Vote No 5 – Public Works – put.

Mr F T MASANGO: Chairperson, your department hon Minister has been
allocated R150 million for buying houses and offices for the additional new
Ministers and Deputy Ministers. Can the Minister tell us how many houses
and offices he is going to buy and what price range is that the Minister is
looking at, especially the houses?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, when you go home at night, hon
Masango, you go home to a beautifully renovated house in Acacia Park, nice
and comfortable, fully refurbished. Public Works spent hundreds of millions
of rand on Acacia Park. Some of the people on this side of the House don’t
have a house to go to tonight and they have to go to a hotel.

So, let’s get our priorities right. The mandate of Public Works is to do
exactly that ... [Interjections.] ... to provide official residences for
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, like it does for Members of Parliament, so
I don’t see what the big fuss is. Nobody asked us how much we spent when
our houses were renovated in Acacia Park. Maybe that would be the question
we should ask against the hundreds of millions we spent on the three parks,
so that we don’t distort this issue.

Now, to get back to your question, we are in line with the requirements of
the extended Cabinet and we will provide the necessary residences and
offices. And we will be accountable to Parliament in the usual manner.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P B MNGUNI: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, R150 million is allocated
for offices and residences for the new Ministers. Does this also allow for
spending on luxuries, decorations and expensive hotel accommodation for
Ministers? In the same vein, Minister, I wanted to comment on the R114,5
million allocated to the Community Works Programme, whilst the Ministers
are getting R150 million.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, the answer to the first part of
the hon member’s question is no, the R114,5 million are funds that have
been transferred to the Independent Development Trust, IDT, the Community
Works Programme and the nonwage portion of the Expanded Public Works
Programme.

These figures are available, hon Mnguni, and you know that these
presentations were made yesterday in the committee. This is what was
announced by the Minister of Finance in the Budget and the Adjustments
Estimates actually make it happen. So, if you had listened carefully to the
Budget and gone back to read the Minister of Finance’s Budget Speech, you
would have seen that these figures were there. This is the mechanism to
bring the money where it belongs. I thank you.

Vote No 6 - Government Communication and Information System – put.

Vote No 7 – National Treasury – put.

Vote No 8 – Public Administration Leadership and Management Academy – put.

Vote No 9 – Public Service and Administration – put.

Vote No 10 – Public Service Commission – put.

Vote No 11 – Statistics South Africa – put.

Vote No 12 – Arts and Culture – put.

Vote No 13 – Education – put.

Ms J C KLOPPERS-LOURENS: Chairperson, for the realisation of quality
education in our schools we need to recommit ourselves to quality teaching
in our classrooms. Mr Minister, how does the high salary increases
translate to improvement in education delivery and, more specifically, in
the productivity of teachers in their classrooms?

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, thank you hon member. I fully
agree with you that to get quality education indeed we are reliant on good
teachers. For us it is very important to make sure that our teachers are
rewarded accordingly, their contributions are recognised, and their
conditions of services, which include their salaries, are in order.

The truth of the matter is that, if one looks at the teachers’ salaries,
including the increment one can see that up to now it is still not where it
should be. In terms of the wellbeing of our teachers, we are currently in a
bad situation where our teachers cannot even afford a decent house. So, it
is important for us that on an ongoing basis we make sure that teachers are
given decent salaries so that their living conditions could reflect that of
the important profession they fulfil.

We agreed, and I think you also agree with me, that we have to endeavour at
all costs to make sure that we keep on improving their salaries as decent
professionals as they are very critical in our society.

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, with this adjustment government is really and
truly putting its money where its mouth is in the sense that education has
been the priority. And improving literacy and numeracy is clearly a major
priority in this regard.

Five hundred and twenty-four million rand will be going towards purchasing
workbooks for primary school students. This will basically be dealing a
death blow to two of the major challenges that we have as far as our
education system is concerned.

The first is task on time: learning and teaching happening in the class.
The second, of course, is addressing the major challenge regarding some
deficiencies amongst our teachers in terms of teaching abilities, and so
on. With this in mind, Minister, can you assure the House that workbooks
will be on every primary school desk by the beginning of the year in 2010?

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, just directly to the
question, yes, we are doing all we can to make sure that come the beginning
of the year we will have workbooks given to our children. More importantly,
one of the key contributory factors in education to improve quality is
access to a good textbook.

If you have a good textbook, properly facilitated, you can even afford to
have the poorly qualified teachers that we sometimes have. So, a resource
book is very crucial and critical to education, and because of its critical
nature, we are doing all we can, with my colleagues there, to make sure
that come the beginning of the year 2010, the first month, we have books in
front of all the learners.

We are hoping that with the money given to us we will even be able to go
beyond the numbers that we thought we could reach. Because our budgets were
based on sending money to provinces, but now that we are going to procure
centrally, with printing centrally and distributing centrally, we have a
sense that we would be able to give it to all the learners. Unlike what we
had committed to before, that we would only give books to 60% of the
learners, with the centralised procurement we might be able to cover all
the learners in the system, including kids in Quintile 5.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Chairperson, the Minister last week reported to the House
that outcomes-based education, OBE, will be phased out. Now, we have this
R524 adjustment on workbooks, does that include Outcomes-Based Education,
OBE, as well, or has that been phased out already?

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, I think that is a very useful
question, because I think we need to clarify things once and for all around
where we are going, so that we don’t have comebacks. Hon members, what
informs a curriculum? Let us talk about the curriculum of the country and
not even use labels because this OBE has become a red herring. Each time we
want to talk about curriculum people raise OBE.
We are saying that a curriculum is informed by principles. The principles
and values which are in your Constitution and as a country we had framed
these as outcomes, these are the principles of nonracialism, nonsexism, and
peace. These are the principles which were even in your initial curriculum
statement that you called OBE. You can’t throw away those principles as
they continue to inform our curriculum.

What I said last week was that we are within that framework of outcomes or
principles that we had termed as outcomes. What we are improving on is
resources, reduction of work, and changing the assessment systems. It is
important for us that at all times we just talk about the curriculum and
not give it labels, because it is when we label that we create confusion as
to whether we still have OBE or not.

What we are saying is that we are improving your assessments and resources,
so that it could inform the principle. We said we are rewriting the syllabi
and therefore providing textbooks has nothing to do with principles. The
textbook is going to support your syllabi or the contents of your
curriculum. I think it is quite useful for us to have a common
understanding of what we are talking about, because we keep on having
people asking us if this is OBE or not. It is neither here nor there.

We are talking about a new curriculum for the country and these workbooks
are meant to support that curriculum. When I spoke about the review, I said
some of the weaknesses that were picked up by that review committee were
poor resources in support of the curriculum. These textbooks are meant to
address that problem of resources in support of the curriculum. I never
said we will not teach children the history of this country. It remains
there as it was always there in the old curriculum and it is going to
continue to be there so that we teach our children the history of this
country.

In the past, we never stopped teaching kids how to multiply. We did it in
the old curriculum and we are introducing resources to empower that
exercise. The knowledge does not change – we are giving resources to the
knowledge part of the curriculum. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, may I ask a question? [Interjections.]
Chairperson, because you have allowed the debate to move further away from
the estimates, the Minister is now raising very interesting questions to
which we must respond and ask further questions. Are you going to allow
more time because we now have ... [Interjections.]

I am addressing the Chairperson and not the hon members ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Just continue, hon member. But, hon
Mpontshane, as you are addressing me, we are not sure whether you are
already asking your question or not, because this is going to eat into your
time. [Interjections.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, seriously, I am asking you, are you going
to allow us more time because ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): No! There was not going to be any
allowing of any time.

Vote No 14 – Health – put.

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, many hospitals in our country
are in a dismal state and the reason that they are not being refurbished is
because there is no money. Could you give reasons why there was a need for
a R183 million roll-over for the hospital revitalisation grant not spent in
the Western Cape and Mpumalanga? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: We have noted amongst other things that the
capacity to absorb the money has delayed our ability to transfer to the
provinces. The Minister met the MECs recently and together we decided that
we shall appoint people with the requested skills so that they are able to
receive the money and engaged with the service providers so that the
clearance of the funds can proceed without delay.

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, in the National Assembly on
21 October 2009 the Minister stated that eight of the nine provinces are
likely to run out of antiretrovirals, ARVs, before the end of the financial
year. The allocation of R900 million towards the Antiretroviral, Programme
is highly welcomed. We certainly do not want to repeat what happened in the
Free State when health services were cut in a moratorium when the new ARV
initiation was imposed. Many people on the programme did not receive their
ARVs for nearly a month; causing treatment interruptions, possible drug
resistance, and increased opportunistic infections.

During this period it is estimated that an additional 30 people died per
day in the Free State and that the waiting list trebled to 15 000 people.
Will the Minister give this House an assurance that the R900 million
allocated, which is R300 million less than what was requested, is
sufficient for all provinces to provide ARVs to all those that are
currently on the programme and those on the waiting list? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, we requested R1,2 billion and
we are grateful for the R900 million that we received. We have secured a
balance of R300 million from donor funding and, therefore, the whole R2,2
billion, which was based on the careful measurement of the needs in the
provinces, will be available and used to clear all backlogs and enrol all
needy persons.

We estimate that this will take our coverage to 1 025 million persons,
which is more than the 700 000 people that we currently have. We want to
give assurance that there shall be no repeat of the problems and tragedies
that we saw in the past. Thank you very much.

Mr D A KGANARE: Chairperson, the R1 billion allocated under programme two
to strategic health and the additional R30 million for emergency services
for the 2010 World Cup does not qualify as unforeseeable and unavoidable
expenditure. These were supposed to have been accommodated in the main
Budget. Can the Deputy Minister explain why these were not accommodated in
the main Budget or does he agree that this is simply poor planning?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I thought the adjustment budget
is not only about unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure. Sometimes one
does so much work that extra money is needed to do even more work. So, I
want to make a plea that the hon member should read the adjustment budget
in that context.

Mr E M SULLIMAN: Chairperson, the bulk of the R900 million allocated for
the management of HIV goes towards antiretroviral drugs, I would like to
know from the Deputy Minister whether they have any plans to try and
procure these antiretroviral drugs at a lower price through, for example,
parallel importation. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, hon Minister Motsoaledi has
repeatedly said, in and out of the House, that the challenge that we have
now is to cover as many people needing treatment and to have sustainable
supplies. He has advised that we look for the most affordable medicines and
other possible supplies, meaning locally and internationally. We have not
ruled out the possibility of parallel importation; we shall do so with
great sensitivity to local economies and the security of jobs. Our priority
is to get as much of the treatment as possible at the most affordable price
so that we can sustain treatment over as long a period as possible. Thank
you very much.

Vote No 15 – Labour – put.

Vote No 16 – Social Development – put.

Vote No 17 – Sport and Recreation South Africa – put.

Vote No 18 – Correctional Services – put.

Vote No 19 – Defence and Military Veterans – put.

Mr D J MAYNIER: Chairperson, we have made some very good progress in the
Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans, but four combat
readiness briefings have been cancelled by the Ministry of Defence. Will
the Minister now commit to give the defence force the green light to brief
Parliament on the combat readiness of the SA National Defence Force;
because it will only then judge the effect of the Budget on Defence and
Military Veterans?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Chairperson, I want to share
with the House a bit of intelligence that I got via the grapevine.
Apparently, there was a party for the DA yesterday, and awards were given
to members of the DA. There was an award for “the most robust Member of
Parliament”, “the one who sleeps the most on benches”, etc. Then, there was
one for “guess who will not get a present from the Minister this year?”.
And you know who got the award? David Maynier. [Laughter.] Congratulations,
hon David Maynier.

I would just like to say to the hon Maynier that upon the production by the
chairperson of a resolution from the portfolio committee requesting that
this briefing be given, with the conditions as laid out in our laws, I will
certainly oblige. I have not received any request from the portfolio
committee based on any resolution taken by the portfolio committee; so I
have no idea what hon David Maynier is talking about. Thank you.

Vote No 20 – Independent Complaints Directorate - put.

Vote No 21 – Justice and Constitutional Development - put.

Vote No 22 – Police – put.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Chairperson, I am extremely disappointed in the
current governing party, that neither the Minister of Police nor his Deputy
has seen fit to be here this evening. Perhaps ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The Minister of State Security will
answer the question.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Is he going to answer on behalf of the Minister of
Police? That’s alright. The head of the Directorate for Priority Crime
Investigation, DPCI, was appointed on 21 May 2009. Today, nearly six months
later, we have seen that they have transferred the money from the Scorpions
to the Hawks.

Could whichever Minister explain if this is merely officialising the agreed
transfer and that the money has already been utilised in establishing the
Hawks or not? Either way, could he explain to this House why it seems as if
many of the ex-Scorpion members who have moved to the Hawks have suffered
large pay cuts against all labour legislation and have in many instances
stayed for six months with no computers, emails or printers and have been
taken off the 639 cases they worked on while in the Scorpions and have
instead been scattered around the country to the three existing South
African Police Service, SAPS, units: organised crime, commercial crime and
crime intelligence? If those units already existed, what exactly is the
Hawks, except a name?

The MINISTER OF STATE SECURITY (on behalf of the Minister of Police):
Chairperson, the funny part of it is that while the hon member was sitting
here in the House, she has just released a press statement, where she
claimed that she had some sources within the police. Our duty is to answer
the member’s question on whether the Directorate for Priority Crime
Investigations, DPCI, is functioning.

Yes, it has been established and it is functioning. But some of the facts
that you have just mentioned now are not correct. Firstly, there were no
salary reductions for any members who came from Scorpions, as this would
constitute a breach of our labour laws. This is a correct statement. In
this regard, your sources were incorrect. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Secondly, you have indicated that some of the former members of the
Directorate of Special Operations, DSO, did not have computers. That is not
true anymore. However, it is true that there have been some challenges in
the beginning of the integration process. It was not caused by any level of
inefficiency. Part of the main problem was that the lease for some of the
computers coming from the DSO had expired. But the police, particularly the
Hawks, moved with speed to ensure that all the members who needed to do
their work had the necessary equipment. They hired the computers and we are
in the process of ensuring that we are purchasing them with these
adjustments. That is a fact, and I am sorry for saying that it will be more
appropriate that we engage the Ministry rather than going through these
uninformed information peddlers. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. Kunemali esuswe kumnyango owenza
uphenyo yahanjiswa kwingqalasizinda, ingabe leyo mali izokwenzani? Angizwa!
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you Chairperson. What will the money that was moved
from the Special Investigation Unit, SIU, to the infrastructure be used
for? I can’t hear you!]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, I would like to hear
the question. Qhubeka baba [Continue, Sir.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Kunemali esuswe ngapha ngasekuphenyeni yahanjiswa
kwingqalasizinda, manje ngibuza ukuthi laphaya lapho iye khona
kwingqalasizinda iyokwenzani ngoba uphenyo yiwona msebenzi wamaphoyisa nje?


UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOKUVIKELWA KWEZWE (Egameni likaNgqongqoshe Wezamaphoyisa):
Kuyiqiniso ukuthi kukhona izimali ezazikhona kulaba ababephethe ezophenyo
abangazange bakwazi ukuzisebenzisa ngonyaka odlule. Ingxenye yalezo zimali
ithathiwe yafakwa lapha kwingqalasizinda. Ingxenye yaleyo mali
ilinganiselwa kwizigidi ezingama-R93 zamarandi. Ilungu elihloniphekile
lizokhumbula ukuthi ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: My question is, for what will the money that was
transferred from the Special Investigation Unit, SIU, to the infrastructure
be used for because investigation is the core function of the police?

The MINISTER OF STATE SECURITY: (on behalf of the Minister of Police): It
is true that there were some monies that were allocated to those who are in
charge of the Special Investigation Unit, which they were unable to spend
last year. Part of that money has been transferred to the infrastructure.
That money amounted to approximately R93 million. The hon member will
remember that ...]

... the Minister has announced that the cluster agreed to move, in order to
implement the criminal justice review process. Most of that money will go
to the improvement of our systems, particularly, fingerprinting, which is
used by the police. The R93 million will be moved for a good cause. If the
session has not spent the money and we have new priorities, which we as
government have agreed upon, and have been put and accepted by the
portfolio committee, it will be appropriate to move the money to this type
of infrastructure. It is currently needed in order to ensure that we
increase our capacity to deal with crime. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Hon Minister, how can protection and security services get
an additional R80,7 million when the amount for crime intelligence went
down, just before the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup? Secondly, how can
detective services be reduced by more than R62 million, notwithstanding the
fact that the Hawks will now be incorporated into Programme 3? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF STATE SECURITY (on behalf of the Minister of Police):
Chairperson and the hon George, I have just indicated that in as far as
some of the these monies which are being moved are concerned, the only
money that has been injected into the department is a small amount of about
R1 billion, which is dealing with salary increases. The other money is a
shift of unspent funds. Those unspent funds are not being moved to reduce
the capacity within the police.

In all those units from which the money had been moved, we have ensured
that there is continued capacity to do their work. The money unspent is
moved to the priority areas which I have identified; as you have indicated,
the establishment of the Hawks. We want to ensure that we have these
systems, which you said must link with the rest of the criminal justice
cluster in order to ensure a coherent approach to fighting crime. I thank
you.

Vote No 23 – Agriculture – put.

Vote No 24 – Communications – put.

Mr N J VAN DEN BERG: Chairperson, the SABC is a public and not a state
broadcaster. The DA supports Vote No 24 on Communications. The SABC is a
public broadcaster with more than 24 million listeners and viewers
everyday. The people’s broadcaster is the only way to be connected to the
world. We have agreed that the R200 million should be paid to the SABC to
keep its doors open. However, this is not nearly enough to resolve the
financial crisis at the SABC. How will the balance of the shortfall be
funded to ensure that the SABC remains financially viable? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson and hon member, we also
agree that the SABC is a public broadcaster that needs to be supported.
Hence the adjustment of R200 million in order to fund its liquidity, which
will be controlled by the Department of Communications on its monthly
management accounts. On a monthly basis we will check that it spends the
money that has been allocated to it.

No new contracts will be allowed without the Minister’s sanction, which are
worth more than R1 million. We are appointing a new CEO who has 25 years’
experience and an acting CEO. Currently there is no CEO. We are working
with the interim board, the task team and Treasury to ensure that the money
that SABC got through the adjustment is well spent. On the shortfall, the
SABC is currently engaging with Treasury, trying to get a government
guarantee. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Minister, just ignore the comments.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: The negotiations are going on in order to
fund the total shortfall that the SABC is currently experiencing. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms J D KILIAN: Chairperson, I have a question for the Minister. On the one
hand we are giving a R200 million bail-out to the SABC to help them
overcome the serious financial problems that they are facing. On the other
hand, provision is made in the adjustment appropriation for a R4,4 million
restraint of trade for the former group CEO. Can the Minister really and
morally justify that? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson and hon member, firstly, let me
start by indicating that the negotiations between the former CEO and the
board were done without the Minister’s involvement, but with his support.
When the interim SABC board came into office, we specifically requested
that it should begin the stabilisation of the SABC by, among other things,
beginning to address the question of a CEO, who has been in office there,
and who was in dispute with the old board, but being a defector without him
doing any work.

The board had the blessing of the Department of Communications to ensure
that they should settle with the group CEO as soon as possible.
Justification for that was the fact that the SABC had been in limbo for
months. Even now, if the interim board had not undertaken these steps and
had not settled in the way it did, that situation would still exist.

We think that the board should be commended for taking the steps that it
took in order to, in the first place, consider the stability of the SABC.
Everybody here has praise for the steps that the SABC’s interim committee
has generally undertaken, ever since its establishment, not long ago. I
think it has done well. I thank you.

Vote No 25 – Environmental Affairs and Tourism – put.

Vote No 26 – Human Settlements – put.

Vote No 27 – Rural Development and Land Reform – put.

Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, as the Minister is aware, the Department of
Rural Development and Land Reform had spent 100% of its current budget.
Given that the adjustment is R292 million, mainly for salaries, and that
the department has commitments of R3,4 billion in signed contracts with
landowners, how will the department finance or honour these commitments
under Programme 4: Restitution?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, what the hon
member is saying is not correct. We have spent 100% of the Restitution
budget for this financial year, but not everything. Secondly ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, hon members!

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Secondly, hon Chair, we
have requested an amount of R220 million. We have reprioritised and
discussed this with Treasury. We have agreed that we can reprioritise and
make some money available for clearing the signed contracts. So that is
what we are going to do. It is therefore not entirely correct to say that
we have spent 100% of our Budget. Thank you.

Ms P DE LILLE: Chairperson, I am very happy to hear that there will be
money made available for the land claims. I just want to ask the Minister:
How long will it take to implement this new system? The hon chairperson of
the portfolio committee can confirm that we have received quite a lot of
enquiries about outstanding land claims. Will you settle all the old ones
before you go over to the new system? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, I am not sure
about the new system. Maybe the hon member could explain that and then I
can respond. I would like to be pointed in my response.

Ms P DE LILLE: Yes, hon Chairperson. The hon Minister of Finance said
earlier on that we cannot continue with this old system of willing-buyer,
willing-seller, in terms of which government needs to pay three times the
market value, and we have to look at a new system.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Fine, Chairperson, now I
understand. Hon Chair, the willing-buyer, willing-seller model is
government policy, as we speak. It is under review. We are going to present
to this House, next year, a Green Paper for discussion. We have already
developed the framework, and we are busy developing that ourselves. We want
to present to government a proposal as to how we go about changing that.

Secondly, because it involves a lot of people, we are also consulting with
the people who are affected by this. People have been working on the
policy, and they have been planning according to that. So we can’t say
today that on date x this is what we are going to do, but certainly, I can
imagine that hon members will participate in this Green Paper and we expect
that they will assist us in finding a much fairer solution than the willing
buyer, willing seller model that we have today.

Mr T BOTHA: Chair, hon Minister, given the failure to urgently address the
issue of land redistribution and restitution, which is a potential time
bomb, and given the sensitivity and importance of land redistribution in
this country for the stability of the country, can the hon Minister explain
the decrease in the allocation of funds to land reform grants under
Programme 5, and the impact thereof on land restitution goals?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Thank you, hon Chair. I
imagine that the hon member is referring to Subprogramme 5.05. We are faced
with a challenge in rural development. The challenge that hon members keep
raising, as the hon Swathe and the hon De Lille have done now, is indeed a
challenge. Now, we have had to reprioritise. I think that is really what I
have been referring to. We have had to reprioritise, in order for us to be
able to clear the desk.

The challenge is this: Once you have signed the settlement agreement, what
will happen is, if you don’t pay, the costs will escalate, because you will
have to pay interest. A complicating factor is that some people have gone
to court. The department has been taken to court. As we speak, there are
cases that are before the court. There are two types of cases. In one the
matter might be settled in court today and we might be called on to pay
today – those cases amount to R377 million, as we speak. We don’t have that
money. The other type of case that is before the court are those where the
court might say, you have agreed, settle. In other words, it is a
performance issue – and these cases amount to R202 million.

Now, once the court takes a decision, we have to comply with that. We have
had to position ourselves in order to be able to meet that challenge when
it comes about. It is not something that we like, but it is something that
we have to do, given the constraints that we are faced with right now.
Thank you, hon Chair.

Mr P S SIZANI: Chair, seeing that R250 million in the Additional
Appropriation have been earmarked for the new Comprehensive Rural
Development Programme of the new department, can the Minister tell us
whether this money will target poverty and unemployment in the rural areas,
and in what way will the Ministry be able to deal with the poverty that we
are experiencing in those areas?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, the hon
Swathe has referred to this amount of money, and has said that it would
mainly go to salaries. Actually, we got R289 million, I think. Of that R289
million, R250 million will go to service delivery. That is what the hon
chair of the portfolio committee is asking. I am happy that he has asked
this question, so that I can explain the points further.

Now, of the R250 million that he has referred to here, R90 million will go
to fencing, for ploughing and grazing land, across the country, or rather,
in the nine provinces. So that is service delivery, in our view, and, in
agreement with the provinces, that money will be used to create jobs. But
there will also be an element of quality control, for which we have an
agreement with the Ministry of Public Works, so that we can make use of the
Independent Development Trust. Of course, in Mpumalanga we are using their
trust. There is a trading trust in Mpumalanga, where we have already
provided, between August and now, 260km of fence. In KwaZulu-Natal we are
using Ithala. So we are creating jobs through that. In the Eastern Cape we
are negotiating to use Asgisa EC to ensure that the quality of the fence
that we are erecting is good. So this is what is going to happen all over
the place in terms of that.

With regard to the remaining R160 million, we are working with Fort Hare
University, which is helping us in doing other things. Amongst these other
things, we want to develop an agripark, particularly in Mpumalanga, because
there is plenty of water in Mpumalanga. We have discussed the possibility
of getting land there with the Premier a couple of weeks ago. We will get
land, actually, to create an irrigation facility, and then we can start
producing vegetables there. But we also want to encourage, with that same
money, food gardens, so that people can sell there. We want to create a
market through the agripark, as well as a processing plant, so that we can
process vegetables into vegetable soup. So we are going to create social
infrastructure.

We are also intervening in health facilities. If we get to a rural area
where there are no clinics, or the mobile clinics come once a week or so,
or don’t come as often as they should, this relates to the problem of the
roads infrastructure. We are intervening there. So that money is going to
go to food gardens, to roads, to fencing gardens - because this we must do
- and to water.

The hon Minister for Agriculture has really done government a lot of good.
Consider, for example, the refining of water in places such as Masha, where
you have water constraints, not just because water is scarce, but because
of the quality of the water. So the Minister has come in, but the Minister
of Communications also has come in, in relation to the e-centres to follow.
The Minister of Energy is coming in for electrification in all these
places. So we are not working in terms of creating this infrastructure
ourselves. We create opportunities for other departments to come in and do
the work themselves.

The R160 million will certainly be spread a little wider than the one
place, that is Masha, but across the provinces. Also, we will initiate, and
the other departments will come in and complete the job, whether it
concerns health facilities, or schools, or other things. We will do that in
Mpumalanga, because the Department of Education may not be ready yet, but
we are ready to assist there in Mpumalanga. There is one school where
children from seven grades have to study in one room, and we have to
intervene there.

So the money is not going to go to salaries. It is not correct to say so.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote No 28 – Minerals and Energy – put.

Vote No 29 – Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs – put.

Mr P F SMITH: Chairperson, Minister with regard to this nice booklet, here,
the Treasury Regulation System specifies that unforeseeable and unavoidable
expenditure excludes the following two things: Firstly, spending increase
due to tariff adjustments and price increases. Secondly, spending to extend
existing services beyond the unforeseeable; unforeseen. Now, in your
budget, there is an amount of R509 million under unforeseeable and
unavoidable expenditure allocated for increase costs or to provide free
basic electricity. Presumably, that’s impossible because of tariff
increases; and the other explanation would be, presumably, the roll-out,
which is beyond expectations. It’s hard to believe, since there is a
service delivery crisis, which makes it difficult to believe that there has
been such a heavy success. What is the R 109 million for, if it’s not for
those two issues? And how are our municipalities compensated for tariff
increases by Eskom? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, it’s quite interesting to hear member Smith trying to describe
the situation in municipalities, as if it’s a crisis. In relation to the
issues that are there, for all intents and purposes, he’s misinterpreting
it. There is no doubt that there are challenges, but these are not crises.
This is a misrepresentation of the facts; in fact, that statement is
bordering on misleading the House.

Responding on the issue of what will happen to the money and how to ensure
that we compensate for the increases; I think hon Smith has answered his
own question, that the amount of over R500 million is aimed at ensuring
that it assists the poor in relation to the forthcoming tariff increases.
Therefore, it is a matter that has been taken care of.

The second matter is an issue around the increase of R900 million which is
dealing with supporting the poor in relation to tariff increases. The
situation, Mr Smith, in municipalities is that they are undergoing a turn-
around process; there is no crisis. Don’t describe it the way you do. Those
are challenges that are within our power to be addressed.
Mr P F SMITH: I have a follow-up ...

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, hon Minister, you are asking us to vote for R288
million of roll-over funds for the infrastructure grant programme; my
question is, how are you and you department going to ensure that this money
is spent, not on running costs by municipalities, but on infrastructure and
when, if this illegal practice, which we heard of from the Minister of
Finance, occurs, will you take steps?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, there are lot of things to consider when talking about the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant, MIG; it is not an accurate answer. One of
the issues is that most of these municipalities with these challenges do
not have the capacity to deliver. As the department, both provincially and
nationally, we are intervening to ensure that the money is well spent.

We are also exploring other measures, because in the past the department
had a Municipal Infrastructure Investment Unit which was a structure aimed
at ensuring that infrastructure is rolled out in municipalities as expected
by the national department. The unit was abolished, but we are looking for
other possibilities of reviving it. We have realised that MIG cannot be in
a position to deal with the challenges prevailing in municipalities; we are
therefore looking at the possibility of a special purpose vehicle which
will be able to roll-out infrastructure.

We have quantified everything across the country and these issues will be
taken up. As an interim measure, the department is ready to ensure that it
assists municipalities with this issue and see to it that they never occur
again. Thank you very much.

Vote No 30 – Public Enterprises – put.

Vote No 31 – Science and Technology – put.

Vote No 32 – Trade and Industry – put.

Vote No 33 – Transport – put.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Hon Minister, with regard to the additional R116
million payment for the transport disaster management grant for the
rehabilitation of infrastructure destroyed by flooding in the Western Cape
in 2008, considering that this was a natural disaster and was declared so,
should this amount not be paid from the disaster fund?

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, yes the money for this disaster
does come from Transport, unless there is other contingency funding
elsewhere. Once there is a disaster, everybody looks at Transport. For
instance, if a road is damaged or a bridge is broken during a disaster, we
can reclaim whatever money is available elsewhere. As Transport, we only
move in as an emergency measure. I thank you.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Hon Minister with regard to Programme 6 for an
additional R144 million allocated as a transfer payment for the Gautrain
Rapid Rail Link grant for inflation and foreign exchange adjustments, why
were these costs not factored in to the initial contracts under condition
of contract price adjustments?

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: In terms of the contract, if the amount was
factored in or there was escalation in terms of inflation, we are liable
for paying. That is what we are doing.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: I am sorry, Chairperson. This is the last one. My
question is with regard to the departmental revenue of R198 million from
transaction fees for vehicle registrations that will be used for the
maintenance of the electronic National Traffic Information System, commonly
known as eNatis. Originally, this fee was paid to Treasury to offset their
extra cost for the system. Why was this amount not paid to the Department
of Transport instead? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: As the member is aware, we have introduced the
Road Traffic Management Corporation, RTMC. In order for it to function,
this amount had to be allocated so that we can be able to implement our
RTMC and be able to go out on the road safety campaign properly,
particularly the demerit system that we will be introducing next year. All
that will depend on the proper functioning of the RTMC. [Applause.]

Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry – put.

Vote No 35 – Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries – put.

Dr L L BOSMAN: Chairperson, hon Minster, under Programme No 3, Agricultural
Support Services, a provision was made for an agricultural disaster
management grant of R156,9 million to provide for disaster management in
all nine provinces. In the Government Gazette of 8 September 2009, a
declaration of the provincial state of drought disaster in the Eastern Cape
province, six district municipalities were declared as disaster areas. The
assessment report estimated a damage of R1,184 billion.

This is only one of a number of drought disaster areas with a possible
total damage, much higher than this figure. How does the Minister plan to
assist communities who suffered losses or are in need of water with
financial support, in the view of the limited budget provided in this
programme, and at what timeframes? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson and hon
member, the state cannot be an insurance policy broker for farmers. The
state cannot substitute insurances for farmers. Our first prerogative is to
get farmers to take out insurance policies so that they cannot be totally
dependent on the state disaster management.

Where disaster does occur, it is not incumbent on the state to recoup
farmers’ losses. Ours is not to balance out the losses. In any business you
will have losses and you must ensure that you actually make provision for
them. As in the past, you cannot be totally dependent on the state to pay
for all your losses, particularly when it comes to disasters.

With disaster management, we only refund farmers on production costs and
infrastructure costs on farm settlement disaster management. When it comes
to all farm disaster management, for example, roads and other
infrastructure projects, we are dependent on the other line function
departments, like the Department of Transport and the Department of Human
Settlements to assist in other areas should there there be disasters.

Our intention is not for agriculture to cover the entire disaster, but only
some areas. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr L L BOSMAN: Hon Minister, yes I agree with you that there should be
schemes available that must also be assisted by government. But I just want
to point out that I specifically asked this question in the Eastern Cape,
because it was not only farmers who were involved in the disaster areas,
but even the community and poor people, who don’t have water or resources
to recuperate their lands and so on.

I think this is the list that government can do something about, to look
after these people, because they are poor and resource poor. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Hon Chairperson, in my
response I did not refer to any particular group. To me farmers are
emerging, smaller, older, medium or commercial farmers. They are all
treated equally when it comes to disaster management.

In the Eastern Cape, yes, there were six districts declared disaster areas.
Agriculture does not fund anything like roads and housing. Those areas
where affected in more areas than only agriculture. We only support
agriculture-related projects. In the Eastern Cape, we disaggregated the
expense and are convinced that what we are going to refund to those
communities, which are agriculture-related, will be within our budget. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon M N Magazi. I thought maybe you
had pressed the button. Please don’t play with the buttons then. Stay away
from them. I thank you. [Interjections.] It is on the screen, so I am not
just accusing you.

Vote No 43 – Water Affairs – put.

Discussion on Votes and Schedule concluded.

Vote No 1 – Presidency – agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Congress of the
People dissenting).

Vote No 2 – Parliament – agreed to.

Vote No 3 – International Relations and Co-operation – agreed to.

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 5 – Public Works – agreed to.

Vote No 6 – Government Communication and Information System – agreed to.

Vote No 7 – National Treasury – agreed to.

Vote No 8 – Public Administration Leadership and Management Academy –
agreed to.

Vote No 9 – Public Service and Administration – agreed to.

Vote No 10 – Public Service Commission – agreed to.

Vote No 11 – Statistics South Africa – agreed to.

Vote No 12 – Arts and Culture – agreed to.

Vote No 13 – Education – agreed to.

Vote No 14 – Health – agreed to (Congress of the People dissenting).

Vote No 15 – Labour – agreed to.

Vote No 16 – Social Development – agreed to.

Vote No 17 – Sport and Recreation South Africa – agreed to.

Vote No 18 – Correctional Services – agreed to.

Vote No 19 – Defence and Military Veterans – agreed to (Democratic Alliance
dissenting).

Vote No 20 – Independent Complaints Directorate – agreed to.

Vote No 21 – Justice and Constitutional Development – agreed to.

Vote No 22 – Police – agreed to (Congress of the People dissenting).

Vote No 23 – Agriculture – agreed to.

Vote No 24 – Communications – agreed to.

Vote No 25 – Environmental Affairs and Tourism – agreed to.

Vote No 26 – Human Settlements – agreed to.

Vote No 27 – Rural Development and Land Reform – agreed to (Congress of the
People dissenting).

Vote No 28 – Minerals and Energy – agreed to.

Vote No 29 – Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs – agreed to.

Vote No 30 – Public Enterprises – agreed to.

Vote No 31 – Science and Technology – agreed to.

Vote No 32 – Trade and Industry – agreed to.

Vote No 33 – Transport – agreed to.

Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry – agreed to.

Vote No 35 – Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries – agreed to.

Vote No 43 – Water Affairs – agreed to.

Schedule agreed to.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 20:17.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

    1. Membership of Committees


    1) The following members have been appointed to the Ad Hoc Committee to
       conduct co-ordinated oversight on service delivery under the theme,
       “ Working Together to Ensure the Delivery of Quality Service to
       Communities”:

       ANC

       Borman, Mrs G M
       Boshigo, Ms F D
       Botha, Ms Y
       Kenye, Mrs T E
       Luthuli, Dr A N
       Matshoba, Mr J M
       Maake, Mr JJ
       Makhubele, Mr Z S
       Mandela, Nkosi Z M D
       Manganye, Ms J
       Mathebe, Mr P M
       Mavunda, Mr D W (Alt)
       Mdaka, Ms N M
       Mdakane, Mr M R
       Mushwana, Mrs F F
       Nchabeleng, Mr M E
       Nelson, Ms W
       Ngwenya-Mabila, Ms PC
       Nhlengethwa, Ms D G
       November, Mrs N T
       Selau, Mr G J
       Segale-Diswai, Ms M J
       Sizani, Mr P S
       Tsenoli, Mr S L
       Williams, Mr A J


       DA


       Doman, Mr W P
       Kopane, Mrs S P
       Motau, Mr S C
       Steyn, Mr A C
       Swathe, Mr M M
       Waters, Mr M
       Wenger, Ms M


       COPE
       Botha, Mr T
       Kganare, Mr D A
       Mda, Ms A
       Ndude, Ms H N
       Dandala, Dr M H (Alt)


       IFP


       Cebekhulu, Mr R N
       Dhlamini, Mr B W
       Msimang, Mr C T (Alt)
       Smith, Mr P F


       UDM


       Gaehler, Mr L B
       Ntapane, Mr SZ


       MF


       Bhoola, Mr R B


       ID
       McGluwa, Mr J J (Alt)


       UCDP


       Ditshetelo, Mr I C (Alt)


       FF PLUS


       Groenewald, Mr P

   (2)      Mr S L Tsenoli has been elected Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
       Committee to conduct co-ordinated oversight on service delivery,
       with effect from 11 November 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)     A copy of the recommendations of the Independent Commission for
       the Remuneration of Public Office-Bearers in  respect  of  salaries,
       allowances and benefits of public office-bearers for  2009/2010  was
       submitted to Parliament on  11  November  2009  in  accordance  with
       section 8(5) of the Independent Commission for the  Remuneration  of
       Public Office-Bearers Act, 1997 (No 92 of 1997).

   2. The Minister of Social Development

    a) Report of the Central Drug Authority (CDA) for 2008-2009 [RP 252-
       2009].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

           a) Policy Imperatives: Parliament 2009 - 2014.

       b) Letter from the Minister of Social Development dated 05 November
          2009, to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay
          in the submission of the Annual Report of the Central Drug
          Authority for 2008-2009.

          TABLING OF THE CENTRL DRUG AUTHORITY 2008/2009 ANNUAL REPORT IN
          PARLIAMENT

          In terms of Section 2 (11) (a) (b) of the Prevention and Treatment
          of Drug Dependency Amendment Act (Act, 20 of 1992), the Executive
          must table the Central Drug Authority (CDA) report in the National
          Assembly.

          In addition hereto, the Public Finance Management Act, Act No. 1
          of  1999, as amended, requires in terms of section 65 (2) a
          written explanation by the Executive to be tabled in Parliament
          with reasons for non compliance.

          There was a delay in the finalisation of the CDA Annul Report
          2008/09 CDA due to late receipts of reports from various national
          government departments, represented on the CDA. The report’s
          design and layout took long to be completed by the relevant units
          of the National Department of Social Development (DSD).

          Enclosed herewith is a copy of the 2008/2009 Annual Report for
          official tabling.

          Accordingly, I humbly appeal to Parliament to accept the CDA
          Annual Report for 2008/2009 for tabling in the 4th Parliament and
          consider an integrated oversight review and referral process on
          this matter.

          Kind regards

          signed
          MRS B E E MOLEWA, MP
          MINISTER

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development on the provisional  suspension  from  office  of  Magistrate  CM
Dumani, dated 11 November 2009:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report on provisional suspension of Magistrate C M Dumani,  a
Magistrate at Graaf Reinet, pending the outcome  of  an  investigation  into
his fitness to hold office as a magistrate, as required in terms of  section
13(3) (a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act  no  90  of  1993),  reports  as
follows:

   1. The Committee notes from the report tabled by the Minister for Justice
      and  Constitutional  Development  that  the   Magistrates   Commission
      resolved on 30 July to recommend that Mr CM  Dumani  be  provisionally
      suspended from office in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the  Magistrates
      Act, 1993:

Mr Dumani is alleged on four different occasions to have  conducted  himself
in an unbecoming and embarrassing manner by stroking the cheek of a  cleaner
and security officer; tickling the back  of  the  neck  of  a  cleaner;  and
sticking his hand between the breasts of  the  clerk  of  court.  Mr  Dumani
denies the allegations.

On 5 March 2009, the Commission resolved  to  charge  Mr  Dumani  with  four
counts of misconduct. The inquiry was set down for 15 May 2009, but did  not
occur. It was then set down for 5 and 6 August 2009.
On 6 March 2009, the Commission asked Mr  Dumani  to  give  reasons  why  he
should not be provisionally  suspended.  Mr  Dumani’s  legal  representative
indicated that Mr Dumani did not wish to make representations regarding  his
provisional suspension.

   2. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993,  Parliament
      must, as soon as is reasonably  possible,  pass  a  resolution  as  to
      whether  or  not  the  provisional  suspension  of  a  magistrate   is
      confirmed.

   3.  Having  considered  the  Commission’s  report  on   the   provisional
      suspension,  the  Committee  recommends  that  the  National  Assembly
      confirm the provisional suspension of Magistrate C M  Dumani,  pending
      the outcome of an investigation into his fitness  to  hold  office  as
      required in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development on the provisional  suspension  from  office  of  Magistrate  NE
Ndamase, dated 11 November 2009:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the  report  on  the  provisional  suspension  of  Magistrate  NE
Ndamase, a Magistrate at Pretoria, pending the outcome of  an  investigation
into her fitness to hold office as a magistrate, as  required  in  terms  of
section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of  1993),  reports
as follows:

   1. The Committee notes from the report tabled by the Minister for Justice
      and  Constitutional  Development  that  the   Magistrates   Commission
      resolved on 29 and  30  July  to  recommend  that  Ms  NE  Ndamase  be
      provisionally suspended from office in terms of  section  13(3)(a)  of
      the Magistrates Act, 1993:

   2. On 10 November 2009, the Magistrates Commission briefed the  Committee
      on the contents of the report: The Commission  decided  to  charge  Ms
      Ndamase  with  misconduct  in  terms  of  Regulation  26(1)   of   the
      Regulations for Judicial Officers in Lower Courts, 1994. It is of  the
      opinion that there is enough  prima  facie  evidence  to  support  the
      charge(s). There is an ongoing process to obtain further evidence.  On
      29 and 30 July 2009, the Commission  resolved  to  recommend  that  Ms
      Ndamase  be  provisionally  suspended,  pending  the  outcome  of  the
      misconduct inquiry. The report and supporting documents  give  reasons
      for this recommendation.

   3. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993,  Parliament
      must, as soon as is reasonably  possible,  pass  a  resolution  as  to
      whether  or  not  the  provisional  suspension  of  a  magistrate   is
      confirmed.

   4. The Committee is of the view that the issues raised by this matter are
      complex, pointing to problems of transformation  within  the  judicial
      system. It is not helpful to look solely at an  individual’s  conduct,
      while ignoring the broader  context.  Of  particular  concern  to  the
      Committee is the ‘gatekeeping’ role that  language  proficiency  plays
      within the justice system, and the  frustration  this  engenders.  The
      Committee is aware that there are no ‘quickfix’ solutions but believes
      that much needs to be done, and urgently, to address this problem.

   5. As part of its oversight function, the Committee intends to embark  on
      regular visits to our courts to gain  insight  of  the  problems  they
      grapple with daily. In the first quarter of 2010  the  Committee  will
      arrange to visit the Pretoria Magistrates Court.

   6. The Committee also intends to engage more closely with the Magistrates
      Commission to better understand its role,  as  well  as  the  systemic
      challenges facing our judicial system and possible solutions to these.
      It would be particularly  interested  in  the  Commission’s  views  on
      whether it has a mediatory or conciliatory role  in  matters  such  as
      these. It urges the Commission to explore  this  possibility  in  this
      particular matter.

Recommendation

   7.  Having  considered  the  Commission’s  report  on   the   provisional
      suspension, the Committee recommends that the National  Assembly  does
      not confirm the provisional suspension of Magistrate NE Ndamase.

Report to be considered.


3.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development on the removal from office of Magistrate TC Oliphant,  dated  10
November 2009:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report on the removal from office of Magistrate TC  Oliphant,
tabled by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development  in  terms
of section 13(4)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of  1993),  reports
as follows:

   1. The Magistrates Commission resolved on 4 March 2009 to recommend  that
      Ms Oliphant be removed from office on the ground of misconduct.

   2. In terms of Regulation 34(1) of the Regulations of  Judicial  Officers
      in the Lower Courts, 1994, if  a  Magistrate  is  absent  from  office
      without leave or a valid reason for more than 30 days, he  or  she  is
      deemed to have absconded and is guilty of misconduct.

   3. In terms of section 13(4)(a) the Minister must suspend a Magistrate if
      the Magistrates Commission recommends his or her removal on the ground
      of  misconduct.  On  10  March  2009,  the  Minister  of  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development tabled a report on Ms Oliphant’s suspension
      from Office. A  report  on  the  withholding  of  remuneration  of  Ms
      Oliphant was tabled on 24 March 2009 in terms of section 13(4A)(b)  of
      the Magistrates Act, 1993.

   4. In terms of section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993,  Parliament
      must, as soon as is reasonably possible, resolve whether to  recommend
      that a Magistrate, who is so suspended, be restored to office or not.

Background

   5. Ms Oliphant was alleged to have been absent from office without  leave
      (1) from 25 April 2008 to 10 November 2008; and (2) from  17  November
      2008 to date.

   6. First period of absence (25 April 2008 – 10 November 2008)

   a.  A  preliminary  investigation  was  conducted  into   Ms   Oliphant’s
      absenteeism and her alleged conduct on  7  February  2008  towards  Mr
      Nyembezi, a prosecutor at the court over which she presided.

   b. On 25  September  2008,  the  Ethics  Committee  for  the  Magistrates
      Commission  considered  the  preliminary  investigation   report.   It
      resolved that Ms Oliphant not be charged with misconduct, but that she
      be asked to appear before it.

   c. At the meeting of the Ethics Committee on 6 November 2008, Ms Oliphant
      indicated that she would resume her duties at  Wynberg  on  Monday  10
      November 2008:

     i. She told the Committee that  she  had  been  suffering  from  major
        depressive disorder and that she had been admitted to a Psychiatric
        Clinic from 2 to 24 April 2008. She produced a medical  certificate
        for this period (2 - 24 April 2008) but did not apply for leave  or
        produce medical certificates supporting her absenteeism from office
        for the period 25 April to 5 November 2008.
    ii. Ms Oliphant also informed the Committee that she felt that she  was
        fit to resume the functions of a magistrate.  The  Committee  asked
        that she obtain a written  report  from  her  medical  practitioner
        confirming that she had recuperated to such an extent that she  was
        able to resume her duties as a magistrate.
   iii. A meeting  was  scheduled  with  the  relevant  Judicial  Head,  Ms
        Tongeni, at Wynberg on 20 November 2008. Ms Oliphant  undertook  to
        provide  Ms  Tongeni  with  a  written  report  from  her   medical
        practitioner, as  well  submit  the  outstanding  leave  forms  and
        medical certificates.
    iv. Ms Oliphant failed to attend  the  meeting  and  failed/refused  to
        submit the outstanding leave forms. She did  not  communicate  with
        her Judicial Head of Office in this regard at all and  attempts  to
        contact her were not successful.

7. Second period of absence from office (17 November 2008 to date)

   a. On 4 December 2008, the Ethics Committee was informed that Ms Oliphant
      had resumed duties at  Wynberg  on  10  November  2008.  She  remained
      present until 14 November 2008, but from 17  November  2008  was  once
      more absent from office.

   b. On 5 December 2008, Ms Oliphant  was  informed  in  writing  that  her
      conduct amounted to serious misconduct. She was  advised  that  should
      she fail to report for duty and or fail to inform her Judicial Head of
      Office of her whereabouts by 17 December 2008, she would be deemed  to
      have absconded  and  that  she  would  have  made  herself  guilty  of
      misconduct.  She  was  also  advised  that  this  might  lead  to  the
      Commission recommending to Parliament that she be removed from  office
      in terms of section 13(4)(a)(i) of the Magistrates Act, 1993  (Act  90
      of 1993).

   c. An attempt was made to serve the letter on her personally, but she was
      not present. The letter was left on a chair in the living room through
      an open window.

   d. On 14 January 2009, two  Judicial  Quality  Assurance  Officers,  both
      Magistrates from the Pretoria Office, made a final effort to trace  Ms
      Oliphant. They visited her place of residence in Mitchells Plain.  The
      windows were closed and the curtains drawn. They came  back  later  in
      the day, where they found Ms Oliphant and a friend at home.  During  a
      20 minute conversation with her, she was asked 3 times why she was not
      at the office. She did not give any explanation. She was also urged to
      contact her Judicial Head,  the  Chief  Magistrate,  Wynberg,  and  to
      report for duty without delay. To date, she has failed to do so.

Committee’s response

   8. On 26 August 2009, the Magistrate’s Commission briefed  the  Portfolio
      Committee on the events that caused it to recommend that  Ms  Oliphant
      be removed from office.

   9. At the meeting, the Committee requested that the  Commission  give  Ms
      Oliphant one more opportunity  to  submit  her  medical  records.  The
      Committee asked  the  Commission  to  try  once  more  to  contact  Ms
      Oliphant, specifically asking her if she wishes to submit any  written
      representations regarding her medical situation since April 2008,  and
      to submit any medical reports that might substantiate why she had been
      prevented from resuming her official duties. It asked that Ms Oliphant
      be given 2 weeks to  respond,  and  that  the  Commission  inform  the
      Committee of her response, if any.

  10. A letter was sent to Ms Oliphant on 27 August 2009  (she  acknowledged
      receiving the letter), but no response has been forthcoming.

  11. Recommendation

   a. The Portfolio Committee recommends that the National Assembly  resolve
      to recommend  that  Ms  Oliphant  not  be  restored  to  office  as  a
      Magistrate in terms of section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

Report to be considered.

4.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development on the upliftment of the provisional suspension from  office  of
Magistrate A Bacharam, dated 10 November 2009:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report on  the  upliftment  of  provisional  suspension  from
office of Magistrate A Bacharam, tabled by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(3)(b) of  the  Magistrates
Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993) on 17 September 2009, reports as follows:

   1. The Committee notes from the report tabled by the Minister for Justice
      and  Constitutional  Development  that  the   Magistrates   Commission
      resolved  on  7  March  2008  to  recommend  that   Ms   Bacharam   be
      provisionally suspended from office in terms of  section  13(3)(a)  of
      the Magistrates Act, 1993. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional
      Development provisionally suspended Ms  Bacharam  from  office  on  16
      March 2008.

   2. Ms Bacharam was criminally charged for defeating  or  obstructing  the
      Administration of Justice.

   3. The Magistrates Commission set down a misconduct inquiry  for  30  May
      2008. Ms Bacharam’s  representative  requested  that  the  inquiry  be
      postponed pending the finalisation of the criminal case against her.

   4. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993,  Parliament
      must, as soon as is reasonably  possible,  pass  a  resolution  as  to
      whether  or  not  the  provisional  suspension  of  a  magistrate   is
      confirmed: On 20 November 2008 and  27  November  2008,  the  National
      Assembly and National Council of Provinces  respectively  resolved  to
      confirm Ms  Bacharam’s  provisional  suspension  from  the  office  of
      Magistrate.

   5. In terms of  section  13(3)(f)  of  the  Magistrates  Act,  1993,  the
      Magistrate’s Commission is required to report  to  Parliament  on  its
      progress in respect of its inquiry every three months. The Minister of
      Justice and Constitutional Development tabled the  necessary  progress
      reports on 10 March 2009 and on 7 August 2009.

   6. On 13 February  2009,  Ms  Bacharam  was  acquitted  by  the  Regional
      Magistrate’s Court in Port Elizabeth.

   7. After studying a transcription of the court  record,  the  Magistrates
      Commission believed that it would not be able to  successfully  prove,
      on a balance of probabilities, misconduct on the part of Ms  Bacharam.
      The Commission decided, on 25 August 2009, not  to  proceed  with  the
      disciplinary inquiry. On the Commission’s recommendation, the Minister
      uplifted the provisional suspension on 16 September 2009.

   8. The Committee, after considering the report  before  it,  and  meeting
      with representatives of the Magistrates Commission,  agrees  with  the
      Minister’s decision to uplift the suspension.

Report to be considered.

5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs on the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework
Amendment Bill [B 57D - 2008] (National Assembly- sec 76), dated 11
November 2009:



The Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs,
having considered the subject of the Traditional Leadership and Governance
Framework Amendment Bill [B 57D- 2008] (National Assembly-sec 76), amended
by the National Council of Provinces and referred to the committee, reports
that it has agreed to the Bill.



6.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs on the National House of Traditional Leaders Bill [B
56D - 2008] (National Assembly- sec 76), dated 11 November 2009:



The Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs,
having considered the subject of the National House of Traditional Leaders
Bill [B 56D- 2008] (National Assembly-sec 76), amended by the National
Council of Provinces and referred to the committee, reports that it has
agreed to the Bill.



7.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development on the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
South Africa and the Government of the Hong Kong special Administrative
Region of the People’s Republic of China Concerning Surrender of Fugitive
Offenders, dated 11 November 2009:
The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
Hong Kong special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China
Concerning Surrender of Fugitive Offenders, recommends that the National
Assembly approves the Agreement.

Report to be considered.

8.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development on the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
South Africa and the Government of the Hong Kong special Administrative
Region of the People’s Republic of China Concerning Mutual Legal Assistance
in Criminal Matters, dated 11 November 2009:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
Hong Kong special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China
Concerning Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, recommends that the
National Assembly approves the Agreement.

Report to be considered.

9.    REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE GREEN PAPER: NATIONAL  STRATEGIC
PLANNING, DATED 10 NOVEMBER 2009

1.    Introduction

Any discussion on national planning  starts  with  South  Africa’s  national
ideal: the need to create a truly  non-racial,  non-sexist,  prosperous  and
democratic society. Towards this end South Africans pursue equitably  shared
economic growth, decent jobs and sustainable livelihoods, quality  education
and skills,  action  against  poverty  and  inequality,  rural  development,
improved healthcare, safety and social cohesion. For  National  Planning  to
achieve these goals, a new culture and style of governance would have to  be
cultivated.

The South African Government  has  developed  policies  and  frameworks  for
poverty alleviation, growth and development of South  Africa  for  the  past
fifteen years. It was realised that planning, coordination across the  three
spheres of government, implementation, monitoring  and  evaluation  of  such
policies remain a challenge. There is no overall long-term  vision  for  the
country.

South Africa has medium-term objectives that are specified in the  five-year
Medium  Term  Strategic  Framework.  Various  sectors  and  departments  and
spheres of Government do have long term objectives set out in white  papers,
strategies,  policy  frameworks  and  other  frameworks   and   instruments.
Coordination and joint planning is meant to be  facilitated  by  legislation
such as the Development  Facilitation  Act,  1995  (Act  67  of  1995),  the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act, 2005 (Act 13 of 2005), the  Land-
Use Management Bill, guidelines on  spatial  planning,  and  ultimately  the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act 108 of 1996).

However, Government lacks an integrated long-term plan,  which  outlines  in
specific terms, the kind of society and economy that  is  aimed  for  in  15
years or more. It was established that there has not  been  enough  systemic
effort to ensure that the visions and  strategies  of  Departments,  sectors
and spheres of Government cohere with one another. Since the  Reconstruction
and Development Programme, which galvanised  large  parts  of  our  society,
there has not been a mobilising vision that is  clearly  understood  by  all
sectors of society with a  commitment  to  contribute  to  its  realisation.
Efforts to reduce poverty and roll back extreme  inequalities  of  apartheid
had not produced results as expected.

The following include some of  the  deficiencies  in  the  current  planning
system:
    • There is no agreed vision about the  country’s  long-term  direction,
      its ideal objective or the end state. No  monitoring  and  evaluation
      body is established to monitor  the  progress  towards  achieving  an
      agreed vision, reaching the ideal objective or the ‘end state’.
    • There is a tendency  towards  ‘short-termism’  and  voluntarism  that
      characterised  activities  of  government,  state  institutions   and
      entities, business communities and civil society.
    •  Government  still  faces  serious  challenges  in  intergovernmental
      coordination, despite significant advances over the past decade.
    • An  agency  is  needed  that  will  authoritatively  drive  planning,
      monitoring  and  evaluation  and  institutional  improvements.   This
      mechanism should have the ability to make  decisions,  where  limited
      resources and policies are contested.

Policy  imperatives,  such  as   growth   and   development,   strengthening
institutions, nation-building  and  the  establishment  of  a  developmental
state are long term projects. A single term of government  is  too  short  a
time  to  complete  building  a  prosperous,  non-racial,   non-sexist   and
democratic South Africa, where all citizens  can  share  in  the  fruits  of
opportunity. This has given rise to the need for government to  establish  a
more long  term  integrated  planning  mechanism  and  develop  systems  for
monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of policies.

There has been no agency  to  drive  planning  and  overall  monitoring  and
evaluation from the centre of government.  Programmes  are  not  articulated
within a coherent spatial frame of reference. This is in marked contrast  to
those developing countries  that  have  grown  rapidly  in  the  past  three
decades.

Long term planning  has  been  the  mainstay  for  the  success  of  several
countries in the international system. Comparative  studies  from  Malaysia,
South Korea, Brazil, India, Botswana, Tunisia and Nigeria,  amongst  others,
indicate that these countries faced similar conditions as South Africa,  and
have succeeded in improving the lives of their citizens by developing  long-
term plans, within a context of global uncertainty.

Most  of  these  countries  took  a  conscious  decision  to  undertake  and
implement long-term strategic planning in order to set  a  coherent  vision,
backed by clear and measurable programmes and targets. The emphasis on long-
term planning did not mean that medium-term  and  short-term  planning  were
less important. The aim was to situate the short-term and medium-term  plans
within a longer term horizon, of approximately 10 – 30 years.

Critical lessons from the international experience include the following:
    • Strategic planning and  better  management  of  development  processes
      require quality institutions that give leadership, including resolving
      problems that are barriers to inclusive growth and development.
    • The systems, institutions and processes  of  strategic  planning  vary
      considerably from  country  to  country.  They  are  informed  by  the
      history, socio-economic conditions and culture of each country.
    • Success in ensuring sustained growth and development  depends  largely
      on mobilising the public service and all of society behind a long term
      vision.
    • The quality of strategic plans and  success  in  their  implementation
      depend on the quality of policies and the strategic choices made.
    • There should be a recognised institutional  centre  (at  the  apex  of
      government)  for  nationwide  planning   which   advanced   strategic,
      political, organisational and technical  capabilities  for  successful
      implementation.
    • Administrative and technical support to planning can be located within
      the apex of government or in semi-autonomous development institutions.



A generic lesson from studies undertaken is that planning is not a  panacea,
and does not by itself guarantee good outcomes. In some countries,  planning
had resulted in adverse outcomes. South Africa,  while  being  cognisant  of
these international lessons, must institute  its  national  Planning  within
the unique conditions that prevail in South Africa.

Good development planning outcomes  require  solid  institutions,  a  highly
capable state, strong relationships between the major social forces,  and  a
clear focus on the strategic objective across  the  board.  It  is  critical
that the institutions and  the  systems  that  support  long  term  planning
should take into consideration the country’s historical,  political,  social
and economic context. Long term planning will  then  ensure  that  society’s
expectations of  better  service  delivery  from  the  state,  an  effective
government and a better life for all are realised.

2.    Parliament’s  constitutional  responsibility  to  consider  the  Green
Paper

Since  Parliament  is  constitutionally  mandated  as  a  forum  for  public
participation on matters of national interest;  the  Green  Paper:  National
Strategic Planning (Green Paper), as a discussion  document  was  considered
in a manner that accommodated  public  interest  and  allowed  for  national
consultation. It is recognised that Parliament is  not  the  author  of  the
Green Paper,  and  thus  cannot  dictate  to  the  Executive  the  terms  of
reference. Parliament, in this instance, is a representative of the  people,
from whom consultation has been sought.

2.1   Powers of the Ad Hoc Committee

The Ad hoc Committee on the Green Paper was  established  by  resolution  of
the National Assembly to consider and report on the Green Paper.

Ad hoc committees are established by resolution of the Assembly  to  perform
a specific task. The resolution establishing the committee must specify  the
task assigned to the committee,  and  set  time  frames  for  any  steps  in
performing the task, and the completion of the task (National Assembly  rule
214 – 216).

National Assembly Committees have the following general powers,  subject  to
the  Constitution,  Legislation,  National  Assembly  Rule  138  and   House
resolutions:
   1. to summon any person to appear before it to give evidence on  oath  or
      affirmation, or to produce documents.
   2. to receive petitions, representations or submissions  from  interested
      persons or institutions.
   3. to conduct public hearings.
   4. to permit oral evidence on petitions, representations, submissions and
      any other matter before the committee.
   5. to determine their own procedure.
   6. to meet at a venue determined by them, which may be beyond the seat of
      Parliament.
   7. to meet on any day and at any time.
   8. to confer with other parliamentary committees.

The Ad hoc Committee ceases to exist when it  has  completed  its  task  and
reported to the Assembly.

2.2   Objectives of the Ad Hoc Committee’s interaction on the Green Paper

The  Green  Paper  is  a  draft  policy  document  that  the  Presidency  is
consulting stakeholders on. The objectives of the Ad hoc Committee is to:
    • Provide a platform for institutional debate on the Green Paper.
    • Allow public comment and broad consideration of the Green Paper.
    •  Evaluate  the  matters  of  convergence  and  divergence,  raised  by
      stakeholders.
    • Report on matters raised that would require clarity and refinement  in
      the Green Paper.
    • Make a recommendation to  the  National  Assembly  whether  it  should
      support the Green paper on National Strategic Planning or not.
    • Propose recommendations to the Executive to refine the Green Paper  on
      National Strategic Planning.

2.3   Procedure followed by the Ad Hoc Committee

The Minister in the Presidency for the National Planning  Commission  tabled
the Green Paper in Parliament on 4 September 2009, as  a  means  to  consult
with Parliament on the establishment of a National Planning Commission.  The
Ad Hoc Committee on the Green  Paper  on  National  Strategic  Planning  was
established on 8 September 2009. The Green Paper was referred to the Ad  Hoc
Committee for consideration and report.

The Committee met on  a  regular  basis  in  order  to  meet  its  reporting
directives. The  Committee  invited  the  Minister  in  the  Presidency  for
National Planning Commission to brief it on the Green Paper. As a result  of
far-reaching proposals made  in  the  Green  Paper,  the  Committee  invited
submissions from the Public.

The Committee received 27 written submissions  and  requested  that  the  29
submissions received by the Presidency be forwarded to  it.  In  total,  the
Committee processed 56 written submissions. The Committee then  grouped  the
submissions according to the sectors they represented,  in  order  to  allow
for a diverse yet balanced input from various stakeholders.

The Committee then invited stakeholders from the various sectors to make  an
oral submission on the Green Paper. The stakeholders that  were  invited  to
make oral submissions were from the  following  sectors:  Labour,  Business,
Mining,  Law,   Disability,   Environment   and   Rural   Development.   The
stakeholders invited to make an oral submission were:

    • Dr. Christo Becker
    • Prof. Harald Winkler
    • Aids Law Project
    • Law Society
    • Business Unity South Africa (BUSA)
    • Chamber Of Mines
    • Johannesburg Disability Forum
    • Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU)

The Law  Society  was  unable  to  make  an  oral  submission  due  to  time
constraints and prior commitments. The Minister in the Presidency:  National
Planning  Commission  was  afforded  an  opportunity  to  respond   to   the
submissions the Committee received.  The  Committee  then  consolidated  its
position on the Green Paper, in preparation for its report to  the  National
Assembly.

3. Overview of the Green Paper: National Strategic Planning

The Green Paper identifies a need to develop  a  vision  for  South  Africa,
from which a long term plan will be formulated. It also  motivates  for  the
establishment of a National Planning Commission and a Ministerial  Committee
on Planning.

The Green Paper sets out a draft proposal for the establishment  of  several
bodies that will work together to formulate long-term  plans.  These  bodies
will  also  play  a  role  in  coordinating  government  departments,  state
institutions and bodies, civil society, business, labour, experts and  other
stakeholders. They will  also  be  responsible  for  formulating  measurable
indicators for monitoring the implementation of a long-term plan  and  allow
for public participation in the planning process.

The Minister  in  the  Presidency:  National  Planning  Commission  will  be
responsible for coordinating the planning process and  will  be  politically
accountable for delivering certain outputs. The Ministry in  the  Presidency
(the Planning  Ministry)  will  contain  the  secretariat  to  the  National
Planning Commission (the Commission), which will  support  the  Commission’s
work and do background work the Commission needs to fulfil  its  objectives.
The Planning Ministry will also be responsible for ensuring  that  the  plan
is factored into the planning of  departments,  spheres  of  government  and
relevant state agencies. The Green Paper is premised  on  the  understanding
that  long  term  planning  exists  within  state  departments,  spheres  of
government and entities.

The Planning Ministry will be tasked with focusing  government  towards  the
achievement of clear goals and ensuring synergy across sectors and  spheres.
The Planning Ministry will undertake its mandate in collaboration  with  the
Ministry in the Presidency for Performance Monitoring and Evaluation.

The Green Paper identified six key functions/requirements  of  the  Planning
Ministry. They are:

    • The Minister should lead government’s interaction with the  Commission
      and social partners in developing a common national strategic  vision,
      and  outline  the  emanating  targets  and  processes  that   relevant
      stakeholders will undertake to reach the targets formulated.
    • The Planning Ministry will be the centre of coordinating  government’s
      planning efforts across the spheres of government and  relevant  state
      agencies.
    • It should coordinate national government’s interaction on  matters  of
      strategic planning with other structures of government:
         o In integrating the input of  other  spheres  into  the  national
           plan.
         o In the iteration that will be necessary in  the  development  of
           ‘sub-national’ strategic plans.
         o In the adoption and operationalisation of the national plan.
         o In strengthening and enhancing government’s capacity to do long-
           term planning.
    • The Planning Commission would  require  administrative  and  technical
      capacity, by a secretariat in the  Presidency.  The  secretariat  will
      conduct and coordinate research and align planning  capacities  across
      government. It will  liaise  with  its  administrative  and  technical
      counterparts in the departments, provinces, municipalities  and  state
      agencies.
    • It should develop networks of knowledge and expertise  in  quasi-state
      research centres, academic institutions,  civil  society  and  private
      sector agencies.
    • It should  also  have  systems  for  interaction  with  the  budgeting
      process, state-owned enterprises and development finance  institutions
      to ensure the plans developed are in line with national strategies and
      that  resources  are  optimally  employed   for   national   long-term
      development.

The Green Paper also proposes alternative planning entities  that  could  be
considered  for  establishment.  However,  a  National  Planning  Commission
located in the Presidency is motivated for, given the current skills  levels
in the country, existing research institutions and bodies;  and  anticipated
costs of establishing alternative planning entities.

The Green Paper also outlines the function of Cabinet in  the  planning  and
implementation process, the responsibility of other  spheres  of  government
in intergovernmental planning, the  role  of  Parliament  and  the  link  of
monitoring and evaluation function in the Presidency. The Green  Paper  also
states that  spatial  planning  will  be  undertaken  in  order  to  correct
imbalances of the past.

4.    Issues highlighted from submissions received by the Committee through
      its public participation process

4.1.  Convergence on Principles

In all submissions and oral evidence presented to the Committee,  there  was
an absolute convergence on the Constitutional imperative for  co-ordination,
inter-relatedness and co-operation, as stated in Section 41  (1)(h)  of  the
Constitution, which states that all spheres  of  government  and  organs  of
state within each sphere must “co-operate with one another in  mutual  trust
and good faith by-
      (i) fostering friendly relations;
      (ii) assisting and supporting one another;
      (iii) informing one another of, and consulting one another on, matters
        of common interest;
      (iv) co-ordinating their actions and legislation with one another”

There is unanimity on the need for long term  sustainable  planning  with  a
clear framework against which to measure the performance of the  State,  and
around which to co-ordinate the myriad of plans, programmes and projects  by
spheres of government, state departments, state-owned enterprises, and  even
society in general.

There  was  agreement  that,  even  though   government   has   successfully
established sound and democratic institutions in the last  15  years,  which
have  created  a  stable  economic  platform  to  effectively   respond   to
challenges  of  transformation  of  the  society,  there  are   still   more
challenges that require better planning and  coordination  of  policies  and
programmes  that  address  unacceptably  high  levels  of  unemployment  and
retrenchments; high levels of inequality in the society and skewed  economic
opportunities, with devastating poverty. Therefore, there is a  need  for  a
coherent and sustainable long-term plan to guide  short-term  interventions.
It was found that all submissions concurred  on  the  need  to  establish  a
national planning body.

In terms of collective responsibility there  was  no  dispute  that  Cabinet
remained ultimately responsible for national planning; and no mechanism  for
national planning could override the responsibility of Cabinet.

These areas of convergence indicate a fundamental  agreement  on  principles
in pursuit of our national ideal for  a  non-racial,  non-sexist  prosperous
and democratic society. This  agreement  is  further  underpinned  by  broad
agreement  on  a  National  Planning  Commission  which  should  produce   a
programme and plan around which all South Africans should unify.

4.2.  Areas requiring Clarification

4.2.1 Titles for Minister

Two titles for the Minister in the Presidency: National Planning  Commission
are used  interchangeably  in  the  Green  Paper.  They  are  ‘Minister  for
National Planning  in  the  Presidency’  and  ‘Minister  in  the  Presidency
responsible for National Planning Commission’. The usage of the  titles  for
the same Minister does create confusion on whether a separate ministry  will
be created or whether the Minister will remain within  the  Presidency,  and
be responsible for national planning in a specific capacity, in relation  to
other Ministers.

4.2.2 Name of the Commission

The National Planning Commission is a confusing name  for  the  Ministry  in
the Presidency that will be responsible for formulating the  national  long-
term planning. The term ‘commission’ usually is used for a body that is  not
part of government, an independent body or a body that is established for  a
specific purpose/task. After the  task  is  complete,  the  Commission  will
dissolve.

If the Ministry is based in the Presidency, its name should  make  reference
to the Presidency,  as  the  Ministry  in  the  Presidency  for  Performance
Monitoring and Evaluation does. This should clear  up  confusion  about  its
placement within government, and the legitimacy of the office.

4.2.3 Appointment of Commissioners

The Green Paper also made some indications that there will  be  appointments
of National Commissioners,  but  the  process  which  will  be  followed  to
appoint Commissioners has not been outlined clearly. It was  an  observation
of  the  Committee  that  most  of  the  submissions  have   suggested   the
involvement of certain individuals from various  sectors  which  will  bring
more experience and inputs rather  than  only  inputs  and  experience  from
academics and intellectuals.  It is therefore important for the Green  Paper
to take into account these factors moving forward.

The Green Paper is silent about a number of matters regarding  Commissioners
and their appointment. These include:

    • some description of the range of skills commissioners would represent;
    • the role commissioners would play in the Commission;
    • how many commissioners would be required, and how  many  commissioners
      would be full-time or part-time  employed  in  the  National  Planning
      Commission;
    • how long would the term of commissioners be; and
    • what their powers and status would be.
4.2.4.      Role of Parliament

Parliament’s role in the Green Paper is envisioned  to  be  consistent  with
its current constitutional role of oversight of  the  Executive.  Parliament
also provides, through  the  National  Assembly,  a  national  platform  for
matters of national interest to  be  considered.  Parliament  may  create  a
portfolio or joint committee which would  conduct  oversight,  consider  and
interrogate long term plans formulated and  the  achievement  of  measurable
outcomes of the plan.  However,  the  placement  of  the  National  Planning
Commission within the Presidency, or  in  Cabinet,  or  independent  of  the
Executive will have implications for the type of parliamentary  entity  that
would be established to conduct oversight of the Commission.

Apart from Parliament’s oversight and legislative role, it should  be  noted
that Parliament plays a role in  appointment  of  commissioners  to  several
statutory  bodies  and  boards.  Parliament  has  received  nominations  and
applications; evaluated and interviewed short-listed  candidates;  and  made
recommendations for the President’s consideration.

4.2.5.      Need for a White Paper

The title of the Green Paper creates confusion  of  whether  a  white  paper
process will result. When Government was reconstituted  after  the  national
elections of 2009, several new government departments were created,  without
a green paper or white paper process. Some confusion exists as  to  why  the
National Planning Commission requires a green paper process, and  whether  a
white paper process and legislative establishment of the  National  Planning
Commission will take place.

The Minister in the Presidency: National Planning Commission  has  indicated
that the green paper process was undertaken in order to receive  submissions
on  the  need  for  national  planning.  The  Green  Paper  is  a  tool  for
consultation on the establishment  of  a  body  that  should  be  formed  to
undertake national planning.  It  seems  reasonable  that  given  the  wide,
robust debate enjoyed by the Green Paper, the purpose  of  consultation  has
been achieved.

5.    Structural questions to be answered

5.1   Status of the National Planning Commission

The Green Paper is  not  clear  about  the  establishment  of  the  National
Planning Commission (NPC) as an advisory body or as part of Government.  The
shape the planning body will take will have implications  for  its  success,
powers and efficacy. Whether it will be established as a statutory body,  an
advisory  body,  a  ministry  within  the  Presidency,  a  ministry  in  the
Executive, or a constitutionally established  body  will  bear  implications
for its powers, legitimacy, responsibilities and accountability.

From the Committee’s interactions it emerged that the NPC is proposed  as  a
new entity in  the  array  of  government  institutions.  It  is  neither  a
constitutionally-established  independent  institution,  nor  a   government
department. Its establishment is meant to  assist  government  in  providing
overall integration of planning; but also to galvanise and unite the  nation
behind a single vision and  long-term  plan.  In  this  respect,  Parliament
could provide a national platform for public participation in the  formation
and  support  of  a  national  vision  and  objectives,  in-line  with   its
constitutional responsibility. The Green Paper states that:

   “Guided by a strategic vision and plan, society  will  more  effectively
   unite in action. The proposed planning system, processes and  structures
   are meant to help achieve such  united  action.  Attached  to  strategic
   planning, it is argued, should be principles to guide  coordination  and
   integration of government’s work and indeed the efforts  of  society  at
   large”.

With the interplay of these roles, the  NPC  is  at  best  advisory  to  the
Executive and consists of the best expertise and  experience  from  society.
The NPC should also create capacity for the state to plan, but will be  free
of the day-to-day  details  and  imperatives  of  the  state  and  political
parties. There has been convergence around  the  conception  that  there  is
need for a National Planning Commission.

5.2   Role of the Ministry

To ensure a coherent set of products from the NPC, a  Minister  or  Ministry
in the Presidency, with the President as the ultimate custodian  of  policy,
must play a role in guiding the NPC, since the President is the conveyor  of
the Executive mandate, and would be responsible  for  communication  between
the Executive and the NPC. All of these are  at  the  service  of  the  core
activity of producing a national vision and to drive National Planning.

The core role of the Presidency’s planning function is  the  preparation  of
the three key products of the planning cycle:
    • The long term product (National Strategic Vision)
    • The medium term product (Medium  Term  Strategic  Framework)  and  the
      short term product (Programme of Action)

Another core activity  will  be  to  initiate  focussed  reflection  by  the
executive and/or society  at  large  on  major  areas  of  government  work.
Specific areas of policy research would be identified – mainly the kinds  of
issues that are key drivers to the  nation’s  development  trajectory,  that
have major macro-social implications and that  are  therefore  critical  for
long-term planning. The Presidency  will  ensure  monitoring  of  trends  in
these areas as well as coordination and leadership in their management.

5.3   Relationship: Planning and Monitoring and Evaluation

The issue of monitoring and evaluation as a separate process  from  planning
remains a concern for the Committee. The Green Paper was  tabled  separately
from  the  monitoring  and  evaluation  policy  document.  Separate   public
participation  was  undertaken  on  the  Green  Paper,  which  excluded  the
Monitoring and Evaluation policy, yet  the  two  documents  complement  each
other.

All the deliberations of  the  Ad  Hoc  Committee  speak  not  only  to  the
complementarity of the Planning function and the  functions  of  performance
monitoring and evaluation, but also to the inseparability of  the  two  sets
of functions. The implementations of the NPC, and the  brief  given  to  it,
must ensure that the development of a national vision and  plan  is  subject
to the imperative  of  measurability,  in  order  to  facilitate  structured
interaction  between  the  two  Ministers  in  the  Presidency.  Performance
monitoring and evaluation  must  be  able  to  turn  vision  and  plan  into
milestones and indicators so that South Africans  can  experience  a  better
life, as envisaged in the policy imperatives of government.

5.4   Relationship: Planning and line-function departments

The Green Paper should ensure that the roles  and  responsibilities  of  the
National Planning Commission  in  relation  to  line  departments  are  well
defined. The essence of several submissions received was that  the  National
Planning Commission would encroach into other  line  departments’  mandates.
Although its mandate is to ensure the formulation of  a  plan,  coordination
and communication amongst government departments on the  national  strategic
plan;  the  implementation  of  the  plans  would  still  be  done  by  line
departments, and they will still be expected to conduct their  own  planning
in line with the national planning body and its  products  after  acceptance
by Cabinet.


5.5   Relationship: NPC, NEDLAC and other established bodies

NEDLAC has been regarded as a body that provides a  platform  for  Business,
Labour and Government to discuss  and  negotiate  micro  and  macro  issues.
Clarity  was  required  on  the  issue  of  how  NEDLAC  and   other   major
stakeholders were to play a role. The establishment of the  NPC  should  not
encroach on the responsibilities of these bodies,  but  would  seek  support
and consensus on matters related to long term planning,  while  bodies  like
NEDLAC continue their given role.


5.6   Public Consultation


Planning will require various inputs from various sectors and any  perceived
exclusion may imply that various stakeholders, in  whose  name  planning  is
done, will be excluded from the process. The views of Labour,  Business  and
other planners should be taken into account to ensure  the  balance  between
all market forces and government planning.

The Green Paper suggests the “buy-in” from the public  but  should  be  more
explicit about how it will solicit the views of  civil  society.  Parliament
could play its role in providing a platform for society to shape matters  of
a vision for South Africa and a long-term plan.


5.7   Other Spheres of Government

The Green Paper  explicitly  states  that  it  would  not  undertake  micro-
planning.  The  issue  of  implementation  of  strategic  plans  remained  a
challenge in government, and should be taken into account  in  ensuring  the
effective and well co-ordinated implementation of national planning.

The  Green  Paper  begins  to  address  the  problems  of  duplication   and
inefficient services in government.  National  government  departments  will
still be expected to conduct their own planning, in line with  the  national
planning body. Other spheres of government will also be required  to  fulfil
their constitutional role of ascribing to the national  plan  that  will  be
formulated; in a way that  allows  unity  and  coherence  across  the  three
spheres of government, as envisioned in chapter three of  the  Constitution,
1996.

The challenge of capacity in local government and at provincial  levels  was
raised and the need to empower local and provincial government in  order  to
achieve the goals and  objectives  was  emphasised.  The  concern  was  also
raised with regard to the Green Paper being silent about  the  role  of  the
Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs  and  Municipal
Integrated Development Plans (IDPs) which would need to be addressed.

6.    Content areas to be considered

The Committee received substantial inputs on a variety of  content  matters,
which supported  the  need  for  national  planning.  These  areas  included
planning for Climate Change to be factored into the work of  all  government
departments to anticipate the impact  on  energy,  water,  agriculture,  the
environment, and other aspects of life  in  South  Africa.  Development  was
also proposed to take place within a spatial framework,  and  the  needs  of
people with disabilities were raised for consideration  in  the  formulation
of a national plan. The  recognition  of  rural  development  was  also  put
forward for consideration in broader economic development and planning.

Other inputs of content reflected the devastating impact of  current  global
economic challenges on the South Africa economy, the livelihoods  of  people
and the deepening of poverty and inequality.

It was not the primary task of the Ad Hoc Committee to pronounce on  matters
of content. However, as the Committee’s public hearings revealed,  the  need
for planning, integration and co-ordination should take  into  consideration
the  allocation  of  scarce  resources,  frugal  exercise  of  choices,  and
steadfast implementation of programmes.

All of the submissions  received  strengthened  the  Green  Paper’s  central
thrust, that South Africa needs a National Planning Commission.

7.    Developing conceptual clarity

In the submissions and presentations to the Ad  Hoc  Committee,  there  were
some fears that an absence of conceptual  agreement  on  key  concepts  that
relate  to   the   planning   process   –   policy,   plan,   co-ordination,
implementation, strategic objectives, operational work, etc. could  lead  to
undue  inter-changeability  of  such  concepts,  and  in   turn,   lead   to
duplication, usurpation or neglect of tasks  and  responsibilities.  The  Ad
Hoc Committee, having examined the usage of  these  concepts,  believe  that
the Green Paper can be more consistent in the  use  of  these  concepts  and
believe that Section 5 of the Green Paper  lays  the  basis  for  this,  and
would eliminate undue fears and suspicions.

The following paragraph from the Green Paper is particularly useful:

    “The  distinction  between  plans  and  policies  varies  in  different
    contexts. In some contexts, a plan is a  detailed  account  of  how  to
    implement a policy – the latter deriving from  electoral  mandates  and
    ensuing choices of the Executive and/or Legislatures. In this  context,
    planning means translating policies into  long-,  medium-,  and  short-
    term  objectives,   prioritizing   the   objectives,   and   sequencing
    implementation”.

This, in the main, should guide the critical relationships  between  various
concepts.

In addition, the Green Paper uses of the following metaphor to describe  the
planning process and to guide the  critical  inter-relationships  that  will
make  it  succeed:  “…  Governance  consists  of  a  continuum  of   related
activities which feed into one another:
    – policy development
    – strategic and operational planning
    – resource allocation
    – implementation
    – performance monitoring and evaluation”

If this governance continuum is  understood  and  creatively  applied,  then
matters which may give rise either to fears, suspicion or  confusion  should
be left to the Executive for  resolution.  These  include  the  relationship
between  General  Planning  and  Economic  Planning,   areas   of   possible
duplication and overlap of functions and  roles,  the  final  management  of
trade-offs,  the  ultimate  influence  of  experts  and  the  assertion   of
government’s mandate.

It is in the exercise of the role of  the  Executive  that  the  primacy  of
Cabinet will be expressed.
8.    Evaluation of areas of convergence and debate

Consensus was reached by all parties that there  is  a  need  for  long-term
planning. The Green Paper advocates for the establishment of an entity  that
would undertake long-term planning. The Green Paper is also  a  consultative
document, in that it asks for comment on what it proposes.

The Committee gave due consideration to the input provided by  the  Minister
in the Presidency: National Planning Commission,  all  submissions  received
on the Green Paper and the Green  Paper  itself.  There  were  matters  that
required further clarity in the  Green  Paper,  and  conceptual  areas  that
required  clarity.  Structural   questions   that   will   require   further
engagements and fundamental issues should be clarified in order to give  all
stakeholders the same understanding of the national strategic planning.

The Committee was pleased with the complete convergence  in  principle:  the
need for national planning through the National  Planning  Commission  would
present South Africans with a vision  around  which  to  unite  and  a  plan
around which all South Africans must work.

The Committee was further pleased with the  robust  debate  of  the  matters
contained in the Green  Paper.  The  Committee  saw  its  role  as  being  a
platform to reconcile differences, and  seek  clarity  about  the  strategic
objectives set out in the Green Paper. Where necessary, the  Committee  also
raised areas that the Executive should address in the implementation of  the
process outlined in the Green Paper.

9.    Conclusion

The Committee undertook  its  constitutional  responsibility  to  provide  a
national platform for public participation on the Green Paper,  by  inviting
written and oral submissions and hosted public  hearings.  It  became  clear
that there is a general consensus  on  the  need  to  establish  a  unifying
planning body which  would  coordinate  and  advance  policy  direction  and
priorities of government in the  long  term.  The  concerns  raised  by  the
public, organisations and stakeholders have been  taken  into  consideration
during the Committee’s deliberations on  the  Green  Paper.  Some  of  these
matters raised required clarification.

Although the paper on Monitoring and Evaluation was tabled  separately  from
the Green Paper on National Strategic Planning, the two  processes  proposed
could not be expected to function independent from each other.

A  trade-off   existed   between   meeting   short-term   requirements   for
establishing a Commission and  addressing  long-term  intergenerational  and
infrastructure challenges.

The President maintains the prerogative to select the Executive, and  create
government departments and structures to  support  the  policy  imperatives.
The Committee appreciated the consultation that was sought  from  Parliament
on the Green Paper. Given the time constraints the Committee  had  not  been
able to exhaust all concerns raised in its public participation process.

10.   Recommendations

Based on the report, the Ad Hoc Committee on the Green  Paper  for  National
Strategic Planning recommends that:

    • Parliament should support the Green Paper: National Strategic Planning
      and the National Planning Commission. The primacy  of  Cabinet  should
      also be supported.


Additionally, the following recommendations are made to the Executive:


    • A consultation process should be embarked on to clarify  matters  such
      as the appointment  and  role  of  Commissioners.  Clarity  should  be
      provided on the role  and  responsibility  of  Cabinet  Ministers,  in
      relation to the National Planning Commission.
    • The Minister in the Presidency: National  Planning  Commission  should
      clarify  the  process  to  be  undertaken  in   the   appointment   of
      Commissioners, as envisaged in the  Green  Paper:  National  Strategic
      Planning.
    • A pronouncement should be made on whether a white paper  process  will
      ensue.
    • Consistency and a common understanding should be ensured in the  usage
      of   concepts   such   as   Policy,   Planning,   Co-ordination,   and
      Implementation; in order to prevent inter-changeability  that  results
      in undue confusion.
    • To structure the relationship between the National Planning Commission
      and the Performance Monitoring  and  Evaluation  functions  so  as  to
      ensure complementarity, and the implementations and measurement of the
      same objectives across government.
    • Consideration should be made on the role of Parliament  to  provide  a
      national platform for public participation
    • Consideration should be made on a  proposed  role  for  Parliament  to
      recommend nominations for the  appointment  of  Commissioners  to  the
      National Planning Commission.


Report to be considered.

