---
title: 'National Assembly - 03 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-11-03
---

                          TUESDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr D T GEORGE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the rising scourge of corruption in our economy
   and the countermeasures required so that Parliament develops a position
   on corruption and makes a statement in this regard.

Mr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF: I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:

   That the House –

      1) discusses the proposal of a dedicated tax for the SABC;

      2) disagrees to raise taxes to pay for the poor management of the
         SABC; and

      3) agrees that the government should put an increased emphasis on the
         greater efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the urgent need to inform and educate the poor and
   vulnerable about how to identify counterfeit bank notes from legal notes
   so that they would not be arrested for unknowingly keeping and trading
   with counterfeit money.

   CONGRATULATIONS TO PROTEAS ON RECENT VICTORY AND WISHING THEM WELL FOR
                             UPCOMING TOURNAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C T FROLICK: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move:

   That the House –

     1) notes the victory of the Protea Cricket Team in the Hong Kong Sixes
        tournament over the weekend;


     2) congratulates the Proteas on winning the Hong Kong Sixes for the
        second time;


     3) further notes that the Proteas will contest a full series of test
        cricket, one-day cricket and twenty-overs cricket against England
        in the upcoming series starting on 10 November 2009 and culminating
        on 14 February 2010 in the final test match;


     4) believes that the upcoming series against England will again prove
        the readiness of our country to successfully host major sporting
        events; and


     5) wishes Graeme Smith and the rest of the team the best for the
        upcoming season and urges them to make the nation proud.

Agreed to.

  CONGRATULATIONS TO BLUE BULLS RUGBY TEAM ON WINNING CURRY CUP AND ON MANY
                            OTHER ACCOMPLISHMENTS
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that on Saturday, 31 October 2009, the Blue Bulls won the
         coveted 2009 Absa Currie Cup for the 23rd time since the beginning
         of the tournament in 1889, when they beat the Cheetahs 36-24 at
         Loftus Versfeld in Pretoria, and made the Blue Bulls the only South
         African team that has won the Currie Cup and the Super 14
         tournament in the same year and positioned them as the best South
         African team that has beaten 7 other teams and therefore received
         the coveted gold trophy which remains the most prestigious prize in
         South African domestic rugby;


      2) further notes that scrumhalf Fourie du Preez was crowned the South
         African Rugby Player of the Year and fly half Morné Steyn was
         awarded the Players’ Player of the Year award, the Test Player of
         the Castle South Africa 2009 Lions Series award and the Vodacom
         Super 14 Player of the Year award for their sublime performances in
         the past season;

      3) recognises that the Blue Bulls Currie Cup victory was secured by
         the tries scored by Bryan Habana and Francois Hougaard, combined
         with the accurate and phenomenal goal-kicking of Morné Steyn;


      4) further recognises that 15 of the 34 players chosen for the
         upcoming Springbok tour to Europe are Blue Bulls players,
         confirming that the Blue Bulls are without a doubt the best South
         African rugby team for 2009;

      5) acknowledges that the Blue Bulls has once again made their fans and
         the rest of the country proud;


      6) congratulates coach Frans Ludeke, captain Victor Matfield and the
         team on their outstanding performance shown throughout the series,
         and their triumphant victory, and congratulates Morné Steyn and
         Fourie du Preez on their well-deserved awards; and


      7) wishes them all a well-deserved rest and all the best for their
         future rugby matches and tournaments.

Agreed to.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: In view of hon
Ellis’s long absence due to illness, I think we should all welcome him back
and wish him well.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your colleague has missed you, so welcome back.

              SPRINGBOK RUGBY SQUAD FOR UPCOMING EUROPEAN TOUR

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C T FROLICK: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move:

   That the House –

     1) notes the announcement last Saturday of the Springbok rugby squad
        to tour Europe during November and December 2009;

     2) further notes that the world champions will play in test matches
        against France, Italy and Ireland, and warm-up games against the
        Leicester Tigers and the Saracens;

     3) congratulates the 10 new caps in the squad who will represent our
        country for the first time;

     4) believes that the team will prove once again why they are the
        number one team in the world; and

     5) wishes John Smith, the team and the management good luck to
        maintain our country’s dominance of world rugby.

Agreed to.

           ETHEKWINI MUNICIPALITY WITH COMMUNITY IN FIGHTING CRIME

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M I MALALE: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That –

   (1)      Fighting crime is the priority of the ANC in the next five
         years, and we will therefore continue to ensure that its level is
         drastically reduced.

   (2)      The EThekwini Municipality has engaged with communities on how
         better to deal with the fight against crime during the national
         consultative conference ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I said motions without notice. You are making a
statement.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                          (The late Imam G Solomon)

Mr E RASOOL: Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I
move:


   That the House –


       1) notes with profound sadness the passing away of ANC veteran Imam
          Gassan Solomon after a long period of illness;


       2) further notes that –


             a) Imam Solomon joined the ANC in 1960 at the tender age of 19
                and that he became president of the Call of Islam  in  1983
                and was elected onto the EXCO of the Western  Cape  UDF  in
                1984;


             b) at the height of apartheid repression in 1985 he went  into
                exile and only returned to South Africa in 1990; and


             c) he became an ANC Member of Parliament in 1994 and served on
                various Portfolio Committees, while being an MP,  including
                Finance, Justice and Safety and Security;


       3) recognises that he had an influence in Parliament and beyond that
          transcended party-political boundaries and that his presence made
          Parliament a better place and that the pride in his achievement
          was a collective pride that was shared across the parties;
       4) believes that Imam Solomon will always be remembered as a person
          who stood in service of humanity and who embraced a duty of care
          to all those with whom he interacted;


       5) further believes that as a man of faith and dignity, his
          contribution to our democratic process over many years leaves a
          hugely positive legacy for all South Africans; and


       6) offers its sympathy and condolences to the Solomon family and
          friends.

Mr J SELFE: Speaker, on behalf of the DA, I would like to associate myself
with the motion of condolence for the late Imam Gassan Solomon. Imam
Solomon was born in Constantia and attended that excellent school, South
Peninsula High. In the 1960s, his family was forcibly removed from
Constantia under the Group Areas Act. That, and the death in detention of
Imam Abdullah Haron in 1969, had the effect of politicising Imam Solomon.

He was a founding member of the Muslim Student Association, MSA, and became
Imam of the Claremont Main Road Mosque in 1979. In this capacity, he
influenced a new generation of Muslim activists. He also played an
important role in building the interfaith movement in opposition to
apartheid. He became involved in The Call of Islam and in the activities of
the United Democratic Front, UDF.

Imam Solomon spent some time in exile in Saudi Arabia before returning to
help organise the ANC. He became an MP in 1994, and served on the Finance,
Safety and Security, and Justice committees where we remember his gentle
but thoughtful and penetrating questions and contributions. He was
passionate about making justice accessible to the person in the street.

I will remember him in the streets of Grassy Park and Lotus River trying to
make a difference to the lives of people who, like him, had given so much
and not always received what they deserved.

He was a man of unshakable convictions and deep morals. This led him to a
life of political activism, which he performed conscientiously, resolutely
and enthusiastically. But at heart, he remained a modest and gentle man who
touched the lives of those who knew him. We will miss his compassion and
wisdom, and we are all the poorer for his passing.

We would like to convey our sympathy to his friends, family and to the ANC.
[Applause.]

Ms S P RWEXANA: Speaker, I worked with Imam Gassan Solomon. I knew him
well. He was a man devoted to democracy and human welfare. In the years of
our bitter struggle for freedom, he stood up to the apartheid regime. More
than that, he was in the forefront where the danger was the greatest. He
survived all that.
However, cancer is an enemy of another kind. I am certain he would have put
up an enormous struggle, but it was not to be.

Imam Solomon took up where the late Imam Abdullah Haroon had left off. He
injected new political activism within the Muslim community. It was not
easy for him to publicly denounce apartheid and the repugnant system of
politics based on racism. However, he was fervent in this regard. We must
also remember just how much emphasis he placed on transparency and
democracy.

In our new democratic order, we should not forget the importance of
transparency and democracy. Power corrupts. The only way to prevent this is
for each of us to remain vigilant and to be uncompromising in respect of
transparency and democracy.

This is how we can be true to the memory of our departed comrade. This is
how we can be true to our own values. Hope does not wish to dwell on the
sorrow of the occasion. The triumph of the life of the late Imam Gassan
Solomon is what we should be celebrating today.

Let his family and all of South Africa know that what he has left behind
will live forever in the years to come.
We cherish him in our midst, now and in the future. We will continue to
cherish him in our minds and our thoughts.

Hamba kahle, Imam. [Rest in peace, Imam.]

You were a pillar amongst us, and through your work and courage, you will
remain a pillar of our cherished democracy. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Speaker, as we gather here today to pay tribute to
our dearly departed former colleague, Imam Solomon, I’m reminded of the
following quote:

   Death comes to all, but great achievements raise a monument which shall
   endure until the sun grows old.

So is the life of Imam Solomon. His great achievements raise a monument
that shall endure forever. His passing on, sadly, reminds us of one great
certainty, that death is awaiting us all.

Solomon lived his life with dedication, passion and vigour, each day as if
it were his last. The lesson I, therefore, take from Gassan’s passing on is
that every day may be my and your last day, colleagues. I discovered the
following wisdom of the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius who said this about
2000 years ago:


   Live not one’s life as though one had a thousand years, but live each day
   as your last.

Imam Solomon will be remembered as one who lived each day as if it were his
last. That is the heritage he leaves us. Let us, therefore, live each day
as if it is our last.

We, in the IFP, applaud and thank Imam Solomon for his lifelong commitment
to building a better South Africa for all. The IFP would like to extend our
heartfelt condolences to the ANC, family, friends and colleagues of the
late Imam Solomon. I thank you, and we support the motion.

Mr M H HOOSEN: Speaker, the ID regrets the sudden loss of one of our
revered leaders of society, and recognises the sterling efforts of a man
who spent a lifetime in the service of his people. Imam Solomon set many
examples for us to follow, and leaves behind a legacy that will not easily
be forgotten.

His courage to stand up for what is right, whether or not people agreed
with him, his unwavering support for the poor and vulnerable, and his
passion for the less fortunate in society, are qualities that we should all
strive to achieve. He served his community with pride, humility and
dignity. These are the kinds of values that we must instil amongst
ourselves.

On behalf of the ID, I would like to extend our heartfelt condolences to
the Solomon family, and pray that God grants them the strength and courage
in the days ahead. I thank you.

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Speaker, our Deputy President and hon members, on behalf
of the UDM, I would like to extend our condolences to the family and
colleagues of the late Imam G Solomon.

He is credited with playing an important role in community, religious and
political circles during the final decades of apartheid. He will also be
remembered for being amongst those who refused to let the old regime
continue the tactics of “divide and rule” along religious and faith lines.

After this illustrious period as a community leader, the late member joined
the first democratic Parliament. There will be many people who share in his
family’s grief during this time of bereavement. Our thoughts and prayers
are with them.

May his soul rest in peace. I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Speaker, it was with great sadness that we in the ACDP learnt
of the passing of Imam Gassan Solomon, last week. I had the honour of
serving with Gassan Solomon on the Justice Portfolio Committee for ten
years, from 1999 to 2009.

During this time, we both had a close relationship based on mutual respect
and a shared desire to improve the lives of ordinary South Africans,
particularly when it came to issues related to justice.

Whilst he came from humble beginnings and was not legally trained, he often
showed us lawyers up on the Justice Portfolio Committee with his insight
for questioning of officials. He had a deep understanding of the grassroots
issues of justice that affected marginalised communities, such as
deficiencies in the criminal justice system, limited access to justice,
maintenance and domestic violence issues.

I was privileged to travel overseas with him on a number of occasions. He
and I would be introduced as the spiritual elders of the Justice Portfolio
Committee, particularly by the hon Jonnie de Lange, a role we were proud to
fulfil.

Imam Solomon has left a lasting legacy not only here in Parliament, but to
the country as a whole. We share, in pain, a tribute to him.

On behalf of the ACDP, I would like to express our deepest condolences to
his wife Amina, his children, the ANC and the broader Muslim community. Our
prayers are with you at this very difficult time. We support the motion. I
thank you.

Adv J H DE LANGE: Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, hon members, the esteemed family and friends of Imam Gassan
Solomon in the gallery, comrades and friends, ladies and gentlemen, it’s a
very special honour and a privilege for me to rise here today on behalf of
the ANC in unequivocal support of this motion, which pays tribute to a very
unique comrade and friend, Imam Gassan Solomon.

On Wednesday 28 October 2009, Imam Solomon, 68 years of age and a highly
respected member of this House during the first, second and third
democratic Parliaments succumbed to prostate cancer, which had spread to
his bones. During his battle with cancer he displayed enormous courage and
fortitude that had been a hallmark of his rich, meaningful and self-
sacrificing life of service and dedication to the Muslim and broader South
African community, particularly in the Western Cape.

Although he lived his life as a veteran and icon of the struggle for
liberation in this country, and particularly in the Cape, he always
remained a humble, gracious and caring man, dedicating his life to the
eradication of poverty, inequality and ignorance in our society. A
dedicated gardener and pigeon man, who always had time for a warm greeting,
a smile and a word of encouragement, he often stopped to smell the roses as
he went about his hectic life’s mission.

Since his passing, in an outpouring of emotion and love, many have paid
gracious tributes and bestowed abundant accolades upon Imam Gassan Solomon.
These tributes include Archbishop Tutu’s, where he said that Imam Gassan
Solomon was a highly principled and inspirational human being and one of
the jewels of the Western Cape; and Gamiet Gabier, who said that Imam
Gassan Solomon was a leader, a hero of South Africa who will go down as one
of the greats. Others said that he played a pivotal role in the political
development of the SA Muslim community; he was a respected Muslim leader
and anti-apartheid activist and he inspired and reassured the youth. There
were also many other tributes.

I also want to take the opportunity on behalf of the ANC and the family to
also thank the opposition parties for the kind words they have expressed on
this occasion. All these accolades and tributes should not come as a
surprise if one were to trace the lineage and the gene pool from which Imam
Solomon was born; it would seem that it is a legacy and life’s mission
bestowed upon him by his illustrious ancestors.

When one has regard to the fascinating and painful history of the
establishment and growth of Islam on this most southern tip of Africa, then
the life and tribulations of the ancestors of Imam Solomon seem to be
inextricably interwoven into this unique South African story. One such
ancestor affectionately known as Tuan Guru, meaning, mister teacher, or
also Imam Abdullah Kadi Abdus Salaam, by all accounts an extraordinary man,
is a direct ancestor of Imam Solomon. His mother, Gasiena, is a great-
granddaughter of Tuan Guru.

Let me briefly explain this extraordinary family lineage. History records
that more than 350 years ago the first seeds of Islam took root in South
Africa and more particularly in the Cape of Good Hope. This planting of
Islam in the Cape took place under conditions of subjugation, injustice and
oppression, not unfamiliar to the experiences of the majority of black
people in this country.

At the time, the Dutch colonisers, most by way of the Dutch East Indian
Company, occupied and settled, inter alia, in today’s Indonesia, Malaysia
and the Cape of Good Hope. The Dutch brought the first Muslims as early as
1652 to the Cape either as captured freedom fighters struggling against
Dutch colonialism in the islands of the Far East or as slaves to European
masters or as indentured labourers.

The sociopolitical relations, at the time, of mainly Dutch domination
ensured that Islam remained a subjugated and oppressed religion throughout
the lands of Dutch occupation, especially in the Cape, enjoying neither
freedom of religion nor equality of worship with other religions. These
first Muslims, as slaves and political exiles, besides being denied the
right to worship freely, were denied the basics of any religion, like the
erection of places of worship and burial grounds.

During this period of Dutch colonialism no person had as pivotal and
profound an influence on the history of and the development and culture and
religion of the 19th century Cape Muslims, as Tuan Guru.

Tuan Guru and three others were captured by the Dutch in the islands of the
Far East, allegedly involved in the conspiracy against the Dutch, and on 6
April 1780 were banished and brought as state prisoners or political
prisoners to the Cape and incarcerated on Robben Island.

Tuan Guru was of noble birth, growing up as a prince in Tidore in the
Trinate Islands, who traced his genealogy to the Sultan of Morocco. He came
from a background steeped in the knowledge and tradition of Islam and was
well-schooled in Islamic theology, having memorised the Quran in accordance
with the best traditions of the teachings of the Prophet Mohamed, peace be
upon him.

This freedom fighter against Dutch colonial tyranny, whilst incarcerated on
Robben Island in 1871, from memory, completed a handwritten book on Islamic
Jurisprudence in Arabic script. This book became the main source of
reference of the 19th century Cape Muslim community and has had a most
seminal influence on this community and its future direction and
development. Later this book was augmented with a handwritten copy of the
Quran, which Tuan Guru also compiled from memory. It remains preserved to
this day at the Owwal Mosque.

With the release of Tuan Guru from Robben Island in 1793, he realised that
for Islam to survive in the Cape, a base was needed from which it could
sustain itself and from which it could further grow. For Muslims everywhere
a mosque in the Islamic sense is a centre of learning and instruction, not
merely in religious norms, but also of the functioning of an individual
Muslim in his or her social milieu. In essence, it becomes the glue of
communal and social life and, as such, is an important institution in the
development of the community’s culture.

So, Tuan Guru, upon release from prison, immediately started negotiating
with the Dutch colonialists for religious freedom of Muslims in the Cape,
for example, asking for a site on which to build a mosque and for a
relaxation of the official prohibitive attitude towards Islam. This was, at
first, strenuously rejected. But, Tuan Guru persisted until permission was
granted. He then immediately converted a warehouse in Dorp Street into the
Owwal Mosque. The Owwal Mosque in Dorp Street still stands today,
established by Tuan Guru as the first mosque in South Africa.

In typical Islamic tradition he established a Muslim school attached to the
mosque, which became extremely popular with the local slave and free black
community as a source of inspiration, knowledge and empowerment in this
Cape enclave of bigotry, colonialist exploitation and white privilege. From
this first mosque and Muslim school many of the Cape Muslim traditions were
born and developed.

What makes this achievement even greater is the fact that this first mosque
was established in an era of colonial rule when the religious freedom of
Muslim was severely repressed and frowned upon and only forms of worship
emanating from the colonialists were allowed.

It was only in the beginning of the 19th century that the colonialists
granted the Muslim community some aspects of limited religious freedom; the
first being the granting of burial grounds, the Tanabaru in the Bokaap and
the second was the aforementioned site to build the Owwal Mosque, but
complete religious freedom in a legal and practical sense was only fully
achieved with the adoption of our present Constitution in 1996.

Tuan Guru was by all means an extraordinary person, highly intelligent, a
Muslim scholar, a dedicated leader, a freedom fighter and even regarded by
some as saintly. He is regarded as a pioneer of the Cape ulema, the Muslim
religious scholars, and was the first chief Imam of the Cape.

The legacy of Tuan Guru, the great-great-grandfather of Imam Solomon, and
the many others who struggled against colonialism and to establish
acceptance of and dignity for their religion and self-worth, forms an
inseparable and integral part of the struggle for liberation in this
country and should receive full recognition as part of the many various and
multifaceted struggles all our people have waged throughout the centuries
to liberate our country.

I’ve deliberately spent considerable time on going into this history
because I felt that on occasions like this, when many of us do know this
history, I for one did not know it at all until Imam passed away and I did
some research, but I thought it was very important for us to put the record
straight and fully and in detail set down the amazing history of the family
of most of the people sitting up there in the gallery.

Imam Solomon, however, not only descended from freedom fighters that fought
the tyranny and oppression of colonialists and fought for the recognition
of their religion, but, as we know, he emulated his ancestors and became a
freedom fighter in the liberation struggle of this country.

Imam Solomon’s political activism was violently kick-started into action in
his student days when his family and relatives were forcibly removed from
their homes and sizeable property holdings off Spaanschemat Road in
Constantia in terms of the Group Areas Act. The Solomon and Sadien
ancestral land consisting of three farms were bought by these families in
1902 and they retain the original title deeds to this day. The land
stretched for almost five kilometres from the Constantia Valley development
through to and including the cemetery. The family still awaits the final
restitution of their original land.

Imam Solomon in the decades to come played a pivotal role as a community
leader in the liberation struggle in the Western Cape, first as an Imam of
the Claremont Mosque since 1979 and later under the banner of the Muslim
Judicial Council, MJC, the Call of Islam, the UDF and the ANC. For his
endeavours he received and experienced the undivided attention of the
repressive apartheid security establishment, which, for a period of his
life, forced him into exile. The contribution, role and legacy of Imam
Solomon, during this period, is enormous and obviously too numerous to
mention. But, one giant contribution stands out and requires special
mention.

After the murder of Imam Haroon in detention in 1969, Imam Solomon became
one of a handful of Western Cape community leaders, with deep roots in the
Muslim community, like our own Ebrahim Rasool, Dr Fariek Essack and others,
whose political activism contributed to the Muslim community’s increasing
involvement in the 80s and 90s in the anti-apartheid movement and
liberation struggle in the Western Cape.

Imam Solomon and these activists learnt as political activists from the
struggles of the Muslim community since the 60s that the political
struggles of the Cape Muslim community could not be divorced from those of
the rest of the oppressed of this country. This was a slow process with
many landmark events.

Through the efforts of these leaders, the Muslim Judicial Council declared
in 1983 that:


  It believes that it cannot divorce itself from the rest of the oppressed
  and those with the same ideals in the formation of a United Democratic
  Front, to oppose a system of apartheid in South Africa.

Later when the MJC stepped down as a UDF affiliate, Imam Solomon and these
activists became founder members of the Call of Islam, which became a UDF
affiliate.

This feat is all the more laudable and impressive if viewed against the
resistance within parts of the Muslim community to these inclusive and
progressive ideas of the time. This rising political consciousness amongst
Muslims unfolded against the backdrop of a deeply divided Muslim community,
in which some elements were totally opposed to the idea that Muslims had a
duty as Muslims to be part of the liberation struggle, alongside communists
and people of other faiths.

Professor Aslam Fataar best describes the enormity and significance of the
feat of these activists as follows:


   Here was a man who provided an example of a seamless marriage between his
   Islamic commitments and his commitment to nonracialism. His example
   showed us that we can establish connections between our social
   transformation commitments and the search for a contextually relevant
   Islamic idiom. His abiding legacy for me lies in opening the door for a
   socially relevant Islam, responsive to the plight of the poor in this
   country.

This great son of the African soil, as his life’s story so abundantly
shows, achieved the rare distinction of being, firstly, a Muslim leader who
transcended religious boundaries; secondly, a community leader who crossed
racial, gender, religious and geographic divisions and borders; and,
thirdly, a loyal and dedicated political leader from the congress movement
tradition, more particularly the UDF and the ANC, who transcended narrow,
parochial and self-serving endeavours and the cult of mediocrity and
conformity and served the movement with distinction.

In conclusion, Imam Gassan Solomon lived a life of sacrifice, and balanced
and dedicated service to his family, to his community of faith, to all the
communities of Cape Town, to his Claremont Mosque, to the Zakhaat Fund, to
the Voice of the Cape Radio, to the MJC, to the Call of Islam, to the UDF,
to the ANC, to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development, to Parliament itself, the electorate and to the youth who were
his special passion.

We hail you, Imam Gassan Solomon, as a true revolutionary, a champion of
reconciliation, a unifier, a principled leader and a man of practical and
unflinching faith, with the spirit of service to the people forming the
core of your existence and the driving force in your life. A great soldier
of the liberation struggle has fallen, but the rest of us must now pick up
your spear and take forward your life’s work and considerable legacy.

May the loving outpouring of support from comrades, friends and family and
the spirit of Gassan Solomon himself, envelope and sustain his wife, Amina,
his two sons and two daughters and his family and friends during this time
of grief.

In paying tribute to Imam Gassan Solomon I have liberally used the comments
and views of others. Due to time and space constraints, I could not
specifically mention them all, but wish to acknowledge and thank you all.

Hamba kahle Imam Gassan Solomon. [Rest in peace, Imam Gassan Solomon.]
Mayibuye iAfrika! [Let Africa come back to its people!] Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to, members standing.

                              SERVICE DELIVERY
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms F C BIKANI (ANC): Speaker, the view of the ANC is that our country does
not need change in the way government relates to our people and in the
delivery of services. Building upon our achievements and learning from our
experiences in government since 1994, the ANC is committed to improving the
quality of education, health and sanitation and accelerating the delivery
of houses to millions of our people to achieve a better life for all.

On 20 October, President Jacob Zuma addressed executive mayors and mayors
from all 283 municipalities in South Africa to discuss the strengthening of
the local government sphere. The meeting took place at O R Tambo Hall in
Khayelitsha, Cape Town. The meeting highlighted the ANC government’s
determination to improve local government capacity as well as the
commitment to search for solutions to challenges facing municipalities and
build on progress made over the past few years, as well as acknowledge that
a lot more still needs to be done.

The ANC remains in touch with our people and listens to their needs. It is,
therefore, committed to a service delivery culture that puts every elected
official and public servant to work for our people and ensures
accountability to our people. We will continue to develop social
partnerships and work with every citizen. Thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]
                    CONDITION OF HOSPITALS IN RURAL AREAS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me D ROBINSON (DA): Agb Speaker, die toestand van hospitale op die
platteland is ’n belediging vir die mense wat daar woon. Tydens ’n onlangse
besoek aan drie hospitale in die Noord-Kaap - Calvinia, Williston en
Carnarvon - was twee sake baie opvallend.

Eerstens kan net met hoë lof gepraat word van die toewyding en
professionaliteit van die personeel van die hospitale - dit is dokters,
verpleegpersoneel en assistente - ten spyte van die feit dat hulle onder
baie moeilike omstandighede werk. Tweedens kan ongelukkig nie dieselfde van
die Departement van Gesondheid gesê word nie.

Die hospitaalgeboue, tien jaar gelede nog stewige en goed versorgde geboue,
is vinnig besig om tot ruïnes te verval. Geen instandhouding van die geboue
vind plaas nie en plaaslike inwoners wat probeer help om die geboue te red
word nie vir die gekoopte materiaal vergoed nie, om van arbeidsvergoeding
nie eens te praat nie.

In Williston is pasiënte vroeër vanjaar versoek om hulle eie kos te
verskaf. Die verskaffers het geweier om langer voorraad aan die hospitaal
te verskaf aangesien die betaling van rekeninge maande agterstallig was.
Die TV-program Fokus het hierdie skandelike praktyk gebeeldsend en eers
daarná is die rekeninge betaal. Die tragedie is egter dat die proses tans
besig is om hom te herhaal aangesien die betaling weer agterstallig is.

In plaas daarvan om miljoene rande in die nasionale
gesondheidsversekeringprojek te pomp moet die regering daardie geld eerder
bestee aan die instandhouding van bestaande hospitale op die platteland en
aan die opleiding van lui, onbekwame amptenare by die departemente van
gesondheid in al die provinsies. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Ms D ROBINSON (DA): Hon Speaker, the condition of hospitals in the rural
areas is an insult to the people living there. During a recent visit to
three hospitals in the Northern Cape - Calvinia, Williston and Carnarvon-
two issues were very conspicuous.

Firstly, one can only speak highly of the dedication and professionalism of
the staff at the hospitals– that is doctors, nursing staff and assistants–
despite the fact that they are working under very difficult circumstances.
Secondly, the same can unfortunately not be said of the Department of
Health.

The hospital buildings, which ten years ago still were solid and well-
maintained buildings, are rapidly deteriorating into ruins. No maintenance
of the buildings is taking place and local inhabitants who are trying to
assist in saving the buildings are not being reimbursed for the materials
bought, not to mention their labour costs.

Earlier this year at Williston patients were requested to supply their own
food. The suppliers were no longer prepared to provide the hospital with
provisions, as many of the accounts had been outstanding for months. The TV
programme Focus broadcast this shameful practice and only afterwards those
accounts were paid. But the tragedy is that the process is currently
repeating itself, as payment is once again behind.

Instead of pumping millions of rand into the national health insurance
project, government should rather spend that money on the maintenance of
existing rural hospitals and on training the lazy, incompetent officials at
the health departments in all of the provinces. [Time expired.]]

                          NATIONALISATION OF MINES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L S NGONYAMA (Cope): Speaker, on 29 October in London, Matthews Phosa
acknowledged concerns about “the noise that has been heard around the issue
of the nationalisation of mines in South Africa”. He assured investors that
“the nationalisation of mines is neither the policy of the ANC nor that of
the ANC-led government”. Even so, Castro Ngobese, spokesperson for the
National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa, Numsa, promptly undermined
Phosa by calling on government to nationalise the wealth of Patrice Motsepe
and hon Tokyo Sexwale, amongst others. This call should not be taken
lightly or treated as a joke. Nationalisation is creeping in. If it is not
at the level of practice, then it is certainly at the level of thought.

Already, government is proposing a 1% tax to rescue the SABC. When this
happens, the nationalisation of the SABC would have begun. Thereafter, we
shall witness the nationalisation of health through the National Health
Insurance, NHI, with further implications for taxpayers.

Speaker, this clamour for nationalisation from Cosatu and the SACP and
others is unrelenting and intensifying by the day. Given how things are
going in the ANC, Cosatu and the SACP, this will soon prevail. The writing
is on the wall. Unfortunately the ANC allies are not dealing with the real
issue. The correct debate should focus on how to correct the fact that our
country is unequal and therefore deal with the challenges. [Interjections.]
I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                          STRUGGLE AGAINST POVERTY

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms M T KUBAYI (ANC): The ANC strongly believes that South Africa’s foreign
policy, which is characterised by dominant features such as the struggle
against poverty and underdevelopment - especially in Africa, guided by
Nepad programmes - peace and peaceful resolutions of conflicts and the
building of partnerships, have grown stronger in the past 15 years, and the
country’s relations with other nations have improved.

In the last 15 years, South Africa has evolved as an influential developing
country with significant growth in diplomatic representation in all regions
of the world. The third administration that left the office in April this
year devoted a significant part of our foreign policy attention to the
consolidation of our African Agenda. We take pride in the work we have done
in the integration of the SADC region. South Africa has around 124
diplomatic missions abroad, and of these, 62 are headed by women.
Diplomatic representation in South Africa has also become an important
source of income, with R5 billion having been injected into the economy by
a diplomatic community between 2007 and 2008.

The ANC commends government for paying attention to the growth of our
foreign policy. Thank you.

                     FINAL EXAMINATIONS AND SADTU STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Chairperson, thousands of learners around the
country have already begun writing their matriculation examinations. The
IFP did wish them well during the sitting of this House last week. We, at
the IFP, are therefore dismayed to learn that the SA Democratic Teachers’
Union, Sadtu, in KwaZulu-Natal is threatening to disrupt these important
examinations by going on strike.

However, whilst we empathise with all the educators over the delay of
payment of what is rightly due to them as contained in the Occupation
Specific Dispensation, OSD, agreements, we think that Sadtu is out of
order. The IFP urges them not to disrupt schooling at such an important
time in the lives of our children. I thank you. [Applause.]

                       REDUCTION OF NEW HIV INFECTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms L S MAKHUBELA-MASHELE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC has committed itself
to reduce the rate of new HIV/Aids infections by 50%. This will be done
through an aggressive prevention campaign and expanded access to
appropriate treatment, care and support to at least 80% of all HIV positive
people and their families.

In continuing with our commitment, the ANC government will provide a total
of R900 million to accommodate a higher intake of antiretroviral treatment,
with spending on HIV and Aids programmes increasing from R1,1 billion in
2005 to R4,4 billion this year. The intake is expected to exceed more than
300 000 new entrants a year. By the end of March next year, nearly 900 000
people will be receiving antiretroviral treatment. About 80% of new
HIV/Aids cases will be entering treatment by the 2011-12 financial year.

The ANC will always provide more resources that will be devoted to
strengthening and implementing the national plan on HIV and Aids and
Sexually Transmitted Infections, STIs. Thank you. [Applause.]

                REPORTS OF CARS STOLEN FROM MOTOR DEALERSHIPS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Chairperson, the ACDP is concerned about the
increasing reports about cars that are stolen from the service departments
of motor dealerships. Such cars, it has been reported, are often stolen
after they are serviced, washed, and some still having keys in the
ignition. There are suspicions that there are syndicates that are working
with some employees on the inside. What is of greater concern is to read
about the attitude of some of the car dealers where the thefts are taking
place. Some, we are told, refuse to accept responsibility for the loss of
the vehicles that have been entrusted to them.

The ACDP believes that the motor dealerships where such cars are stolen
must take full responsibility for their negligence. They must be required
to replace the stolen car with one as similar as possible to the one which
was stolen. We further call on the retail motor industry to ensure that
their members improve security on their premises. The retail motor industry
must also ensure that its members do not refuse to compensate victims who
suffered loss because of lack of proper security and their failure to
safeguard cars that have been entrusted to them. Thank you.

                    SAPS SHOULD CONCENTRATE ON CHOP SHOPS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R N CEBEKHULU (IFP): Chairperson, today violent crime is the cancer that
erodes the fabric of our nation. We live in a country where criminals rob
us of our precious lives and property. On a daily basis law-abiding
citizens of this country are being exposed to criminals who have committed
a string of offences previously and continue to commit crimes with
impunity. Car hijackings have become a regular occurrence and some drivers
are even murdered during these attacks.

The IFP believes that the SAPS unit responsible for car hijacking should
not only trace and arrest the car hijackers, but should also concentrate on
chop shops and panel beaters who buy these hijacked cars, strip them and
sell their parts or are using them for parts when repairing damaged
vehicles. The pre-eminent responsibility of any government is to ensure
safety and security of the citizens, without which none of the other policy
goals have much significance.

One could, therefore, argue with conviction that the creation of a law-
abiding country must be this administration’s most important priority. Much
is required to turn around the crises of crime. The IFP believes, however,
that government could start by focussing the attention on scrap metal
dealers ... [Time expired.]

       TRANSFORMATION OF GLOBAL ORDER THROUGH CO-OPERATION WITH RUSSIA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs N B GXOWA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC will continue to work with other
countries and progressive forces to promote the transformation of the
global order away from unilateralism and conflict. It will continue to seek
a path of hope and human solidarity, and believes that economic and
political co-operation with other countries can improve the lives of our
own people, and will continue to work towards a better life for all.

In line with the commitment, South Africa and Russia have agreed to
increase their co-operation in various fields including technology, energy,
trade and investment. The International Relations and Co-operation Ministry
and Russian Ministry of Natural Resources held talks in Cape Town on
Tuesday 27 October 2009, where they discussed, among other things, ways of
enhancing co-operation and the relationship that already exists between
these two countries, their people and the business sector.

The meeting paved the way for President Zuma‘s state visit to Russia in
2010, which aims at cementing and ensuring smooth bilateral co-operation.
The ANC will continue to achieve and engage efforts to build in South
Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

                 JULIUS MALEMA BELIEVES HE IS ABOVE THE LAW

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): The head of the ANC Youth League, Julius Malema,
has apparently asked traffic police in Limpopo who had the unmitigated gall
to stop him for speeding ... [Interjections.] ... “Do you know who I am?”
The DA thought we would utilise this opportunity to assist him in answering
this vexed question.

He is the man who believes there is one law for South African citizens yet
another law for him. He is the man who will slap a neighbour who has the
temerity to ask that the music at his housewarming be turned down at 03:00
am. He is the man who has turned hate speech into an art form, who has
insulted the Premier of the Western Cape in the basest, most libellous of
terms, indeed who has so very many cases pending against him that I have
lost count.

Julius Malema is a man who citizens at grass-roots level believe acts as a
mouthpiece for the President who said he would fire Thabo Mbeki and indeed
any other ANC member sitting in this House, should he get the urge.

The man who says he lives by economic policies that have bankrupted
countries and has been discredited for generations while the intricacies of
the policies escape him. He is extremely capable of parroting the violent,
militaristic rhetoric that accompanies them. I am referring to the incident
where his Idi Amin-like arrogance had him throwing his not insubstantial
weight about in Limpopo. This was because he was caught at a speed trap.
Such is the ANC today that he failed to apologise and pay up, but instead
the threats began.

Is it true he phoned various Limpopo bigwigs to pull strings? Did his
threats intimidate the police to the extent that they gave him a free pass
for speeding? Malema’s ego and contempt for the law the rest of us must
respect, is unparalleled and one has to ask the other hon members in the
House: Is this someone you honestly believe is a leader in the making
worthy of inheriting the ANC? [Applause.]

                    FUNDING FOR EDUCATION IN RURAL AREAS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T BOTHA (Cope): It is an indictment of the government that after 15
years many children in our rural areas are still as disadvantaged as they
were at the height of apartheid. Ten years after the advent of democracy
there were altogether 939 schools with mud walls in the Eastern Cape alone.
In 2006, there were still 572 schools in that province.

Cope is saddened that children in disadvantaged communities remain
persistently neglected in this way. Our grand constitutional guarantees are
rendered null and void in these forgotten areas. Meanwhile, all around the
country the majority of our children have access to decent or outstanding
school buildings and facilities.

On the other hand, children in rural areas are still forced to receive
their education in the bare veld or under trees or inside structures that
are not in the least conducive to teaching and learning. Yet the same
children are expected to compete as equals in the job market when they
leave school.

Chairperson, without equal facilities in schools there can be no equal
socioeconomic opportunities in our society. The government can certainly
cap its own expenses, and Ministers can trim their lavish lifestyles to
fund this. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                JOB CREATION IN SA AFTER SOCCER WOLD CUP 2010

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L SUKA (ANC): Madam Chairperson, the ANC believes South Africa will
organise and host a world-class tournament. As such, the Brazilian
delegation is currently in South Africa to learn more about the processes
and preparations that go into staging one of the world‘s biggest sporting
events. Brazil will also host the Fifa World Cup Tournament in 2014.

The Brazilian delegation is pleased with the country‘s tourism
infrastructure and the rebuilding of South Africa and Africa‘s image as
well as job creation and stimulation of growth in the small to medium
business sector. The ANC will ensure that the country’s investment in 2010
will result in a lasting legacy for our communities and our people in South
Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

             BLUE FLAG STATUS AWARDED TO SOUTH AFRICA’S BEACHES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R KRUMBOCK (DA): Chairperson, the DA welcomes the fact that Cape Town
has been awarded the most Blue Flag accredited beaches in the country.

The Blue Flag awards strengthen the already justified perception that Cape
Town is a world-class tourist destination. Blue Flags are only awarded to
beaches that have achieved the highest quality in water facilities, safety,
environmental education and management.

It is a voluntary eco-label award which covers over 3 450 beaches and
mariners in 41 countries worldwide. The beach awards for Cape Town come at
the most opportune time, directly ahead of the 2010 World Cup. This news
means that tourists can enjoy our beaches knowing that they meet the
highest quality standards.

However, the DA is concerned about the absence of Durban’s beaches on the
Blue Flag list. It lost several Blue Flag awards on its beaches because the
manager, Michael Sutcliffe, does not see the benefits of participation.
Sutcliffe appears to be the only one at odds with a national drive to
improve our beaches and said that the Blue Flag status for the city has not
affected tourism.

The DA believes that there are plenty of reasons to join the Blue Flag
scheme: Firstly, it encourages good practice regarding water quality,
environmental management, education and safety; and, secondly, it allows
the municipality to openly fly the Blue Flag which hopes to promote the
beach to tourists.

The DA urges the manager of tourism to encourage all coastal municipalities
to engage in a Blue Flag scheme ahead of the World Cup so that South Africa
can maximise its tourism potential. I thank you.

               FIGHTING CRIME IN KWAZULU-NATAL MUNICIPALITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M I MALALE (ANC): Chairperson, fighting crime is the priority of the
African National Congress in the next five years, and we will continue to
ensure that its levels are drastically reduced.

The eThekwini Municipality has engaged with communities to consider how to
better deal with the fight against crime. During the National Consultative
Conference on Community Safety held last Wednesday, 28 October 2009, the
eThekwini Municipality’s Safer City Unit hosted the conference under the
theme Fighting Crime Through Community Participation at the iNkosi Albert
Luthuli International Convention Centre.

The conference follows the successful launch of the Ward Safety Communities
and Committees in June 2009, where all spheres of government played a role
in the deliberations on the safety of communities at ward level. Amongst
others things, the ANC commends and supports the initiatives geared towards
mobilising communities to participate in combating crime through the
establishment of street committees and community courts. I thank you.

                     PRIMARY HEALTH CARE IN RURAL AREAS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N R BHENGU (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC believes in strengthening primary
health care, especially in rural areas, by eradicating the backlogs of the
health service. Thus, the North West department of health and social
development will be putting 40 new ambulances on the road in the coming
week in a further effort to improve emergency services throughout the
province.

At a cost of R17 million, the ambulances will be distributed equitably and
preference will be given to rural communities. The move was necessitated by
the fact that most people in the rural areas do not have adequate
transportation to and from hospitals in cases of emergencies.

The ANC welcomes the initiative and sees it as a means of making health
care service available to all South Africans as well as ensuring a better
health outcome. It is a way of improving ordinary people’s lives and
ensuring service delivery. I thank you.

                 JULIUS MALEMA BELIEVES HE IS ABOVE THE LAW
                          NATIONALISATION OF MINES

                            (Minister’s Response)


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, with regard to the matter
raised by the hon Kohler-Barnard. We, in the Department of Transport, have
too read the reports about the alleged behaviour of the African National
Congress Youth League, ANCYL, President and we are looking into the matter.
We want to assure South Africans that none of us are above the law.

These are allegations we wish to stress at the moment, but we are seeking
to establish what exactly happened. We would like to use this opportunity
to assure traffic officers that they enjoy our support, and they must
conduct their business without fear or favour. [Applause.]

With regard to the matter raised by the hon Smuts Ngonyama, it’s very
ironic; he comes from a party which calls itself the Congress of the
People. Hon Ngonyama will know that at the real congress of the people a
Freedom Charter was framed and endorsed. The Freedom Charter says that the
wealth of the country shall be shared amongst all the people of this
country. [Applause.]

It said the wealth beneath the soil and the monopoly companies should
become a common wealth. It doesn’t use the word “nationalisation”, which is
true. At least, that gives us an idea of how to ensure that the wealth of
our country indeed becomes the wealth of all our people, and not of a small
élite that benefit from elephant consortiums and other plundering of public
resources.

The position of the ANC and of government remains the same as at the time
when the hon member was the spokesperson of the ANC, and its approach is
neither in favour of wholesale nationalisation nor of privatisation. We
will address the issue of state-owned enterprises on the balance of
evidence. You once used to say that, but now you are raising the “rooi
gevaar” and all kinds of strange issues.

We wish to assure you that we will certainly protect the public property
and public ownership and won’t allow the plundering of our public
resources, as it often occurred, as the member knows well from his own
experience with the elephant consortium and the way in which public
resources, in the case of Telkom, were taken over by private hands for self-
enrichment.

                    FUNDING FOR EDUCATION IN RURAL AREAS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson, hon Botha
raised a particularly important matter, the matter of mud schools in rural
areas. We all know that it is going to take a bit of time to overcome
underdevelopment. Government has deliberately established the Department of
Rural Development and Land Reform for this purpose. We want to assure the
hon member that this is a matter which is at the top of government’s
agenda.

I just want to draw the attention of the hon member to the fact that we are
working in all provinces. Where we have already been, we have left a
footprint. Should you go to the primary and high schools in Muyexe, you
will see the ablution facilities that have been put up for the schools.
These ablution facilities – which use water-saving technology – affect the
health and the education of a community and, as both of these relate to how
people live, change the mindset of that community.

Lastly, in another typically rural area like the one I’ve just mentioned,
we found a mobile clinic that visited the area once a week. Now, I note
this because we have set up a structure, a building, to which people will
have access five days a week and eight hours a day. This is a trend that’s
beginning to emerge.

Donkerhoek in Mpumalanga is a place that could not be reached by road.
Since August, we have been constructing a road to reach it. There is a
hostel that is being renovated by people in the area who are being trained
by government to operate there.

I hope that the hon member will very soon find time to go and see these
places. There is development in the rural areas. Thank you. [Applause.]

The House adjourned at 15:06.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a money Bill:
          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees


    (1)     The following changes have been made to the membership of
        committees:

        PC on Economic Development


        Discharged:


        MF


        Bhoola, Mr R B

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Government Notice No R949 published in Government Gazette No
       32621dated 2 October 2009: Amendment of Air Passenger Tax (APT/4),
       in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


   (b)      Proclamation No R.942 published in Government Gazette No 32605
       dated 30 September 2009: Commencement of sections 97 (1) and 98 (1)
       (a) and (c) of Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 60 of 2008).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces




              SECOND REPORT OF THE JOINT RULES COMMITTEE, 2009


The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, as co-chairpersons of the Joint Rules Committee
(JRC), present the Second Report of the Joint Rules Committee, dated 29
October 2009, as follows:

The Joint Rules Committee met on 14 October 2009 to consider the Draft
Report of the Parliamentary Group on International Relations (PGIR),
including proposed rules for the establishment of the group.

    A) CONSIDERATION OF NEW RULES

The JRC recommends that the following new Joint Rules 128 to 136 be
adopted:

Part 12: Parliamentary Group on International Relations (PGIR)


128.  Establishment


There is a Parliamentary Group on International Relations (PGIR).


129.  Composition


The Parliamentary Group on International Relations consists of the number
of Assembly and Council members that the Joint Rules Committee may
determine.


130.  Co-chairpersons


A House Chairperson designated by the Speaker of the Assembly and a House
Chairperson designated by the Chairperson of the Council are co-
chairpersons of the group.


131.  Acting chairperson



If neither of the co-chairpersons is available, the Speaker of the National
Assembly and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces may
designate another member of the group to act as chairperson.





132.  Functions and powers


The Parliamentary Group on International Relations must implement the
international relations policy agreed by the Joint Rules Committee by,
inter alia, –

     1) providing policy and strategic direction on Parliament’s
        international engagements, including its relations with other
        Parliaments and international parliamentary organisations;
     2) coordinating Parliament’s international engagements, including its
        relations with other Parliaments and membership of, and
        participation in, international parliamentary organisations;
     3) receiving reports from parliamentary delegations and submitting
        proposals on their tabling, referral and scheduling for debate to
        the presiding officers or relevant parliamentary structures;
     4) meeting annually with members appointed by the Houses to serve in
        international parliamentary bodies and members of all substructures
        of the group, as well as the chairpersons of the parliamentary
        committees dealing with international relations and cooperation and
        trade and industry to determine strategy and evaluate the
        international relations of Parliament.


133.  Reporting


The Parliamentary Group on International Relations –

     1) must report regularly on its activities to the Joint Rules
        Committee; and


     2) may submit, in accordance with its mandate, substantive reports and
        proposals to relevant parliamentary forums.

134.  Substructures


The Parliamentary Group on International Relations may, with the
concurrence of the Joint Rules Committee and according to agreed
guidelines, establish –

     1) multiparty, programme-driven focus groups consisting of core
        members of delegations to international parliamentary organisations
        to pursue and lend continuity to Parliament’s multilateral
        relations;


     2) friendship groups informally to pursue nonstrategic bilateral
        relations; and
     3) any substructures that may be required to assist with the
        implementation of international relations policy.


135.  Quorum


     1) A majority of the members of the group constitutes a quorum.
     2) The group may proceed with business irrespective of the number of
        members present, but may decide a question only if a quorum is
        present.
     3) When the group has to decide a question and a quorum is not
        present, the member presiding may either suspend business until a
        quorum is present, or adjourn the meeting.


136.  Decisions


A question before the group is decided when there is agreement among the
majority of the members present.
    B) OTHER PGIR MATTERS PRESENTED


(1)   Establishment of focus groups

The JRC, in accordance with the proposed new rules, concurred that focus
groups will be set up as substructures of the PGIR to represent the
following multilateral bodies to which Parliament is affiliated:

Focus Group on the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU): This group will
comprise 5 core members and 6 additional members.
Focus Group on SADC-PF: This group will comprise 5 core members and 6
additional members.
Focus Group on the Pan-African Parliament: This group will comprise 5 core
members and 6 additional members.
Focus Group on Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA): This group
will comprise the Branch Executive of the CPA (5 core members) as well as 6
additional members.
Focus Group on the African Caribbean Pacific-European Union (ACP-EU): This
group will comprise 3 core members and 6 additional members.
Focus Group on Association of Senates, Shoora and Equivalent Councils in
Africa and the Arab World (ASSECA): This group will comprise 9 core
members.
Focus Group on South Africa-European Union Relations: This group will
comprise 5 core members and 6 additional members.
Focus Group on IBSA (India, Brazil, South Africa) Dialogue Forum: This
group will comprise 5 core members and 6 additional members.
The size of a focus group is determined by the multilateral body it
represents and whether the delegates are appointed by the House for the
duration of the parliamentary term or on an ad hoc basis for each activity
of that multilateral body.

The purpose of a focus group is as follows:

   a) The group will analyse the work of the particular body it represents
      and guide Parliament’s engagement with that body.
   b) The group will assess and evaluate reports of delegations to meetings
      of the body and identify matters which require further follow up by
      Parliament.
   c) The group will embark on information-sharing initiatives for members
      on the work of the affiliated multilateral body.

The focus groups will report on their work in the PGIR’s annual extended
meeting. Each focus group will meet at least four times a year in
accordance with the programme of work of its corresponding multilateral
body. Each focus group will be led by a convenor and a deputy convenor.

(2)   Establishment of friendship groups and strategic bilateral relations

The JRC further agreed that friendship groups will be utilised to pursue
nonstrategic bilateral relations based on geographical regions. Friendship
groups will pursue such relations in a purposeful and focused manner in
support of South Africa’s foreign policy objectives. In this regard, there
must be a bias in favour of relations with other African countries. It is
important to differentiate between bilateral relationships that are
nonstrategic and strategic bilateral relations.

The JRC noted that friendship groups and the pursuit of strategic  bilateral
relations will be given further consideration by the PGIR and  a  report  on
the matter will be submitted to the next meeting of the JRC.

(3)   Members representing Parliament

The JRC also agreed that when a member receives an invitation in his or her
personal capacity to represent Parliament, the member must have the
approval of the Presiding Officers for such participation if parliamentary
funds are to be used. Funding for such participation will not necessarily
come from the parliamentary budget.
Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


    (1)    South African Postbank Bill, 2009, submitted by the Minister of
         Communications. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Business Case for the Establishment of the Companies and
        Intellectual Property Commission.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

       a) Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 30 October 2009,
          to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining a further delay
          in the submission of the Annual Report of the South African
          Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) for 2008-09.

          SUBMISSION OF THE SABC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR
          THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2009: REQUEST FOR EXTENSION FROM 31
          OCTOBER TO 30 NOVEMBER 2009


          My letter of 26 August 2009 in the above mentioned regard has
          reference.


          The Interim Board has, since taking office, focused on stabilizing
          the SABC with its first priorities being, the stabilization of the
          leadership of the SABC, finalizing its corporate plan and
          implementing the recommendations of the Auditor General’s forensic
          audit. The SABC has written to me requesting a further one month
          extension to submit its annual report. This is due to the fact
          that the guarantee application by the SABC took longer than
          anticipated and that, the National Treasury postponed a Government
          Guarantee Committee meeting scheduled for 22 October 2009 due to
          the recent tabling of the Adjustment Estimate of Expenditure in
          Parliament.


          The request by the SABC to submit its annual report will further
          delay the tabling of its annual report by a further one month and
          tabling will be made by the first week of December 2009.


          Hope the above meet with your requirements.

          Yours sincerely


          signed
          GEN (RET) SIPHIWE NYANDA
          MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development in terms of Rule 239(3) of the National Assembly, dated 03
    November 2000:
      The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
      having been given permission by the National Assembly to proceed with
      the Draft Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
      Laws Amendment Bill, 2009, and having complied with Rule 239 (1) of
      the National Assembly, reports in terms of Rule 239 (3) that it has
      published the Bill.


