---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 February 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-02-17
---

                          TUESDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 44.

                                 NEW MEMBER

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, before we start with the
Order Paper I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the hon
Mcgluwa to the National Council of Provinces. The hon member was sworn in
today in the Chairperson’s office. He is a member of the DA. He will stand
up ... I’m sorry, he is a member of the ID from the Northern Cape province.
[Applause.] Order! There will be no speeches.

Mr V V Z WINDVOЁL: Chairperson, on a lighter note, I was saying to the
member that the next sitting will be his last one. May he just say hello
and goodbye. [Laughter.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Okay, he is a member anyway.

                            DEATH OF HELEN SUZMAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

   (1)      notes with deep sadness the death of Helen Suzman on 1 January
        2009;


   (2)      acknowledges the significant contribution she made to the
        attainment of democracy in South Africa, by tirelessly and
        fearlessly fighting against apartheid and injustice and for the
        rights of the marginalised and dispossessed of South Africa, during
        her time as the only Progressive Party MP in Parliament;


   (3)      recognises that since her retirement from Parliament in 1989 she
        has stood four-square behind the ideals that animate the South
        African Constitution, and stood up without fear or favour for human
        rights and civil liberties in South Africa and in the wider world;


   (4)      further acknowledges that she has left a rich political legacy
        that will inspire all South Africans in the years ahead; and


   (5)      conveys its condolences to her family and friends and expresses
        the assurance that she will truly be missed.


We salute a great South African woman!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                        CONDEMNATION OF CARL NIEHAUS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      condemns the activities that the then ANC spokesperson, Carl
        Niehaus, has been involved in;


   (2)      notes that it is unfortunate that the ANC wants to redeploy him
        in another capacity within its own ranks;


[Interjections.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon members! Continue, hon member.

Mr O M THETJENG: Thank you, Chairperson.

   (3)      further notes that the ANC manifesto for the coming elections
        reflects that corruption cannot be tolerated; why, then, tolerate
        the corruption that Carl Niehaus committed — are there different
        rules for ANC members and for members of the general public?; and


   (4)      acknowledges that the DA calls for this House to debate the
        concept of corruption as a matter of urgency.


[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Since there is an objection to the draft
resolution, it will be recorded on the Order Paper as a notice of motion.

                        BAKKIE ACCIDENT IN MPUMALANGA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms F NYANDA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council —

      1)  notes  that  a  speeding  bakkie  knocked  down  and  killed  four
         schoolchildren while  they  were  walking  to  various  schools  at
         Daantjie  Trust  in  Mpumalanga,  not  far  from  my  constituency,
         yesterday morning, 16 February 2009;


      2) further notes that  the  four  children,  Zinhle  Mnisi,  Khulekani
         Mathebula, Gladness Mashele and Menzi Mtileni, were flung into  the
         yard of a welder, William Lubisi, where three of them died  on  the
         spot while the other was certified  dead  on  arrival  at  a  local
         clinic;


      3) acknowledges that the driver of the bakkie, who was also  a  pupil,
         was reportedly speeding and his companion was rushed to hospital in
         a critical condition;


      4) takes this opportunity to convey its condolences to the families of
         the deceased, and  calls  on  all  parents  to  ensure  that  their
         children have the necessary authorisation to drive  cars  and  that
         they exercise the greatest caution when  driving  in  places  where
         there are learners; and



      5) further acknowledges that ironically just last month  in  the  very
         same area, officers  from  the  traffic  law  enforcement  “Sivutha
         Umlilo”, who themselves were speeding, had their  car  fly  into  a
         certain house – as I speak, the owner still does not have a house.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

            ENDORSEMENT OF MANIFESTO BY FORMER PRESIDENT MANDELA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council —


      1) notes that whoops of joy reverberated across Idutywa in the
         Eastern Cape on Sunday, 15 February 2009, when former President
         Nelson Mandela arrived at an ANC rally to endorse the ANC’s 2009
         National Elections Campaign;


      2) further notes that Mr Mandela, who was helped to the stage by his
         grandson Mandla Mandela and ANC President Jacob Zuma on the
         platform, boldly reaffirmed his lifelong devotion to the visionary
         leadership and ideals of the ANC;


      3) acknowledges that the appearance of this lifelong cadre of our
         movement dispels any ill-conceived notions and blatant lies that
         have been constantly told by desperate people seeking to mislead
         our people, that uTata uMandela has abandoned the party that he
         led for decades to see the liberation of the people of South
         Africa and the demise of the brutal apartheid state; and


    (4)     takes this opportunity to reaffirm that this great movement has
         moved well beyond many evolutions from its initial endurance under
         the iron rod of apartheid to the liberation of the people of South
         Africa, yet its inclination for a better South Africa remains ever
         so compelling and resolute.


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: There’s an objection to the motion. In the
light of the objection, the motion will not be proceeded with; the motion
without notice will now become a notice of motion.

Order, hon Sibiya and hon Thetjeng, we are in the House, please!

                       PRECEDENCE GIVEN TO ORDER NO 8

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Council agrees that Order No 8 be inserted  after  Order  No  6,
   namely Consideration of Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2F  –  2008]  (National
   Assembly – sec 76(1)), and that Order No 8, as printed, becomes Order  No
   8.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  ESTABLISHMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER MATTERS IN TERMS OF SECTION
             12 OF THE NATIONAL PROSECUTING AUTHORITY ACT, 1998

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Council ratifies the decision of the Chairperson of the National
   Council of Provinces and the Speaker of  the  National  Assembly,  acting
   jointly, in terms of Joint  Rule  138,  to  establish  an  ad  hoc  joint
   committee to consider matters in terms of  section  12  of  the  National
   Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act 32 of 1998),  as  announced  in  the
   Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 12 January 2009.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.
APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO SERVE ON MEDIATION COMMITTEE IN RESPECT OF SECOND-
                               HAND GOODS BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I move the motion printed in my name
on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the Council ratifies the decision of the Chairperson to appoint  the
   following members to serve on the Mediation Committee in respect  of  the
   Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2D — 2008] (National Assembly—sec 76(1)):


    Eastern Cape: J W le Roux
    Free State: N S S Mqungquthu
    Gauteng: D R Tsotetsi
    KwaZulu-Natal: A N T Mchunu
    Limpopo: M L Mokoena
    Mpumalanga: F Nyanda
    Northern Cape: C M Goeieman
    North West: K A Kgarebe
    Western Cape: N J Mack


    Alternate:


    North West: A L Moseki
Question put: That the motion be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

        RATIFICATION OF DECISION TO ESTABLISH AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Kwakhona, Mhlalingaphambili, ndiphakamisa
esi sindululo sibhalwe ngam kwiPhepha leMicimbi yeNdlu: [Chairperson, I
move the motion printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:]

   That the Council, noting that the National Youth Development  Agency  Act
   (Act 54 of 2008) has been promulgated, resolves to ratify –


      1) the decision of the Chairperson  to  establish  an  ad  hoc  joint
         committee in terms of Joint Rule 138(4)(a) to consider,  in  terms
         of the Act, the appointment  of  members  to  the  National  Youth
         Development Agency Board;


      2) that the committee exercises those powers in Joint  Rule  32  that
         may assist it in carrying out its task;


      3) that the committee consists of 9 members of the  National  Council
         of Provinces and 13 members of the National Assembly (ANC 8, DA 2,
         IFP 1 and all other parties 2) and;


      4) that the committee reports by 19 February 2009.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                 SUSPENSION OF JOINT RULES 154(2) AND 220(2)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Kwakhona, Mhlalingaphambili, ndiphakamisa
esi sindululo sibhalwe ngam kwiPhepha leMicimbi yeNdlu: [Chairperson, I
move the motion printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:]

   That the Council —


      1) subject to the concurrence  of  the  National  Assembly,  suspends
         Joint Rule 154(2), which provides that the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         may not classify a Bill before the expiry of the period stated  in
         the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, in  respect  of
         the Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 — 2009] (National Assembly — sec
         76)  (see  Announcements,  Tablings  and  Committee  Reports,   11
         February 2009, p 301); and


      2) subject to the concurrence  of  the  National  Assembly,  for  the
         purposes of conducting the Second Reading  debate  on  the  above-
         mentioned Bill, suspends Joint Rule 220(2), which requires that  a
         translation  of  a  Bill’s  official  text  must  be  received  by
         Parliament at least three days before the formal consideration  of
         the Bill by the House in which it was introduced.


Question put: That the motion be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER MATTERS IN
        TERMS OF SECTION 12 OF THE NATIONAL PROSECUTING AUTHORITY ACT

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson and hon members, let me start by thanking
the Chief Whip, Ms Ntwanambi, for having confidence in me and by nominating
me to, on behalf of the NCOP, co-chair this ad hoc committee which deals
with very sensitive and delicate matters. Members from the NCOP who served
in the ad hoc committee were brilliant, dynamic, focused, effective, sharp
and very helpful.

The ad hoc committee had two options with regard to the request by
President Motlanthe to remove Adv Pikoli from the Office of the National
Director of Public Prosecutions. Option one was to just look into the
Ginwala reports and all the presentations that were made before her, and
also to look into the report by the Presidency and the Minister for
Justice, and take a decision on that. The second option was to invite all
relevant parties to come and give evidence before the ad hoc committee.

We deemed it fit and proper to take the second option. We decided on the
latter and therefore invited Adv Pikoli, the Minister for Justice, and Rev
Chikane to make presentations. Adv Pikoli appeared before the committee and
made a very appealing argument. The Minister also came in to give his side
of the story on behalf of the department. The Presidency, represented by
Rev Chikane, also appeared before the committee. The majority of members
were moved by all the facts tabled before them by Rev Chikane. Having
listened to all parties concerned, the majority of members raised serious
questions about the conduct and attitude of Adv Pikoli, for being
insensitive to national security.

Let us look at the search at the Union Buildings: We learn with shock and
disbelief that Adv Pikoli informed the President, Deputy President, the
Minister and the Director-General in the Presidency that he was going to
conduct searches at the Union Buildings and Tuynhuys, long after they had
received the warrants. Adv Pikoli did not see anything wrong with that.
According to him, it was not necessary to obtain a warrant before
discussing it with either the Head of State, or the Head of Government.

On the matter of the investigation of National Commissioner Selebi, again
Adv Pikoli went on to obtain warrants for his arrest and search without
discussing this with the relevant Minister or even the Head of State,
forgetting the repercussions that might have occurred. My colleagues will
go more deeply into this matter, but let me say in passing that it was very
strange to the majority of members that, even after the President requested
to be given 14 days to make some necessary arrangements for the search and
seizure and for the arrest of Mr Selebi, Adv Pikoli refused and told the
President that he was giving him only seven days.

On closer examination during the Ginwala inquiry a question was put to Mr
Pikoli – this is found in par 2(94) on p 183 of that report:

  Dr Ginwala: “But the question I put to you, Adv Pikoli, had the President
  insisted on an extended period of time, would you have acquiesced?” Adv
  Pikoli, “...reluctant to answer this, but I will say that perhaps I might
  have defied the President.”

This kind of attitude illustrates a lack of respect for the President’s
constitutional obligation to maintain stability and national security, and
it suggests that Adv Pikoli believes his own assessment of the security
environment as being superior to that of the President. There is no doubt
that the request by the President for a delay of only two weeks was not
really unreasonable.

Let me deal with the allegation by Adv Pikoli that the main reason for his
suspension was to prevent the NPA from prosecuting the National
Commissioner of Police. [Interjections.] If this is to be believed, why was
Adv Mpshe not suspended, because he continued with the necessary
arrangements as outlined by the President and the Minister? As we are
speaking, Mr Selebi is being charged and he will appear in court very soon.

Even now, I don’t understand why Adv Pikoli used private security companies
to conduct a search and seizure at the ANC President’s house and at
Tuynhuys, and even at the Union Buildings. Those people were not vetted;
they were just private companies. By the way, let us not forget that
Tuynhuys and the Union Buildings are national key points housing classified
documents — that is where they sent people who were not even vetted and who
did not even have clearance certificates.

Until now it was difficult to understand why action was not taken against
Adv McCarthy for the unfortunate “Browse Mole” report. My colleagues will
deal with this in more detail. All the events referred to point to one
thing and one thing only, and that is that Adv Pikoli lacked sensitivity in
dealing with matters of national security.

The Minister for Justice has lost confidence in Adv Pikoli. The Head of
State cannot trust Adv Pikoli, and cannot allow him to deal with sensitive
issues that affect the security of the state. Therefore, it will not be in
the best interests of the state to keep Adv Pikoli in the sensitive
position of National Director of Public Prosecutions. He too, let us be
honest and frank, will find it very difficult ... I am being sabotaged,
Chairperson; I am no longer audible.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order!

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you very much, and thank you also to the hon
Gamede for bringing this to my attention, because I also want the public to
hear what I am saying.

What we are saying is that until now it has been very difficult for us to
understand why no action was taken against Adv McCarthy, who authorised and
was busy with the “Browse Mole” report. All the events referred to point to
one thing, and one thing only - that Adv Pikoli lacked sensitivity in
dealing with matters of national security.

The Minister for Justice has lost confidence in Adv Pikoli. The Head of
State cannot trust Adv Pikoli anymore, and cannot allow him to deal with
the sensitive issues that affect the security of the state. Therefore, let
us be fair; it will not be in the best interests of the state to keep Adv
Pikoli in that sensitive position of National Director of Public
Prosecutions. He too will find it difficult to work under such a cloud. I,
therefore, submit that this House accepts and recommends that Adv Pikoli be
removed from that position in the best interest of himself and of the
country. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, hon members from the DA would also like to
wish the new member well, so we hope he will have a pleasant stay in the
NCOP. Chairperson, we are unfortunate today to discuss the future of Adv
Vusi Pikoli. Other than what Kgoshi has said here, I have found that the
leadership of the ANC, from the President down, agrees that he is a man of
integrity, a great asset ... [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Can you control the sound ... [Inaudible.]
Continue, hon member.

Mr J W LE ROUX: ... to his office and to South Africa. He has a proud
struggle record and has served the ANC and the country with dedication and
distinction. Added to this, the commission appointed by the President under
the chairmanship of Frene Ginwala to determine whether he is fit to hold
office made a finding that he is indeed a fit and proper person to be the
Public Prosecutor and should be reinstated.

I quote from the Ginwala report:

      He impressed me as a person of unimpeachable integrity; ... impressed
      me as a man of unquestionable integrity, with passion to execute his
      constitutional responsibilities without fear, favour or prejudice;
      ...and impressed me as a person of unimpeachable integrity and
      credibility.

This is the commission that the President appointed to go and oversee what
the man, Pikoli, is like.

What is impossible to understand, is the brutal way the ANC is now treating
one of its finest members. During the last 15 years ordinary South Africans
were amazed at the way the ANC leadership dealt with members who committed
very serious crimes and indiscretions. The list is long and includes Tony
Yengeni, Travelgate offenders, Winnie Mandela, fraudsters and now our
latest offender, Carl Niehaus.

The leadership of the ANC has known all about his fraudulent dealings for a
long time and as a reward, he was promoted to a senior position at Luthuli
House. Advocate Vusi Pikoli had no such luck and was humiliated and
suspended. Chairperson, we all know, and I am sure the voters know, the
real reason for Adv Vusi Pikoli’s axing is because he wanted to arrest
Jackie Selebi, the Commissioner of Police, as well as other ANC members.
The reasons the ANC is advancing to justify his removal from office are
nothing but smokescreens.

Die een rede vir sy skorsing wat voorgehou word, is sy swak werksverhouding
met die vorige Minister, me Mabandla. Hierdie beswaar is van die tafel
gevee en Ginwala het bevind dat daar absoluut geen bewys is vir hierdie
aantygings nie. ’n Tweede argument wat voorgehou is, was dat adv Pikoli nie
die DG deurgaans ingelig gehou het nie. Feit is egter dat hy nie
veronderstel is om die DG oor alles in te lig nie.

Groot ophef word gemaak van die sekuriteitsaspekte van sy optrede en dat hy
nie sensitief was wat betref staatsveiligheid nie. Adv Pikoli se hele
geskiedenis as ANC-kader, en sy onkreukbare karakter, is ’n bewys dat hy
letterlik die laaste persoon sou wees om staatsveiligheid in gevaar te
stel.

Wat die inhegtenisneming en vervolging van Jackie Selebi betref, is dit so
dat adv Pikoli vir minister Mabandla reeds in 2006 ... (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The one reason advanced for his suspension is his poor working relations
with the previous Minister, Ms Mabandla. This objection was swept off the
table and Ginwala found that there was absolutely no proof of these
allegations. A second argument advanced was that Adv Pikoli did not, as a
rule, keep the DG informed. The fact of the matter is that he is actually
not supposed to inform the DG regarding everything.

Much is being made about the security aspects of his actions and that he
was not sensitive regarding state security. Adv Pikoli’s history as an ANC
cadre, and his unimpeachable character, is proof that he would literally be
the last person to put state security at risk.

With regard to the arrest and prosecution of Jackie Selebi, the fact is
that Adv Pikoli, as early as 2006, had informed Minister Mabandla ...]

Mr V V Z WINDVOëL: Chairperson, will the member take a question?

Mr J W LE ROUX: No, sir.

Mr V V Z WINDVOëL: Why not?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The hon member will not take questions. You
may continue, hon member. [Interjections.]

Mr V V Z WINDVOëL: Hy’s net ’n bangbroek! [He is just a coward!]

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Wat die inhegtenisneming en vervolging van Jackie Selebi
betref, is dit so dat adv Pikoli vir minister Mabandla reeds in 2006
ingelig het oor die probleme met Selebi. Die President is toe ook ingelig.
Die bewering word gemaak dat adv Pikoli nie genoegsaam aandag aan die
gevolge van so ’n inhegtenisneming gegee het nie. Dit sou skynbaar
staatsveiligheid bedreig en nie in die breë belang wees nie.

Wat in werklikheid waar is, is dat dit nie in die breë belang van die ANC
is nie. In werklikheid is dit uiters gevaarlik vir die land as die
polisiehoof betrokke is by georganiseerde misdaad, en die vervolgingsgesag
word verhoed om op te tree. Dít is die gevaar. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

With regard to the arrest and prosecution of Jackie Selebi, the fact is
that Adv Pikoli had informed Minister Mabandla, as early as 2006, regarding
the problems pertaining to Selebi. The President was then also informed. It
is alleged that Adv Pikoli did not give the consequences of an arrest of
this nature sufficient consideration. It would apparently have compromised
state security and not have been in the interest of the broader public.

In fact, what is true, is that it is not in the interest of the ANC at
large. In actual fact, it is extremely grave for the country if the police
chief is involved in organised crime and the prosecuting authority is
prevented from taking action. That is the danger!]

I would like to quote in this regard a letter that Minister Mabandla wrote
to Adv Pikoli on 18 September 2007:

   Until I have satisfied myself that sufficient information and evidence
   does exist for the arrest of and preference of charges against the
   National Commissioner of the Police Service, you shall not pursue the
   route that you have taken steps to pursue.


Adv Pikoli antwoord soos volg in ’n opvolgbrief aan die Minister: [Adv
Pikoli responds as follows in a follow-up letter to the Minister:]

   I would like to point out respectfully that neither the Constitution nor
   NPA Act, the National Prosecuting Authority Act, contemplates that the
   Minister needs to be satisfied that there is sufficient evidence or that
   it is in the public interest, before a prosecution can be instituted.
   Such decisions are the sole prerogative of the NPA.

All credit must go to Adv Pikoli for resisting this interference.
Unfortunately, his brave and correct stance may cost him his job.

Chairperson, in conclusion I would like to say this.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Yes, your time is up, but do please conclude.

Mr J W LE ROUX: It is very cynical and it is very disturbing that the co-
chairman of this committee who sat in judgment of Adv Pikoli, the hon Oupa
Monareng, has a criminal record. [Interjections.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo ohloniphekile, bengithi lolu daba empeleni uthunsi
luzoke lithi ukuyolala phansi. [Hon Chairperson, I was hoping that the dust
will settle on this matter.]
Makwala re tsebe ho nona. [Let there be peace.]

Ngiyabona ukuthi akulungi ... [I can see that things are not getting right
...]

Chairperson, the task before this House is to evaluate whether the decision
by the President of the Republic to fire Adv Pikoli should be upheld or be
quashed by Parliament. As you might know, our party, the IFP, has rejected
the recommendation of the ad hoc committee to ratify the President’s
decision that Pikoli be axed.

In our view there is a close link between the Polokwane decision to kill –
if I may use the word – the Scorpions, and the one to dismiss Pikoli, since
he is now seen as a threat because of his decision to prosecute the
President of the ANC, Msholozi. [Interjections.]

In her final report the former Madam Speaker, Ginwala, recommended that Mr
Pikoli be reinstated, but this advice was ignored by the President. The
President’s argument is that Pikoli was not sensible to the matters of
national security. It is not only obscure, but absurd in a superfluous
manner, to refuse to consider the commission; the President has clearly
misdirected him and has ... [Interjections.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, is the hon member prepared to take a
question?
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are you prepared to take a question?

Mr M A MZIZI: After my speech I will definitely do that.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All right, continue, hon member.

Mr M A MZIZI: ... rendered the work of the commission in vain. To speak the
truth, the decision to fire Pikoli was taken for the purpose of political
convenience, and not on the balance of probabilities of his case. The
decision to fire him was solely preconceived, rather than based on the
logical consequences of the findings of the commission. If Parliament fails
to execute its powers ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Windvoël, order! Hon member, hon Windvoël.

Mr V V Z WINDVOЁL: Chairperson, we just want to know who wrote the member
such a difficult speech to read.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon Windvoël. Continue, hon member.
[Interjections.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Whether for ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon members. Continue, hon member.

Mr M A MZIZI: ... fear or favour then the court of the land will be the
final arbiter to determine if Mr Pikoli’s dismissal was indeed fair and
reasonable in a democratic society, and based on an individual’s freedom
and the supremacy of the Constitution. Sir, I will take the question. What
is the question?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Sulliman.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, we want the hon member to acknowledge that
Koos van der Merwe wrote his speech for him. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, I don’t think that is a question.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, the question to you bab’uMzizi [Mr
Mzizi] is: Who put words in your mouth?

Mr M A MZIZI: Oh, that’s ... Any other question? [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, that is the end of your speech, thank
you.

Mr M A MZIZI: Two minutes, twelve minutes, eleven minutes, no question,
thank you.
Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Ngibonge nami leli thuba lokucacisa ukuthi ngabe
uMengameli wamxoshelani uMmeli Pikoli owayenguMqondisi Kazwelonke
Wezokushushiswa Komphakathi.

Okokuqala mangicacise ukuthi uDokotela Ginwala wenza isincomo,
akasithathelanga isinqumo ukuthi uMmeli Pikoli simenze njani. Sesizwile
ukuthi umbiko wekomidi ubuthini mayelana nalolu daba. Leli yikomidi
elaphakanyiswa yiziNdlu zombili zePhalamende okukhona phakathi kwazo nawo
kanye uMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe.

Phela indlovu ihlatshwa ngabantu bonke andukuba iwe. Ngalokhu-ke ngiqonde
ukuthi uma udaba lunzima lufuna imiqondo yabantu abaningi. Sonke
siyavumelana ukuthi lowo owayenguMqondisi Kazwelonke Wezokushushiswa
Komphakathi ungumuntu oqotho. Ungumuntu ofundile kakhulu impela futhi
ngisho nomlando wakhe wokuthi wakhulela lapha kuKhongolose wethu uyaziwa.
Wabaleka waya ekubhaceni kwamanye amazwe. Walwela inkululeko ngaphansi
kophiko loMkhonto weSizwe.

Wathola nethuba lokuzithuthukisa kwezemfundo ephakeme, yingakho namuhla
esengu-Advocate. Lokhu phela kusho ukuthi ufunde wagogoda kwezomthetho.
Yingakho–ke edelela kanjena nje. Uyeyisa. Ubukela abantu phansi.
Uyintendele ibulawa uqondo. Uyazazisa, futhi akabonakali njengomuntu
ozisolayo uma ngabe enze amaphutha kepha uyazigqaja.

Baye bathi akulungile ukubhozomela ingakabonakali inhloko nomsila wayo,
ngoba ungaze ubambe ufushi! Yingakho-ke ikomidi lahlala izinsuku eziningi
lilalele ubufakazi bukaPikoli, kanye nobabanye ababemele uhulumeni. Uma
ngilugoqa luba lufushane nje lolu daba, ngithi ubudlelwane phakathi
kukaPikoli njengoMqondisi Kazwelonke Wezokushushiswa Komphakathi kanye
neHhovisi likaMongameli, okanye nohulumeni nje wonkana, bunjengomshado.
Phela umshado uyigugu liyadonsiswana. Lokhu kusho ukuthi uma abantu
beganene, bayahlalisana, bazwelane futhi babambisane. Uma kungekho ofuna
ukuthobela omunye, lowo muzi uyachitheka okanye lowo mshado uyaphela.

Ukubonisa ukuthi uMmeli uPikoli uligwala, uvese wabalekela
emaphephandabeni. Ngifunde k wiphephandaba langempelasonto lapho ebexoxa
khona udaba lwakhe. Nalabo-ke oyizwa ngikutshele besebesizakele nabo phela
ngoba le ndaba isematheni. Usethathe inkulumompikiswano wayisa
kwabezindaba. Ngabe kanti uMnumzane uPikoli lona yena akazi yini ukuthi
iningi liyabona ububende na? Isiyamosheka-ke manje le ndaba ngoba kufana
nokuthi  yena usezizwa ukufuna inalidi otshanini.

Uthi uPikoli uma ekhuluma nalabo abathathela izindaba, intando yeningi
lapha eNingizimu Afrika kanye nezomthetho zazisengcupheni. Useyajika yena
futhi uthi empeleni akusikhona ukuthi waxoshelwa udaba lokubopha
uKhomishana Kazwelonke Wamaphoyisa kepha uxoshelwa udaba lukaMsholozi.
Uhlanganisa amanzi nowoyela, lezi zinto-ke azihlangani. Niyazi-ke nani
kuyacaca ukuthi akundoda yalutho lena, futhi kuyacaca ukuthi akuphelele
kahle nalapha kuye. Ufundile kepha uyisiphukuphu.

Ikomidi lesikhashana ngenkathi limfaka imibuzo ngeqhaza lakhe,
nangomsebenzi wakhe njengoMqondisi Kazwelonke Wezokushushiswa Komphakathi,
uye wabika imbiba wabika ibuzi, wazenza imbuzi igudla iguma. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: I am also grateful for this opportunity to clarify the
reasons which led to the axing of Adv Pikoli, the former National Director
of Public Prosecutions, by the President.

Firstly, let me clarify that Dr Ginwala simply made recommendations, and
not a ruling, regarding Pikoli’s fate. We all have heard what the
committee’s report entailed regarding this matter. This is a committee
which was formed by both Houses of Parliament, of which this very National
Council of Provinces is part.

As the saying goes, if the elephant has to be killed, it should be pierced
by all and sundry, and by this I mean that a complex matter like this one
needs to be tackled by a lot of people. At least we all agree that the
former National Director of Public Prosecutions is indeed a man of good
standing. He is a very learned man and the fact that he was groomed by the
African National Congress is well-documented. He went into exile as a
freedom fighter under uMkhonto weSizwe.

He was even afforded an opportunity to study at a university, hence he is
now an advocate. This means he is well-qualified in the field of law, and
this is where his contempt stems from. He is contemptuous. He looks down
upon other people. He is a partridge which is full of itself. He is full of
himself. He does not look like a person who is remorseful; instead he is
full of pride.

Those who are in the know say: Do not trouble trouble until trouble
troubles you. And that is the reason why the committee sat for days
listening to the statements made by Adv Pikoli and others representing the
state. In short, I will say the relationship between Pikoli as the National
Director of Public Prosecutions and the Office of the President or the
government, was like a marriage. A marriage is a mutual attraction between
two individuals. This means that if two people are married, they settle,
they feel compassionate about each other, they care for each other and they
do things co-operatively. And if both partners do not want to be
submissive, that house is doomed, and the marriage would be terminated.

To prove that Adv Pikoli is a coward, he has since run to the press. I read
from a weekend newspaper where he was telling his story. The gossipmongers
were pleased, because this was a front-page story for them. Adv Pikoli has
taken this debate to the media. By the way, does he not know that too many
cooks spoil the broth? This matter is now wasted, because it looks like he
is now being helped to look for a needle in a haystack.

Adv Pikoli – when he addresses the press - claims that democracy and the
criminal justice system in South Africa were at risk. The same Adv Pikoli
is now singing a different tune altogether. He claims he was not only fired
because he had decided to prosecute the National Police Commissioner,
Jackie Selebi, but he was also fired to protect Msholozi from prosecution.
He mixes oil and water, and these two do not mix. You can all see that it
is clear now that this is a man who is good for nothing and it is also
clear that he is yet to mature. He is a learned, yet stupid, man.

When the ad hoc committee interrogated him about his role and functions as
the National Director of Public Prosecutions, he beat about the bush, like
a goat loitering about with intent.]

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, only in the speech the hon member referred to
Advocate Pikoli as “intendele [a partridge]”; now she says he is stupid. I
want you to rule on the parliamentary status of those utterances.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We will look at the Hansard, and then will
rule on that, Mr Watson. I do not know what “intendele” is, I shall have to
check on that. Can I ask all the members to debate the report and not to
assassinate people’s character? Please, let the debate be confined to the
report.

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Ngibalalele nabo laba abanye bemkhulumela ukuthi uyindoda
eqotho, ewaziyo umsebenzi wayo kepha mina ngiyaphika. Ngenkathi ethola
umbiko i-Special “Browse Mole” Report, kunokuba akhuze amahlakani akhe
wakhetha ukuwubeka lo mbiko, wawufayila, ungathi akaboni ukuthi ufaka izwe
enkathazweni. Yilokhu ngesiNgisi sebeshilo ozakwethu ukuthi “matters of
national security”.

Enjalo-ke akamhloniphi ngisho noNgqongqoshe Wezobulungiswa. Kuthe
uNgqongqoshe kanye noMengameli becela amaviki amabili ukuze bahlele kahle
izinto mayelana nalowo ebefuna ukumfaka ozankosi, wanqaba, waze watshela
iKhomishana kaGinwala njengoba senizwile ukuthi yena akayigqizi qakala
inkulumo kaMengameli.

Niyabona-ke ukuthi uma sithi sikhulumela umuntu onjengalona, sizobe
sichitha isikhathi. Malunga, niyabona nani ukuthi sigcina umuntu
onjengoMmeli Pikoli ukuze sizifake enkingeni, nokuzithela ihlazo ngoba
wenza amaphutha. Ubechazwa ukuthi uhola Ofezela. Ubetonda esithebeni
njengengonyama, ezizwa ukuthi unamandla.

Into okufanele uMmeli Pikoli ayazi yikuthi indlu nendlu inomthetho kanti
nesintu siyasho sithi,ikhanda elixegayo liyofulela abafazi, ngichaza khona
belu ukuthi umthetho wendoda emzini wayo kufanele uthotshelwe. Kanjalo
neHhovisi likaMengameli linemithetho yalo . Awumane ubhozomele nje uphethe
izincwadi zokusesha uphinde uze nenkampani engahloliwe kahle lokhu okuthiwa
yi-vetting. Elinye iphutha uMmeli  Pikoli angalibonanga ukuthi ulenzile,
elokuthi alande inkampani ekungeyona elungileyo.

Kukho konke lokhu esengikuphawulile, okokuqala nje uMmeli Pikoli
akakulungele ukuphatha iHhovisi Likazwelonke Lezokushushiswa Komphakathi
ngoba yena ucabanga ukuthi uyashushisa kepha izigebengu zona ukwazi
ukuzikhiphela eceleni ezenze ubugebengu obuhleliwe, zonke ziphuma zikhokhe
imali zingayanga enkantolo.

Okunye ukuthi uma ethatha izinqumo zokugweba abanye abathile uthatha lokhu
okubizwa ngokuthi yi-plea bargaining, kepha kukhona abaningi abadlelwa
izimpahla. Ziningi izigebengu ezazidedelwa nguMmeli Pikoli ngenxa yokuthi
zona zinemali.

Uma sengiphetha, mangisho ukuthi ikomidi selisithathile isinqumo salo,
laqeda ngokuthi uMmeli Pikoli akakufanele ngempela ukulibamba iHhovisi
Likazwelonke Lezokushushiswa Komphakathi. Ngalawo mazwi ngiyabonga Sihlalo.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: I also listened to these other members who were arguing
that Adv Pikoli is a trustworthy man who knows his job very well, but I beg
to differ. When he received the special “Browse Mole” report, instead of
disciplining his subordinates, he chose to keep mum and he filed the report
as if he was oblivious of the risk he was putting the country in. And this
is what my colleagues have, in English, referred to as “matters of national
security”.

And he has no respect for the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development. When the Minister and the President requested two weeks in
order to review the matter of the person he wanted to see behind bars, he
flatly refused, even telling the Ginwala Commission of Inquiry that he
disregards what the President said, as you all have heard.

You can all see that trying to save a person like that is a complete waste
of time. Hon members, you can all see that if we keep somebody like Adv
Pikoli we will be putting ourselves at risk, and we will embarrass
ourselves because he makes blunders. He was proud of the fact that he was
the head of the Scorpions. He was proud, like a lion in its den; he knew he
had all the power.

Adv Pikoli needs to know that every household has its own rules and there
is even an African saying which suggests that where there is lawlessness,
turmoil prevails. I am trying to explain, of course, that when you are in
Rome, you do as the Romans do. Even the Office of the President has its own
rules. You dare not invade this Office with search warrants and at the same
time use a company which lacked vetting. Another mistake that Adv Pikoli
made, which he did not seem to recognise, was to bring an external service
provider which lacked vetting.

I have said that Adv Pikoli is unfit to hold the Office of the National
Director of Public Prosecutions. He thinks he is a good prosecutor, yet he
fails to prosecute organised crime criminals. They all pay fines and leave
without standing trial.

The other thing is that when he makes a decision to prosecute some people,
he enters into plea bargaining with them; yet there are other people who
have their assets seized. Many criminals were set free by Adv Pikoli, just
because they had money.

Let me conclude by saying that the committee has reached its final decision
by saying that Adv Pikoli is unfit to hold the Office of the National
Director of Public Prosecutions. Hon Chairperson, with those words I thank
you.]

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I don’t know if something can be done about the
interpreting services, because the English is very poor. It breaks down.
Difficult words were not interpreted, and I think something should be done
about it.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is it the sound or the interpreting?

Mr A WATSON: The sound and the interpreting. The interpreter breaks down at
crucial points and then resumes again a few sentences later.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Can the staff attend to the sound, please. I
think it is the sound that is problematic.

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Hon Chairperson, history is being made today. I‘ve been
sworn in today, it is my President’s birthday and at 5:12 tonight I will
have been married for two months. I would like to thank hon Mahlangu, the
hon Chief Whip and the staff for their hospitality with the very short
introduction today.

Nevertheless, as it has been mentioned that it will be a hello and a
goodbye, I would like to say, hon Chairperson, on behalf of the ID, that we
do not see the point of spending millions of rand on these types of
commissions, when government repeatedly rejects and shows scant regard for
their recommendations.

The recommendations by the ad hoc committee remind me of someone who cuts
off his nose to spite his face. Just like the findings of the Khampepe
Commission and the Van Zyl Slabbert report before it, so have the Ginwala
Commission’s recommendations been rejected by the current President and
this Parliament. The fact that the President relieved Mr Pikoli of his
duties, despite the commission’s finding that he carried out his duties
without fear or favour, is totally unacceptable.
Saying that Pikoli did not fully understand national security ...
[Interjections.] ... holds no water for the ID. National security is often
used by the ANC as a disguise for the protection of its narrow political
interests. There is absolutely no proof of any breach of national security
by Pikoli. The President talks about national security, but why does the
President not take into account the security of our nation, when it is
threatened by a ruling party that continuously undermines the integrity of
our independent institution? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Is that a question,
sir?

Mr D J BOTHA: This is a maiden speech and members want to respect that, but
if the member is attacking a political party in that way, then he is
diverting from that maiden speech. It is a gentleman’s agreement, Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order, please! Thank
you. You may continue, hon member.

Mr J J MCGLUWA: The way the head of committee ... [Interjections.] ... his
matter was unfair and not objective. The ad hoc committee simply
rubberstamped the decision already made at Luthuli House. The fact that Adv
Pikoli is taking this issue to court shows that once again, in the instance
where the findings of the commissioner are ignored by the executive or
Parliament, the courts will be the final adjudicators of the truth.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Chief Whip, is
that a question?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Yes, Chair. I want to know who wrote his
speech, because he was not there. [Laughter.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: The ID intensely opposes the findings of the ad hoc
committee and we, therefore, oppose any action to relieve Mr Pikoli of his
duties.

Sifuna uPikoli abuye. [We want Pikoli back.] The ID wants Pikoli back. It
is clear that Pikoli had ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mev die Voorsitter, die VF Plus verwerp die verslag wat
die afdanking van adv Pikoli bevestig. Ek motiveer dit soos volg:

In sy openingsrede het die agb President so onlangs soos 6 Februarie 2009
gesê dat korrupsie uitgeroei moet word. Dit is ’n lofwaardige stelling. In
sy kommentaar op die Schabir Shaik-verhoor sê die ANC se president, Mr
Zuma, na aanleiding van beweringe van bedrog en omkopery teen hom — onder
andere in die wapentransaksie van miljarde rande — dat, sou daar
voortgegaan word, en ek haal aan: “I will spill the beans”.

Ek wil terugkom na die President se stelling met betrekking tot korrupsie.
Suid-Afrika is ’n ondertekenaar van vele, maar veral twee, internasionale
konvensies. Die een is die United Nations Convention Against Corruption, en
die ander een is die African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating
Corruption.

Adv Pikoli se kop word nou geëis omdat hy, onder andere, pleitooreenkomste
aangegaan het met persone wat skynbaar by die Kebble-moord betrakke was.
Dit is bekend dat daar ernstige aantygings van omkopery, geldwassery en
korrupsie teen Kebble was. Selebi was, volgens sy eie weergawe, ’n baie
groot vriend van Kebble. As georganiseerde misdaad ’n bedreiging vir
nasionale veiligheid is, is die Kebble-Selebi-broederskap ’n ernstige
bedreiging, nie alleen vir Suid-Afrika nie, maar ook vir die wêreld.

Dit is in die eerste plek so, gegewe die internasionale konvensies wat ons
onderteken het. In die tweede plek is dit ‘n feit dat Selebi die hoof van
Interpol was, waar hy lekkasies veroorsaak het vanaf die Britse na die Suid-
Afrikaanse polisie, en hy was beslis ’n bedreiging vir Suid-Afrika se
nasionale veiligheid.

Die veldtog teen adv Pikoli strek egter veel wyer. Die ANC se ywer om die
Zuma-verhoor te kelder gaan oor veel meer as mnr Zuma; dit gaan oor die
ANC. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chairperson, the FF Plus rejects the report
which verifies the dismissal of Adv Pikoli. I motivate this as follows:

In his state of the nation address, as recently as 6 February 2009, the hon
President said that corruption must be eradicated. This is a laudable
statement. In his comment on the Schabir Shaik trial the President of the
ANC, Mr Zuma, said, on account of allegations of fraud and bribery against
him – inter alia the arms deal of billions of rand – that if they were to
continue and I quote: “I will spill the beans”.

I want to come back to the President’s statement with regard to corruption.
South Africa is a signatory to many, but especially two, international
conventions. One is the United Nations Convention Against Corruption and
the other is the African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating
Corruption.

Adv Pikoli is now in the hot seat because he, amongst other things, entered
into plea bargains with people who are apparently implicated in the Kebble
murder. It is known that there were serious allegations of bribery, money
laundering and corruption against Kebble. Selebi was, by his own account, a
very good friend of Kebble. If organised crime is a threat to national
security, the Kebble-Selebi brotherhood is a serious threat to not only
South Africa, but the world at large.

Firstly, the reason for that has to do with the international conventions
we have signed. Secondly, the fact is that Selebi was the head of Interpol,
where he caused leakages from the British to the South African police, and
he was certainly a threat to South Africa’s national security.

The campaign against Adv Pikoli, however, goes much further than that. The
ANC’s dedication to sabotage the Zuma trial is about much more than Mr
Zuma; it is about the ANC.]

Zuma will spill the beans.

Dis duidelik dat daar groot kannonne in die ANC is, wat eintlik boontjies
is. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit moet gestop word. Dít is die ware rede vir die
verwydering van adv Pikoli.

Vervang hom met iemand wat voldoen aan die voorskrifte van die ANC, die
“African National Cover-up”; die “African National Corruption”, en daar
gaan ons! Ons is heeltemal by met betrekking tot hierdie goed en nou kan
ons maar aangaan. In hierdie Suid-Afrika, wat reeds die muishond van die
wêreld raak, kan ons nie eens meer na Brittanje reis sonder visums nie. Dit
is te wyte aan Adv Pikoli se lekkasies. Dít is die rede. Dit is een van die
belangrike redes. Dít is ’n bedreiging vir nasionale veiligheid.

Nog bedreiginge vir nasionale veiligheid is vigs, cholera en die
ineenstorting van die plaaslike dienste. Diesulkes is baie groter
bedreiginge vir nasionale veiligheid as Adv Pikoli se sogenaamde en
beweerde lekkasies. Die FF Plus kan nie hiermee akkoord gaan nie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is clear that there are big guns in the ANC, who actually do not
measure up to expectations. [Interjections.] This has to be stopped. This
is the true reason for the removal of Adv Pikoli.

Replace him with someone who adheres to the guidelines of the ANC, the
“African National Cover-up”, the “African National Corruption” and there we
go! We are entirely up to date with regard to these issues and now we can
continue. South Africans, who already are the black sheep of the world,
can’t even travel to England without visas. This is imputable to the
leakages by Adv Pikoli. This is one of the most important reasons. It is a
threat to national security.

Some other threats to national security are Aids, cholera and the collapse
of local services. These are greater threats to national security than the
so-called and alleged leakages by Adv Pikoli. The FF Plus cannot go along
with this. [Applause.]]
Mr R J TAU: Chairperson ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon Tau.
I must say that my members are misbehaving today.

Mr R J TAU: Chair, that has taken some of my time.

Comrades, the report we are dealing with in the House today points to a
very important matter. Before I get to the subject matter, I wish to deal
with some misconceptions or myths.

After the National Assembly had debated and adopted the report, very
negative publicity was then given, especially by the SABC, who said that
after the NA had concluded their debate, the NCOP was merely going to
rubberstamp it.

I want to say to the editor-in-chief of the SABC that, from my perspective,
I am not, in fact, rubberstamping any decision. In fact, I am participating
in a very intelligent debate. I must state that it was quite disappointing
for an institution like the SABC — which is expected to protect our
Constitution — to flout it, by referring to us, as I have mentioned.

Perhaps it is important to assist or inform those members — especially the
DA and other members of the opposition — who deliberately refuse to learn
about and understand the issues that are put before the House.

I am going to refer to a very important document, the Cambridge Learner’s
Dictionary – with the emphasis on the fact that it is a learner’s
dictionary – where a commission is defined as:

   A group of people chosen to find out about something and recommend what
   they think ...


Note, I want to underline “think” –

   ... should happen.


It further goes on to define an enquiry as:

   A process of asking questions in order to get information.

Note: Not to decide.

Therefore, it is quite clear that the Ginwala commission was established to
look at the matter put before it, and recommend to the President of the
Republic what they thought the best solution would be. In essence, the
commission was tasked to assist the President to arrive at a conclusion,
but not to tell the President what to do.

We find the opposition’s arguments to be extremely selective. They chose
certain aspects of the commission’s terms of reference and conveniently
ignored a very significant part of the terms of reference, which reads as
follows:

   ... and such matters as may relate to the fitness and propriety of the
   National Director to hold office.

Having considered the report in its entirety, the President arrived at the
conclusion that Adv Pikoli should be relieved of his position as National
Director of Public Prosecutions.

One of the key things, related to issues of national security, yet
conveniently ignored by the opposition, is the manner in which the “Browse
Mole” report was handled. As the chair of the committee mentioned, we will
get details about that.

It is important to note that Parliament adopted the report that stemmed
from an investigation conducted by the joint security and intelligence
committee that was established by Parliament. All political parties agreed
to the contents of that report.

It is equally important that we remind ourselves that one of the key and
important issues arising from that report is the fact that the DSO is
involved in gathering intelligence information. The DSO relied on
information pedlars. Such information is then used by the DSO to prosecute
South African citizens.

It is perhaps important that we ask ourselves: What are information pedlars
and how are they connected to the issue of national security? Information
pedlars are dangerous cartels that go around collecting negative
information. They play leaders of countries off against each other, they
develop conspiracy theories and their targets are always developing
countries. South Africa is not immune to that. These cartels gained entry
into South Africa through the DSO.

Now, let us look at the kind of information that disinformation pedlars
would normally push. It is the kind of information that has caused much
instability in many countries, particularly in developing countries. Right
now, even as we speak, coups, chaos, riots and instability are rife across
the continent of Africa.

Where do these people come from? Where do these things originate? They are
a result of these information pedlars who then developed a report that was
given to Adv Pikoli. Adv Pikoli saw it as insignificant. A report that had
an opportunity to put ... in fact, it not only had an opportunity, it
actually put our entire security system at risk. There was a possibility
that our country’s security system could have imploded. If it had imploded,
we would not be sitting where we are today. Perhaps this country would have
been involved in a civil war.

One of the key things that the information pedlars have done or used is to
collect information alleging that the general-secretaries of Cosatu,
Comrade Zwelinzima Vavi, and of the SACP, Comrade Blade Nzimande, are in
actual fact working very closely with senior and key African leaders — such
as the Libyan president, Comrade Mu’ammar Gaddafi, and Comrade José Eduardo
dos Santos — to overthrow the South African government.

Adv Pikoli had that report, and he believed it. That clearly shows that
this person is extremely insensitive to matters of national security. He
had, in actual fact, hon Watson, not only put you at risk, but your
grandchildren too, because they would not have had any future if our
country was in the grip of a civil war right now.

It is therefore very important that we ask these kinds of questions. The
ANC and the committee asked Adv Pikoli why he, having seen the report, did
not discipline Adv McCarthy. We wanted to know who, instead, rewarded Adv
McCarthy. This clearly shows that our country, particularly our security
system, had been opened up to international undermining. Why was he
rewarded? It is a question for members to ask and to give answers to this
particular House.

On the issue of vetting, I want to draw the attention of this House to the
findings of the ad hoc joint committee report, page eight, point four,
which we adopted. It reads as follows, and I quote:

   Many DSO officers have no security clearance as required by law. NIA has
   registered a vetting project for the DSO. In addition, Ivor Powell, and
   other senior special investigators do not have the necessary security
   clearance. This is in violation of section 19B of the National
   Prosecuting Authority Act, which provides for the security screening of
   special investigators. Ivor Powell’s vetting has been delayed, because
   the head of the DSO ...

McCarthy again –

   ... has not responded by supplying the information requested by NIA in
   January 2007.

What a security risk for our country! These are the very same people who
went out to investigate and seize very important documents at a very key
point of entry into our country, the Union Buildings.

During his presentation, Adv Pikoli, when asked whether he knew that the
people who raided the Union Buildings were not vetted, admitted that he was
not sure. [Interjections.] What an irresponsible head of the DSO! He had
put our country at risk, because he was not sure.

When asked what he did to ensure that those people are vetted, he said that
he relied on his divisional directors. Can we entrust such a person with
important responsibilities? Therefore, it is important that we must
understand this thing in its context and not play to the gallery for the
purposes of elections. We should rather understand the reality with which
we are faced.

As a committee, on the basis of the above, etc, we had to agree that there
was no way that we could have a person such as Adv Pikoli head such an
important institution that was created to defend our democracy, our
Constitution, our country and our future. Therefore, I put it before this
House that the report be adopted, with this recommendation that he must go.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): That concludes the
debate. I shall now put the question, namely that Adv V Pikoli, who had
been removed from office by the President, not be restored to the office of
the National Director of Public Prosecutions, and that the report of the ad
hoc joint committee be adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the House
to cast their province’s vote. Are all delegation heads present? In
accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question, and I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please insert their
cards before I call the voting in.

Please press button number one to confirm your presence. There should be
lights flashing. Are your lights flashing? If not, the Chamber staff will
assist you.

Order! We now come to the voting. When I call the name of the province, the
delegation head will vote by pressing button number four for those who vote
in favour, button number two for those who vote against, and button number
three for those who abstain. I now call upon the provinces to cast their
votes.

Have all the provinces voted? If any of the members have mistakenly pressed
the incorrect button, please press the correct button now. Voting will
close. Could the Table staff submit the results?

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal,
Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Question be agreed to and report accordingly adopted in accordance with
section 65 of the Constitution.

                    MONEY BILLS AMENDMENT PROCEDURE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, and hon members, section 77(3) of the
Constitution provides that all money Bills must be considered in accordance
with the procedure established by section 75, and further requires an Act
of Parliament to provide for a procedure to amend money Bills before
Parliament.

The Money Bills Amendment Procedure Bill is a money Bill, since it seeks to
establish a procedure to amend such Bills before Parliament, within the
context of the oversight findings and the adoption of the fiscal framework.
The Bill further seeks to establish a parliamentary budget office to
provide research support to Parliament and its committees, in order to
maintain oversight of the budget process and the possible amendments to
money Bills.

The committee has been briefed about the principles and the provision of
the Bills, and has further considered the submissions made. Therefore, the
Select Committee on Finance recommended that the Bill be passed with
proposed amendments in terms of section 75(1)(a)(ii) of the Constitution. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                             CIVIL AVIATION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr R J TAU: Chair, I have been properly canvassed by members here that they
have read the report as printed in the ATCs. All I need to do is just to
present it for adoption. Thank you very much, Chair.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We now come to the
question with respect to the Third Order. I shall now put the question,
namely that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall
first allow political parties an opportunity to make their declarations of
vote, if they so wish. Any political party? There is none.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. Before I call the voting,
please press button number one to confirm your presence. There should be
lights flashing. Are your lights flashing? Those in favour, please press
button number four, those against press button number two and those who
abstain, press button number three. Have all members voted? If any of the
members have mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, please press the
correct button now.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                  NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, the National Environment Laws
Amendment Bill changes a few clauses, such as those relating to atmospheric
pollution, prevention, etc. I therefore put it before this House for
adoption.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question, namely that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with
in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the House to cast their province’s
vote. Are all delegation heads present? In accordance with Rule 71, I shall
first allow provinces an opportunity to make their declarations of vote, if
they so wish.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question, and I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please insert their
cards.

Before I call the voting, please press button number one to confirm your
presence. There should be lights flashing. Are your lights flashing? If
not, the Chamber staff will assist you. We now come to the voting. When I
call the name of the province, the delegation heads will vote by pressing
button number four for those who vote in favour, button number two for
those who vote against and button number three for those who abstain.

Have all provinces voted? If any of the members have mistakenly pressed the
incorrect button, please press the correct one. Voting will close. Could
the Table staff submit the results?

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal,
Mpumalanga, North West, Western Cape.


Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

      NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: PROTECTED AREAS AMENDMENT BILL
                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, the purpose of the National
Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill is to amend the
National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act of 2003, as
summarised below, but I will hint at two or three things.

The Bill seeks to add a schedule detailing areas of national parks
currently in the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act of
2003.

The Bill also seeks to provide that management of special nature reserves
be assigned to any suitable person, organisation or organ of state, but the
management of a national park only be assigned to the SA National Parks.

The Bill proposes that any flying corridors over national parks, heritage
sites and specific areas need the prior permission of the management
authority.

The Bill provides for an appeal to the Minister against a decision of the
management authority for dealing with the winding up and dissolution of
South African National Parks, and that the South African National Parks
manages all existing parks, nature reserves and protected environments that
are assigned to them, including enforcement of traffic rules in the parks.
I put this before this House for adoption.

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                           SECOND-HAND GOODS BILL

              (Consideration of Report of Mediation Committee)

                           SECOND-HAND GOODS BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, colleagues, comrades and friends, in the
last engagement with this House when tabling this Bill, we reported that
the main purpose of the Bill was to regulate the usage of second-hand
goods. Having done that, the committee led by yours truly and those
dynamic, excellent members, agreed that of the items that have to be
regulated, clothing and books will have to be excluded. Our colleagues in
the NA refused and said that they cannot accept that, because there are
some syndicates who deal with clothing and that needs to be regulated.

But, the excellent, dynamic committee put its foot down and our colleagues
in the NA reconsidered and said that the senior House was correct in saying
that those items must also be regulated. We only met them half way. We put
a value in terms of books; not all books, but books of a certain value had
to be regulated.

The National Assembly accepted all 22 amendments by the dynamic committee.
That tells you the kind of effort that was put in by the members of this
House in all committees.

Therefore, I report to this House that our amendments have been accepted
and I am pleased to say: As a House, let us adopt this Bill as amended and
reported to you. I submit. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! I shall now put the question
in respect of the Sixth Order, namely that the report be adopted. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the House to
cast their province’s vote. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow
provinces an opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so
wish.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question, and I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please insert their
cards.

Before I call the voting, please press button number one to confirm your
presence. There should be lights flashing. If not, the Chamber staff will
assist you. We now come to the voting. In case any member has mistakenly
pressed the incorrect button, he or she is given an opportunity to press
the correct button.

Eight provinces voted in favour. I therefore declare the report agreed to
in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

We will note the abstention of Gauteng province. I just wish to bring to
the attention of hon members that delegation heads are delegation heads,
unless provinces have changed their delegates, because the people who have
pressed buttons here are not delegation heads. That creates problems in
terms of counting.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.


ABSTAIN: Gauteng.

Report of Mediation Committee on Second-Hand Goods Bill accordingly adopted
in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! I shall now put the question
in respect of the Seventh Order, namely that the Bill be agreed to. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the House to
cast their province’s vote. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow
provinces an opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so
wish.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question, and I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please insert their
cards. Before I call the voting, please press button number one to confirm
your presence. There should be lights flashing. If not, the Chamber staff
will assist you. We now come to the voting. In case there is any member who
has mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, he or she is now given an
opportunity to press the correct button.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Mpumalanga, North West,
Western Cape.

ABSTAIN: Gauteng.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I must mention that one
province has officially abstained, namely the Gauteng province, and three
provinces voted in favour when their provinces had not sent their final
mandates to the office of the Chairperson. Congratulations to Gauteng for
being meticulous in terms of the Rules of the House. I must declare that
five provinces have voted in favour. I therefore declare the Bill agreed to
in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Second-Hand Goods Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65
of the Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
    QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH AND DISABLED PERSONS —
                            AFRICAN YOUTH CHARTER

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, njengezwe laseNingizimu Afrika sisethubeni lokuba
yingxenye yokuqopha umlando ngokuvuma futhi seseke uSomqulu waseAfrika
Wabasha.

Inhloso namuhla ukuthi kuvunywe ukuthi kusayinwe lo Somqulu yileNdlu.
Inhloso yalo Somqulu ukuthi uqinise ukusebenzisana kwezwekazi laseAfrika
ngezindaba eziphethwe ngabantu abasha, ukuqikelela ukuthi kuthuthukiswe
abantu abasha. Ngakho-ke siyacela ukuthi le Ndlu ngokukhulu ukuzimisela
nokumoyizela ukuseke ukusayinwa kwalo Somqulu. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, as the country of South Africa, we have been
afforded an opportunity to be part of history in the making by agreeing to
and supporting the National Youth Agency Bill.

Today’s purpose is to vote in favour of the passing of this Bill by this
House. The aim of this Bill is to strengthen the working relations in the
African continent concerning issues of the youth, as well as catering for
the development of the youth. We, therefore, urge this House to take the
responsibility and vote in favour of this Charter. Thank you.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): That concludes the debate. I shall
now put the question, namely that the report be adopted. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the House to cast
their province’s vote. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow
provinces an opportunity to make declarations of vote, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question, and I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal,
Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                          SPECIAL PLENARY ANNOUNCED

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! Hon members, I just wish to
bring to your attention the following important announcement, which has
been undersigned by the Chief Whip, whom I cannot see here.

There will be a special plenary at 14:00 tomorrow. [Interjections.] It is
an announcement from the Chief Whip.

The Council adjourned at 15:51.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 5 DECEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation Bill [B 77 – 2008] –
         Act No 41 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 25
         November 2008).

      2) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 76 – 2008] – Act No 40 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 25 November 2008).

      3) Legal Succession to the South African Transport Services Amendment
         Bill [B 43B – 2008] – Act No 38 of 2008 (assented to and signed by
         President on 25 November 2008).

      4) Finance Bill [B 78 – 2008] – Act No 42 of 2008 (assented to and
         signed by President on 25 November 2008).

      5) Diplomatic Immunities and Privileges Amendment Bill [B 55B – 2008]
         – Act No 35 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 25
         November 2008).

      6) Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2008] – Act No 39 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 25 November 2008).

      7) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty (Administration) Bill [B 60
         – 2008] – Act No 29 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on
         21 November 2008).

      8) Refugees Amendment Bill [B 11D – 2008] – Act No 33 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 November 2008).
      9) Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill [B 68
         – 2008] – Act No 45 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on
         3 December 2008).

     10) Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69 – 2008] – Act
         No 46 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 3 December
         2008).

     11) The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act Repeal
         Bill [B 71B – 2008] – Act No 47 of 2008 (assented to and signed by
         President on 3 December 2008).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Multi-Annual Indicative Programme  and  Country  Strategy  Paper
         between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
         European Community for 2007-2013, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
         of the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South  Africa  concerning  Water  for
         Growth and Development  Programme  (Masimbabane  III)  (SA/001/07),
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (c)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning  “Sustainable
         Rural Development in the Eastern Cape (SURUDEC)”  (SA/005/06  Rev),
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (d)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic  of  Germany  concerning
         Technical Cooperation in 2006, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.


    (e)    Protocol between the Government  of  the  People’s  Republic  of
         China and the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  on
         Economic and Technical Cooperation,  tabled  in  terms  of  section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (f)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic  of  Germany  concerning
         Technical Cooperation in 2004, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.

    (g)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning “Sector  Wide
         Enterprise,   Employment    and    Equity    Programme    (SWEEEP)”
         (SA/1006/000),  tabled  in  terms  of   section   231(3)   of   the
         Constitution, 1996.

    (h)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South  Africa  concerning  Innovation
         for  Poverty  Alleviation  Sector  wide  budget  support   to   the
         Department of Science and Technology 2008-2012, tabled in terms  of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (i)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of  South  Africa  concerning  “Expanded
         Programme of Partnership for the delivery of Primary  Health  care,
         HIV and AIDS Services” (SA/003/06 Rev), tabled in terms of  section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (j)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  concerning  Official
         Development Assistance Programme (ODA-P) (SA/002/06 Rev), tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (k)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning Programme  to
         Support  Pro-poor  Policy  Development  in  South  Africa   (PSPPD)
         (SA/001/06  Rev),  tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of   the
         Constitution, 1996.

    (l)    Financing Agreement  between  the  European  Community  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South  Africa  concerning  “Expanding
         and Strengthening Community Based Participation in Local Government
         (CBP)”, tabled in terms of  section  231(3)  of  the  Constitution,
         1996.

    (m)    Proclamation No R.41 published in Government  Gazette  No  31512
         dated 13 October 2008: Determining a  date  on  which  the  Diamond
         Export Levy Act, 2007, will come into operation, in  terms  of  the
         Diamond Export Levy Act, 2007 (Act No 15 of 2007).

    (n)    Proclamation No R.41 published in Government  Gazette  No  31512
         dated 13 October 2008: Determining a  date  on  which  the  Diamond
         Export Levy (Administration) Act, 2007, will come  into  operation,
         in terms of the Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Act, 2007 (Act
         No 21 of 2007).

    (o)    Government Notice No 1170 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31561 dated 31 October 2008: Commencement dates, in  terms  of  the
         Financial Services Laws General Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No  22  of
         2008).

    (p)    Government Notice No 1163 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31554 dated 30 October 2008: Notice in terms of  paragraph  (b)  of
         the definition of “Living Annuity” in section 1, in  terms  of  the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (q)    Government Notice No 1164 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31554 dated 30 October 2008: Notice in terms of  paragraph  (c)  of
         the definition of “Living Annuity” in section 1, in  terms  of  the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (r)    Government Notice No 1160 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31548 dated 31 October 2008: Regulations prescribing administrative
         penalties in respect of non-compliance, in terms of the Income  Tax
         Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (s)    Government Notice No R.1236 published in Government  Gazette  No
         31614 dated 21 November 2008: Regulations to be issued in terms  of
         section 10(1) (d)(iii) and (iv), to prescribe conditions  on  which
         the Commissioner  may  approve  on  entity  for  purposes  of  that
         section, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

 2. The Minister for Provincial and Local Government
    a) Report and Financial Statements of the National House of Traditional
       Leaders (NHTL) for 2007-2008 [RP 206-2008].


 3. The Minister of Housing


    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the  National  Home  Builders
         Registration Council for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
         Information for 2007-2008.

 4. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2007-2008.



 5. The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of  Bloem  Water  for  the  year
         ended June 2008, including the Report of the  Independent  Auditors
         on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Overberg Water for the year
        ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


                           MONDAY, 12 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

     (1)    Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
         Communication-related Information Bill [B 9D – 2006] – Act No 48
         of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 6 January 2009).

    (2)    National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 36D – 2007]
         – Act No 62 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 5
         January 2009).

    (3)    Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 7D – 2008] – Act No
         63 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 5 January
         2009).


    (4)    South African National Space Agency Bill [B 20B – 2008] – Act No
         36 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 11 December
         2008).


    (5)    General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance
         Amendment Bill [B 35D – 2008] – Act No 50 of 2008 (assented to and
         signed by President on 23 December 2008).


    (6)    Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill [B 40D – 2008] –
         Act No 58 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 6
         January 2009).

    (7)    National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B 41D –
         2008] – Act No 53 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on
         5 January 2009).


    (8)    Intellectual Property Rights from Publicly Financed Research and
         Development Bill [B 46D – 2008] – Act No 51 of 2008 (assented to
         and signed by President on 17 December 2008).


    (9)    Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill [B 62B – 2008] (assented
         to and signed by President on 6 January 2009).

     (10)   Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill [B 63B – 2008] (assented
         to and signed by President on 6 January 2009).

    (11)   General Laws (Loss of Membership of National Assembly,
         Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill [B 64B
         – 2008] – Act No 55 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President
         on 6 January 2009).

     12) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 80 – 2008] – Act No 60 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 5 January 2009).

     13) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 81 – 2008] – Act No 61 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 5 January 2009).
     14) National Youth Development Agency Bill [B 82 – 2008] – Act No 54 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 23 December 2008).

2.    Establishment of Ad Hoc Joint Committee

    DECISION BY THE SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE CHAIRPERSON OF
    THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES TO ESTABLISH AN AD HOC JOINT
    COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER MATTERS IN TERMS OF SECTION 12 OF THE NATIONAL
    PROSECUTING AUTHORITY ACT, 1998 (ACT 32 OF 1998)


    1.     The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
         National Council of Provinces, acting jointly after consulting the
         Chief Whip of the Majority Party in the Assembly and the Chief Whip
         of the Council, have decided, in terms of Joint Rule 138, to
         establish an ad hoc joint committee to consider matters in terms of
         section 12 of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act 32
         of 1998).


        The committee is to consider the President’s decision to remove the
         National Director of Public Prosecutions, Adv V P Pikoli, in terms
         of section 12 of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act
         32 of 1998), and to recommend to the Houses whether Adv Pikoli
         should be restored to office or not, the committee to report by 9
         February 2009.


    2.     The committee may exercise those powers in Joint Rule 32 that
         may assist it in carrying out its task.


    3.     The committee is to consist of 13 members of the National
         Assembly (ANC 8; DA 2; IFP 1; other parties 2) and nine members of
         the National Council of Provinces.


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

      1) The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
         Joint Committee to Consider Matters in terms of Section 12 of
         National Prosecuting Authority Act:


         Ms B N Dlulane
         Mr W M Douglas
         Mr W J le Roux
         Ms N F Mazibuko
         Kgoshi M L Mokoena
         Mr A L Moseki
         Mr Z C Ntuli
         Mr R J Tau
         Dr F J van Heerden


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    Speaker and Chairperson


    Message and requisite supporting documents received from the President
    of the Republic in terms of section 12(6)(b) of the National
    Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act 32 of 1998), informing Parliament
    of the removal from office of the National Director of Public
    Prosecutions with effect from 8 December 2008.


    Referred to the Ad Hoc Joint Committee to Consider Matters in terms of
    Section 12 of National Prosecuting Authority Act for consideration and
    report.

                          TUESDAY, 13 JANUARY 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

   1. Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill, 2009, submitted by the
         Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs.

    (2)    Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill, 2009,
         submitted by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
         Development.
        Referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on Criminal Law (Forensic
         Procedures) Amendment Bill and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B 1 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 74) [Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 31692 of 9
             December 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


          b) Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill [B 2 – 2009]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 31759 of 29 December 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Ad Hoc Committee on Criminal
             Law (Forensic Procedure) Amendment Bill of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


                          TUESDAY, 20 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159:

    (1)    Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
         Amendment Bill, 2009, submitted by the Minister for Provincial and
         Local Government.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government and the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.


                         WEDNESDAY, 21 JANUARY 2009


TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)    The Budget and Strategic Plan of the  Auditor-General  of  South
         Africa for 2009-2012 [RP 288-2008].

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum  for
         2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)    Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee (CAFCOM) for 2007-2008.

4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for the year ended
         June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the
         Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Namakwa Water Board for the
         year ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle Northern Water for
         the year ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the year
         ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
         on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the year
         ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
         on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
         ended June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
         on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


National Council of Provinces

1. The Chairperson

   (a)      The President of the Republic  submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 2 December 2008 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of  the  employment  of
        the SA National Defence Force to the Democratic Republic  of  Congo
        in fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic  of
        South Africa towards the Southern African Development Community:

        EMPLOYMENT OF THE  SOUTH  AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE  FORCE  FOR  A
        SERVICE IN FULFILLEMT  OF  THE  INTERNATIONAL  OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE
        REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE SOUTHERN  AFRICAN  DEVELOPMENT
        COMMUNITY


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        authorised the employment of the  South  African  National  Defence
        Force (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC),
        for a service in fulfilment of the international obligations of the
        Republic of South Africa towards the Southern  African  Development
        Community  (SADC),  to  assist  with  the  assessment  and   advice
        pertaining to the security situation in the Eastern DRC.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions  of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of ten (10) SANDF members  will  be  employed  as  soon  as
        possible. The initial deployment will be for a period of two weeks.
        The deployment will be extended on request from the SADC.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National  Assembly
        and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, and
        wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the attention
        of the National Council of Provinces.


        Regards
        signed
        K P MOTLANTHE

         Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs.

     b) Consolidated Annual Report on the Performance of the Northern Cape
        Municipalities, 2006/2007.


     c) Consolidated Annual Report on the Performance of the Eastern Cape
        Municipalities, 2005/2006 and 2006/2007.


     d) Consolidated Annual Report on the Performance of the Western Cape
        Municipalities, 2006/2007.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration for consideration.


                          THURSDAY, 22 JANUARY 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Skills Development Amendment Bill [B 49D – 2008] – Act No 37 of
        2008 (assented to and signed by President on 27 November 2008).

    (2)    National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 35B – 2007] – Act No
        44 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 3 December
        2008).

    (3)    Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of Interrupted
        Service) Bill [B 79 – 2008] – Act No 43 of 2008 (assented to and
        signed by President on 28 November 2008).


2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

         (a)     Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill [B 2—
             2009] (National Assembly — sec 75)


     (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
        Bill as a section 74 Bill:


        (a)      Constitution Sixteenth Amendment Bill [B 1—2009] (National
             Assembly — sec 74).


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson.

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    Kgoshi M L Mokoena has been elected as Co-Chairperson of the Ad
         Hoc Joint Committee to Consider Matters in terms of Section 12 of
         National Prosecuting Authority Act with effect from 14 January
         2009.


                           FRIDAY, 23 JANUARY 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Government Notice No 1370 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31726 dated 15 December 2008: Commencement dates in  terms  of  the
         Insurance Laws Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 27 of 2008).

    (b)    Government Notice No 11 published in Government Gazette No 31772
         dated 9 January 2009: Commencement dates in terms  of  the  Special
         Pensions Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 13 of 2008).

    (c)     Government Notice No 1373 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Designation of which the activities
        do not fall within the meaning of “the business of a bank” (“Ithala
        Limited”, a wholly owned subsidiary of Ithaba Development Finance
        Corporation Limited), in terms of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of
        1990).


    (d)     Government Notice No R.1374 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/640), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R.1375 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1370), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R.1376 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1371), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (g)     Government Notice No R.1377 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/315), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No R.1378 published in Government Gazette No
        31716 dated 19 December 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No 5/89),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1990 (Act No 91 of 1964).


2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


    (a)    Government Notice No R.1223 published in Government  Gazette  No
         31601 dated 14 November 2008: Amendment of regulations in terms  of
         the Marine Living Resources Act, 2008 (Act No 18 of 1998).


    (b)     Government Notice No 1241 published in Government Gazette No
        31615 dated 21 November 2008: Intention to establish the Vaal
        Triangle Air-Shed Priority Area Air Quality Management Plan, in
        terms of the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act,
        2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


    (c)     Government Notice No 1242 published in Government Gazette No
        31615 dated 21 November 2008: Regulations: Implementing and
        enforcing the Vaal Triangle Air-Shed Priority Area Air Quality
        Management Plan, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


    (d)     Government Notice No 1346 published in Government Gazette No
        31694 dated 12 December 2008: Declaration of the Hantam National
        Botanical Garden, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


    (e)     Government Notice No 1358 published in Government Gazette No
        31707 dated 12 December 2008: Invitation to comment on the Draft
        Policy for the Allocation and Management of Medium-term Subsistence
        Fishing Rights, in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998
        (Act No 18 of 1998).


    (f)     Government Notice No 1380 published in Government Gazette No
        31715 dated 19 December 2008: Invitation for public comment on
        proposed increases and amendments in levies on fish and fish
        products, in terms of section 29 of the Sea Fishery Act, 1988 (Act
        No 12 of 1988).


    (g)     Government Notice No 1381 published in Government Gazette No
        31715 dated 19 December 2008: Invitation for public comment on
        proposed increases in the fees payable in respect of applications
        for and the issuing or granting of rights, permits and licences in
        terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1988 (Act No 18 of 1998).


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)    Government Notice No 1053 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31461 dated 3 October 2008:  Standards  matters  in  terms  of  the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    (b)    Government Notice No 1082 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31485 dated 10 October 2008: Standards  matters  in  terms  of  the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    (c)    Government Notice No 1106 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         31503 dated 17 October  2008:  International  Trade  Administration
         Commission of  South  Africa:  Export  Control,  in  terms  of  the
         International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


    (d)    Government Notice No R.1123 published in Government  Gazette  No
         31520 dated 24 October 2008: Proposed amendment of  the  compulsory
         specification for Replacement  Brake  Lining  Assemblies  for  Road
         Vehicles, in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    (e)    Government Notice No R.1134 published in Government  Gazette  No
         31520 dated 24 October 2008: Proposed introduction of a  compulsory
         specification for Motor Vehicles of Category L,  in  terms  of  the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

National Council of Provinces

1. The Chairperson


   NOTICE ISSUED IN TERMS OF SECTION 139(1)(c) OF THE CONSTITUTION, 1996, TO
   DISSOLVE MNQUMA LOCAL MUNICIPAL COUNCIL.


   Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
   for consideration and report.


                          TUESDAY, 27 JANUARY 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

   1. Calling of Joint Sitting by President of the Republic:


     “CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
                            COUNCIL OF PROVINCES



      In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
      South Africa, 1996, read with Rule 7(1)(a) of the Joint Rules of
      Parliament, I hereby call a joint sitting of the National Assembly and
      the National Council of Provinces on 06 February 2009 at 11:00, in
      order to deliver my annual address to Parliament.


      With kind regards


      KGALEMA MOTLANTHE”
KGALEMA MOTLANTHE

2.    Bill to be referred to Mediation Committee

    (1)     Bill, as amended by National Council of Provinces, and rejected
        by National Assembly on 27 January 2009, to be referred to
        Mediation Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186(2)(a):


         (a)      Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2D – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 76(1)).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
    (a)     Draft Municipal Budget and Reporting Regulations in terms of
        section 169(2) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
        Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


2.    The Minister of Home Affairs


    (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho on the Facilitation of
         Cross-Border Movement of Citizens of the Republic of  South  Africa
         and the Kingdom of Lesotho, tabled in terms of  section  231(2)  of
         the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom
        of Lesotho on the Facilitation of Cross-Border Movement of Citizens
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of Lesotho.

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the  year
         ended June 2008, including the Report of the  Independent  Auditors
         on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2008.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
         National Council of Provinces, as co-chairpersons of the Joint
         Rules Committee, present the Second Report of the Joint Rules
         Committee for 2008, as follows:

                SECOND REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE, 2008

         The Joint Rules Committee, having on 19 March 2008 considered the
         report of the Task Team on Oversight and Accountability in regard
         to the Oversight and Accountability Model and having agreed to the
         model in principle, recommends the model for consideration by the
         Assembly and the Council:


CREDA INSERT - T090127e-insert1 – PAGES 65-111.


         Report to be considered.


         (The report is also available on www.parliament.gov.za)


                         WEDNESDAY, 28 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

   1. Introduction of Bill

     (1)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


         (a)     Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
             Matters Amendment Bill [B 3 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31798
             of 23 January 2009.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Provincial and Local Government of the National Assembly, as
             well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 28 January 2009:


          a) National Land Transport Bill [B 51D – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 76(1)).


          b) Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

    1. Membership of Committees


    (1)    The following members have been appointed to serve on the
        Mediation Committee in respect of the Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2D-
        2008]:

         ANC
         Goeieman, Mr M C
         Mack, Mr N
         Mokoena, Kgoshi M L
         Moseki, Mr A L (Alt)
         Mqungquthu, Mr S
         Nyanda, Ms F
         Tsotetsi, Ms D


         DA
         Le Roux, Mr J W


         IFP
         Mchunu, Ms A B E


         UCDP
         Kgarebe, Ms K A


                          THURSDAY, 29 JANUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

 1. Membership of Committees

    Note:   The following item replaces the item published on page 129 of
            the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 28 January
            2009:

              1) The following members have been appointed to serve on the
                 Mediation Committee in respect of the Second-Hand Goods
                 Bill [B 2D- 2008]:

                 1.    Le Roux, J W           -    Eastern Cape
                 2.    Mqungquthu, S    -          Free State
                 3.    Tsotetsi, D            -    Gauteng
                 4.    Mchunu, A B E    -          KwaZulu-Natal
                 5.    Mokoena, K M L   -          Limpopo
                 6     Nyanda, F        -     Mpumalanga
                 7.    Goeieman, M C    -          Northern Cape
                 8.    Kgarebe, K A           -    North West
                 9.    Mack, N                -    Western Cape


                 Alternate:


                 Moseki,  A L           -          North West


                           FRIDAY, 30 JANUARY 2009


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Draft Rules made in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of
        Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

2.    The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Employment Equity Report of the Department of Home Affairs for
        1 October 2007 to 30 September 2008, in terms of section 22(2) of
        the Employment Equity Act, 1998 (Act No 55 of 1998).


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Statement issued in terms of section 106(3) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
        allegations of maladministration, fraud and corrupt practices
        occurring within Mnquma Local Municipality.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration for consideration.


                           MONDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B 23D – 2008] – Act
         No 56 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 27 January
         2009).

      2) South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B 30D – 2008] – Act No
         57 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 27 January
         2009).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pension Funds Adjudicator
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2007-2008


                          TUESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Membership of Committees


   Mr C V Burgess has been appointed chairperson of the Joint Standing
   Committee on Intelligence in terms of section 2(4) of the Intelligence
   Services Oversight Act, 1994 (Act No 40 of 1994) with effect from 27
   January 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

       a) Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2007-
          2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on Monies in
          Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2007-2008 [RP 282-2008].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

       a) Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme for 2007-
          2008.


                         WEDNESDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2009


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Civil Aviation
    Bill [B73B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 4 February 2009:

        The Select Committee on  Public  Services,  having  considered  the
        subject of the Civil Aviation Bill [B73B – 2008] (National Assembly
        – sec 75), referred to it  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
        Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed  to  the
        Bill.


                          THURSDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Security
        and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


          a) Draft Rules made in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion  of
             Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
    Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons

    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of  Quality  of
    Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons on the  African
    Youth Charter dated 04 February 2009:


    The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality  of  Life  and
    Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons, having  considered  the
    request for approval  by  Parliament  of  the  African  Youth  Charter,
    referred to it, recommends that the National Assembly and the  National
    Council of Provinces, in terms of section 231(2) of  the  Constitution,
    approve the said Charter.

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on the
    National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B66B-2008] (National Assembly
    – sec 76) dated 3 February 2009:

    The  Select  Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs,   having
    considered the National Environment  Laws  Amendment  Bill  [B66B-2008]
    (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it,  reports  the  Bill  with
    amendments [B66C-2008].

 2. Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on the
    National Environment Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill [B67B-
    2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 3 February 2009:

      The  Select  Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs,  having
      considered the  subject  of  the  Provision  of  Land  and  Assistance
      Amendment Bill [B67B-2008] (National Assembly – sec 75),  referred  to
      it, reports the Bill with proposed amendments as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 4

1. On page 3, in line 25, to omit “2500 feet above its  highest  point”  and
   to substitute:
           “[2500 feet above its  highest  point]  such  level  as  may  be
          determined by the  Minister,  in  concurrence  with  the  Cabinet
          member responsible for Transport, by notice  in  the  Gazette  in
          relation to that special nature reserve, national park  or  world
          heritage site or for a specific area therein,”.


      2.    On page  3,  in  line  28,  after  “authority”,  to  insert  “in
         concurrence with the South African Civil Aviation Authority,”.

      3.    On page 3, in line 28, to omit “provide for  flight  corridors”,
         and to substitute “allow or restrict air routes”.

      4.    On page 3, in line 31, after “interest”, to insert “or  for  the
         execution of the National Airspace Master Plan”.


      5.    On page 3, from line 45, to omit “The provision  of  any  flight
         corridor in paragraph (a) and area in paragraph  (c)  is”,  and  to
         substitute “Paragraph (c) is”.
                                 NEW CLAUSE

      1.    That the following be a new clause:


        “Transitional provision


        9. Section 47(3) of the principal Act continues to exist as if that
         subsection has not been amended until such  time  as  the  Minister
         publishes a notice in the Gazette as contemplated therein.”.


                           MONDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2009
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

   (a)     Report of the 2008 Youth Parliament.


CREDA INSERT REPORT - T090209e – Insert1 – PAGES 263-285

                          TUESDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson
    1. Establishment of Ad Hoc Joint Committee

    DECISION BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES TO
    ESTABLISH AN AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER THE APPOINTMENT OF
    MEMBERS TO THE NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BOARD


    1. The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, in concurrence
       with a resolution passed by the  National  Assembly  on  5  February
       2009, establishes an ad hoc joint committee in terms of  Joint  Rule
       138(1)(b) to consider, in terms of the  National  Youth  Development
       Agency Act (Act No. 54 of 2008), the appointment of members  to  the
       National Youth Development Agency Board.


    2. The Committee to exercise those powers in Joint  Rule  32  that  may
       assist it in carrying out its task.

    3. The Committee to consist of 9 Members of  the  National  Council  of
       Provinces as follows:

       Name                            of                             member
Province


       Hon. Ms F Mazibuko (Co-Chairperson)              Gauteng
       Hon. Mr D D Gamede                                          KwaZulu-
       Natal
       Hon. Mr D G Mkono                                            Eastern
       Cape
       Hon. Ms H F Matlanyane                                     Limpopo
       Hon.             Ms             M              P              Themba
       Mpumalanga
       Hon.              Mr              R              J               Tau
       Northern Cape


       Hon. Ms J F  Terblanche                                        North
       West
       Hon.                  Mr                  W                  Douglas
       Western Cape
       Hon.             Mr              M              A              Mzizi
       Gauteng


       Alternates:
       Hon. Mr T S Setona                                              Free
       State
       Hon. Mr M C  Goeieman                                       Northern
       Cape
       Hon. Mr M O  Robertsen                                       Eastern
       Cape


    4. The Committee to report by 19 February 2009.


      CHAIRPERSON
    NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
    Date: 10 February 2009

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Submission by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
        Development of notices in terms of section 31 of the Regulation of
        Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-
        related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002).


    (b)     General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of
        Local Government for 2006-2007 [RP 5-2009].

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) Government Notice No 71 published in Government Gazette No 31832
        dated 30 January 2009: Proclamation of the Cape Floral Region
        Protected Areas as a world heritage site and delegation by the
        Minister of certain powers and duties to the Director-General of
        the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, in terms of
        the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).

    (b)     Government Notice No 72 published in Government Gazette No
        31832 dated 30 January 2009: Proclamation of Mapungubwe Cultural
        Landscape as a world heritage site and delegation by the Minister
        of certain powers and duties to the South African National Parks
        (SANParks), in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999
        (Act No 49 of 1999).


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Mediation Committee on the Second-Hand Goods Bill [B2B
      and B2D – 2008] (sec 76), dated 9 February 2009:

        The Mediation Committee, having considered the Second-Hand Goods
        Bill [B 2B and B 2D – 2008] (sec 76), as well as the papers
        referred to it, reports that it has agreed to a new version of the
        Bill [B 2F – 2008].


                         WEDNESDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management
        Bill [B 40D – 2007] – Act No 24 of 2008 (assented to and signed by
        President on 9 February 2009).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
             Amendment Bill [B 3 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75)

3.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Division of Revenue Bill, 2009, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the
         Select Committee on Finance.

4.    Introduction of Bills


     1.     The Minister of Finance

         (a)      Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2009] (National Assembly –
         proposed sec 76)


         (b)     Appropriation Bill [B 5 – 2009] (National Assembly –
              proposed sec 77)


         (c)      Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 – 2009]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 77)

             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Finance of the National Assembly for consideration and report,
             and to the Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its
             mandate, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

      a) Hon. Dr F J van Heerden (Free State Province) has been appointed to
         serve on the Ad Hoc Joint Committee for the appointment of  members
         to the National Youth Development Agency Board.


      b) Hon. Mr M A Mzizi will serve as an alternate on the Committee.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance – 11 February 2009 [RP
         03-2009].


      b) Estimates of National Revenue for 2009 [RP 04-2009].


      c) Budget Review 2009 [RP 02-2009], including:

           • Taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise duties.

      d) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 - 2009], tabled in terms of section
         10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No
         97 of 1997).

      e) Appropriation Bill [B 5 - 2009].

      f) Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 - 2009]

      g) Estimates of National Expenditure 2009 [RP 01-2009], which
         includes:


          1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


          2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;


          3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


          4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;


          5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;


          6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Government Communications and
             Information System", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


          7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Administration Leadership and
             Management Academy", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;

         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service and Administration",
             Main Estimates, 2009-2010;

         10.      Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service Commission",
             Main Estimates, 2009-2010;

         11.      Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;

         12.      Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Arts and Culture", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         13.      Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Education", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;

         14.      Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;

         15.      Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;

         16.      Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Social Development", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         17.      Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Sport and Recreation South
             Africa", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         18.      Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Correctional Services", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         19.      Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;

         20.      Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Independent Complaints
             Directorate", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         21.      Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Justice and Constitutional
             Development", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         22.      Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Safety and Security”, Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         23.      Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


         24.      Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Communications", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;

         25.      Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Environmental Affairs and
             Tourism", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         26.      Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2009-
             2010;


         27.      Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


         28.      Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Minerals and Energy", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         29.      Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Provincial and Local
             Government", Main Estimates, 2009-2010;


         30.      Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Enterprises", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;

         31.      Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         32.      Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main
             Estimates, 2009-2010;


         33.      Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Main Estimates,
             2009-2010;


         34.      Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
             Main Estimates, 2009-2010.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
        and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T090211e-insert1 – PAGES 305-318

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  the  Financial  Management  of
    Parliament Bill [B74 – 2008] (National Assembly – section 76(1)):
    The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the  above-mentioned
    Bill, referred to it and classified by the JTM,  reports  that  it  has
    agreed  to  the  Financial  Management  of  Parliament  Bill  (National
    Assembly - section 76(1)) with amendments [B74A – 2008].

                         THURSDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

      1) The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following Bill
         as a section 76 Bill:


          a) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec
             76)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


         (a)      Molaokakanywa-Phetošwa Wa Tšweletšopele Ya Methopo Ya
             Dimierale Le Petroleamo [B 10F – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 75)


         This is the official translation into Sepedi of the Mineral and
         Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill [B 10F – 2007]
         (National Assembly – sec 75).


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:


        (a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho on the Facilitation
           of Cross-Border Movement of Citizens of the Republic of South
           Africa and the Kingdom of Lesotho, tabled in terms of section
           231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
           of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
           Kingdom of Lesotho on the Facilitation of Cross-Border Movement
           of Citizens of the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of
           Lesotho.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     National General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit
        Outcomes of Departments, Constitutional Institutions, Public
        Entities and other entities for 2007-2008 [RP 6-2009].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on the employment of the
    South African Defence Force (SANDF) to the Democratic Republic of Congo
    (DRC) and within the Republic of South Africa, dated 11 February 2008:


    The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letters
    from the President on the employment of the South African National
    Defence Force (SANDF) to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) for a
    service in fulfilment of international obligations of the Republic of
    South Africa towards the Southern African Development Community (SADC),
    and employment of SANDF for a service in co-operation with the South
    African Police Service (SAPS) in prevention and combating of crime
    within the Republic of South Africa during the FIFA Confederation  Cup
    draw, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.




National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Money Bills
    Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill [B 75B—2008] (National
    Assembly – section 75), dated 10 February 2009:

    The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the Money Bills
    Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill [B 75B—2008] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a
    section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill with proposed
    amendments:

                                 Long title
     1. On page 2, in the long title, after “Parliament” to insert “and for
        norms and standards for amending money Bills before provincial
        legislatures”.


                                  Clause 4
    1.     On page 4, in line 18, after “amendments to“, to omit “the
        Division of Revenue Bill,”.

                                  Clause 8
     1. On page 6, in line 26, after “within” to omit “16” and to substitute
        “30”.


   2. On page 6, in line 49, after “at least” to omit “two” and to
      substitute “seven”.

   3. On page 6, in line 55, after “within” to omit “16” and to substitute
      “30”.

                                  Clause 9

     1. On page 7, from line 6, to omit the whole of clause 9.


                                  Clause 12
   1. On page 9, in line 46, after “at least” to omit “2” and to substitute
      “seven”.


   2. On page 9, in line 54, after “at least” to omit “4” and to substitute
      “seven”.

     3. On page 10, in line 14, after “at least” to omit “4” and to
        substitute “seven”.


                                  Clause 15

      1. On page 10, from line 44, to omit “There is hereby established a
         Parliamentary Budget Office”, and to substitute “The Secretary to
         Parliament must establish a budget office within the administration
         for Parliament”.
   2. On page 10, in line 45, after “provide” to omit “independent,”.

   3. On page 11, from line 10, to omit subclauses (3) – (16).

                                 New clause

   1. On page 11, after clause 15, to insert the following new clause:


         “Norms and standards for provincial legislatures

             16. Provincial legislatures must adhere to the norms and
                standards for amending money Bills set out in the Schedule.

                                New Schedule
    1.     To insert the following schedule after clause 16:


                                  “Schedule

         Norms and standards for provincial legislatures

         Legislation enacted by a provincial legislature to provide for a
         procedure to amend money Bills must provide that the purpose of
         amending money Bills is to give effect to resolutions of the
         legislature on oversight, and must comply with the following
         principles:

     a) A money Bill sent to the Premier for assent must be consistent
        with:
             i) the relevant fiscal framework adopted by Parliament; and
            ii) the relevant Division of Revenue Bill adopted by Parliament.


          b) When considering an amendment a provincial legislature or any
             of its committees must ensure that there is:
             iii) an appropriate balance between revenue, expenditure and
                  borrowing;
              iv) ensure that debt levels and debt interest cost are
                  reasonable;
               v) ensure that the cost of recurrent spending is not deferred
                  to future generations;
              vi) ensure that there is adequate provision for spending on
                  infrastructure
             vii) development, overall capital spending and maintenance;
            viii) consider the short, medium and long term implications of
                  the fiscal framework, division of revenue and national
                  budget on the long-term growth potential of the economy
                  and the development of the country;
              ix) take into account cyclical factors that may impact on the
                  prevailing fiscal position; and
               x) take into account all public revenue and expenditure,
                  including extra budgetary funds, and contingent
                  liabilities.


          c) In amending revenue Bills and revenue proposals a provincial
             legislature and its committees must:
               i) ensure that the total amount of revenue raised is
                  consistent with the fiscal framework approved by
                  Parliament and the relevant Division of Revenue Bill
                  adopted by Parliament;
              ii) take into account the principles of equity, efficiency,
                  certainty and ease of collection;
             iii) consider the impact of the proposed change on the
                  composition of tax revenue with reference to the balance
                  between direct and indirect taxes;
              iv) consider regional and international tax trends; and
               v) consider the impact on development, investment, employment
                  and economic growth.


          d) The standing rules of the provincial legislature must provide
             for timeframes to introduce and consider money Bills, with or
             without amendments, with due regard to
               i) its constitutional obligation to facilitate public
                  involvement in its legislative and other processes of the
                  legislature and its committees; and
              ii) comments from the member of the Executive Council who is
                  responsible for financial matters in the province.


          e) The report of a committee of the provincial legislature that
             proposes amendments to the provincial annual budget must, in
             respect of each amendment:
               i) indicate the reason for such proposed amendment;
              ii) demonstrate how the amendment takes into account the broad
                  strategic priorities and allocations of the relevant
                  budget;
             iii) demonstrate the implications of each proposed amendment
                  for an affected vote and the main divisions within that
                  vote;
              iv) demonstrate the impact of any proposed amendment on the
                  balance between transfer payments, capital and recurrent
                  spending in an affected vote;
               v) set out the impact of any proposed amendment on service
                  delivery;
              vi) set out the manner in which the amendment relates to
                  prevailing departmental strategic plans, reports of the
                  Auditor General, committee reports adopted by the
                  provincial legislature, reports in terms of section 32(2)
                  of the Public Finance Management Act, annual reports and
                  any other information submitted to the provincial
                  legislature or committee in terms of the standing rules or
                  on request; and
             vii) include any responses from the member of the Executive
                  Council who is responsible for financial matters in the
                  province or any other member of the Executive Council.


          f) The report of a committee of the provincial legislature that
             proposes a conditional appropriation of a sub-division of a
             main division within a vote to ensure that the money requested
             for the main division will be spent effectively, efficiently
             and economically must:
               i) consider comments from the member of the Executive Council
                  who is responsible for financial matters in the province
                  or any other member of the Executive Council; and
              ii) specify the conditions that need to be met before the a
                  provincial legislature may resolve to release the funds.


          g) A provincial legislature may appropriate an amount
             specifically and exclusively for a purpose mentioned under a
             main division within a vote.


          h) A provincial legislature must pass, with or without
             amendments, or reject the provincial annual budget within four
             months after the start of the financial year to which it
             relates.

          i) Notwithstanding any provision in this legislation, a
             provincial legislature or a committee may consider an
             amendment to a money Bill proposed by the member of the
             Executive Council who is responsible for financial matters in
             the province in order to make technical corrections to the
             Bill.”


                MEMORANDUM ON THE OBJECTS OF THE MONEY BILLS
             AMENDMENT PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS BILL, 2008


      1. On page 12, at “2. OBJECTS OF THE BILL”, after the last sentence to
         insert “The Bill requires that legislation enacted by a provincial
         legislature to provide for a procedure to amend money Bills must
         comply with norms and standards set out in the Schedule.”


   2. On page 12, at “3. CONTENT OF THE BILL”, to omit item 3.9.

      3. On page 13, at “3. CONTENT OF THE BILL”, after item 3.15, to insert
         the following new item: “Clause 16 provides that provincial
         legislatures must adhere to the norms and standards for amending
         money Bills set out in the Schedule.”

      4. On page 13, at “3. CONTENT OF THE BILL”, after item 3.16, to insert
         the following new item: “The Schedule provides that the legislation
         of a provincial legislature which provides for a procedure to amend
         money Bills must provide that the purpose of amending money Bills
         is to give effect to resolutions of the legislature on oversight,
         and must comply with the same principles found in the provisions of
         the Bill.”

      5. On page 13, at “6. FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS FOR THE STATE”, after
         “budget of Parliament.” to omit the following:

         “Although the salary and allowance of the Director is linked to the
         senior management level in the public service, and as such can be
         estimated accordingly, costs of other personnel and incidental
         costs such as information systems and consultancy fees depend on
         the range of functions required from the Office from year to year.”




                          FRIDAY, 13 FEBRUARY 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces
The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 13 February 2009:


         (a)      Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             sec 76(1)).
             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance
             of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Notice No 22 published in Government Gazette No 31789 dated 9
        January 2009: National Environmental Management Act, 2008 (Act No
        62 of 2008).

National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Exclusions from coastal public property in terms of section
        27(4) of the National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal
        Management Act, 2008 (Act No 24 of 2008).


         Referred to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental for
         consideration and


                          MONDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Revised Draft Rules made in terms of section 7(3) of the
        Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).
        (Please Note that the rules tabled on 30 January 2009 have been
        withdrawn)

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs for consideration and report.


                          TUESDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
        Bills as section 77 Bills:


        (a)      Appropriation Bill [B 5 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec
             77)
          b) Western Cape Inherited Debt Relief Bill [B 6 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 17 February 2009:


         (a)      Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72D – 2008] (National
         Assembly – sec 75).

    (2)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 17 February
         2009:


          a) Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2F – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             76(1)).


          b) Civil Aviation Bill [B 73B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
        Division of Revenue Bill for 2009-2010, tabled on 11 February 2009
        in terms of section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations
        Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
     a) Government Notice No 27 published in Government Gazette No 31775
        dated 16 January 2009: Draft Regulations for the proper
        administration of the Knysna Protected Environment, in terms of the
        National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act
        No 57 of 2003).


National Council of Provinces

 1. The Chairperson

    (a)     Correspondence from Mr Q M Mahlinza of King Williams Town in
        the Eastern Cape Province.


         Referred to the Select Committee on Members’ Legislative Proposals.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs on
    the Revised Draft Rules of Procedure for Judicial Review of
    Administrative Action in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of
    Administration of Justice Act (Act No 3 of 2000), dated 17 February
    2009:

    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
    considered the Revised Draft Rules of Procedure for Judicial Review of
    Administrative Action in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of
    Administration of Justice Act (Act No 3 of 2000), recommends the Revised
    Draft Rules to the National Council of Provinces for approval.

    The Committee, however, wishes to make the following additional
comments:


    1.      The finalization of these Rules is long overdue.  The Committee
        would like to thank the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
        Development for the very constructive role he has played in ensuring
        a resolution to the problems that caused the delays. The Committee
        would similarly like to thank the Rules Board for its cooperation in
        this regard.
    2.      The Procedures to be followed for the Judicial Review of
        Administrative Action generated much debate.  As this is the first
        time that Rules of this nature are being adopted, the Committee
        believes that their implementation should be monitored and
        evaluated. Should the process of the judicial review of
        administrative action not be running as expected, either by making
        it too difficult for the less advantaged members of society to make
        use of review proceedings or by being too burdensome on the state,
        the Rules would need to be amended. The Committee, therefore,
        requests that the Minister reviews the implementation of these Rules
        within 24 months of their approval by Parliament and reports back to
        the National Council of Provinces on their implementation and any
        amendments that may be necessary.


    3.      As the Rules are somewhat complex, the Committee recommends that
        the Department ensures that mechanisms are put in place to assist
        members of the public in making use of them.  These mechanisms could
        include the training of Community Development Workers and even
        Parliamentary Constituency office administrators to provide
        assistance.

        Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
    on the Reform of Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of Related
    Matters Bill [B 10B-2008 - sec 76], dated 17 February 2008.


       The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
       considered the Reform of Customary Law of Succession and Regulation
       of Related Matters Bill [B 10B-2008 – sec 76] referred to it, reports
       the Bill with amendments [B10C – 2008].



