---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 September 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-09-16
---

                        WEDNESDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____


   The House met at 15:01.

House Chairperson Mr M B Skosana took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


      PRESENCE OF SA HOMELESS STREET SOCCER TEAM IN HOUSE ACKNOWLEDGED


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Before we proceed, I have
been requested to acknowledge the presence of the SA Homeless Street
Soccer, SAHSS, team. Let me just give you a brief background before you
applaud. The SAHSS took part in the Homeless World Cup in Milan, Italy,
from 6 to 13 September 2009. Forty nations took part in the tournament. The
SAHSS brought home the City of Milan trophy by winning Malawi in the final
with a score of 9-1. You may now applaud. [Applause.]

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 4

MINISTERS:

     Particulars regarding occupation of units in parliamentary villages

79.   Mr P B Mnguni (Cope) asked the Minister of Public Works:

       (1)  Whether all units in all parliamentary villages are used
           exclusively by (a) Members of Parliament (MPs) and (b) session
           staff employed by the Public Service; if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant details;


       (2)  what steps have been taken to ensure that these units are not
           inhabited by any other individuals and families who do not fall
           in the above categories;


       (3)  how many nonreturning MPs are still residing in the
           parliamentary villages;


       (4)  whether a policy with transparent criteria of the equitable
           allocation of houses to MPs has been developed; if not, why not;
           if so, when will it be tabled;


       (5)  whether the seniority of an MP in terms of (a) years of service
           as a Member of Parliament and/or (b) office held in Parliament
           or the executive is one of the criteria; if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant
           details?                                                 NO1140E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, parliamentary villages provide
accommodation for the following categories of inhabitants: Members of
Parliament; sessional officials employed by the Public Service;
departmental officials per park to perform standby duties; aides and
assistants to members with disability; and protectors to members.

We have measures in place to account for the number of people who reside in
each village. Once people in the categories above take residence, the
identity numbers, names and surnames of all adults, youth and children
residing in a particular house or unit are recorded. The parliamentary
villages management board has put in place policies and regulations that
ensure that people who fall outside the mentioned categories do not reside
in parks. These are enforced in collaboration with the national protection
service and the SA Police Service.

There are five nonreturning members staying in the villages. These are
exceptions to the rule. Each case was reviewed separately, and their stay
in smaller units was extended for a limited period. As of this week, the
state attorney is dealing with these cases on our behalf.

Whips of the various political parties allocate houses to their members
according to their own policies. However, once the parliamentary villages
board has been reconstituted, this will be revisited.

The answer to section 5 of the question is the same as the last answer I
have given. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P B MNGUNI: Chairperson, Minister, this question was posed to illustrate
to what extent the ANC government has increasingly blurred its role between
political parties and the state. Seven nonreturning ANC MPs were granted
special permission to stay on until the end of June. Yet, they flaunted all
the regulations and unilaterally extended their stay at a cost to taxpayers
until August. Only now, as a result of a court ruling, will the department
conduct an audit of those who reside in parliamentary villages to ensure
that units meant for MPs and parliamentary staff will be utilised for that
purpose and not for the ANC, their staff, families and friends. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, obviously the hon member’s
inside information was incorrect this time. I said that these were
exceptional cases. These are cases where a member has produced a medical
certificate to say that they were unable to move out of the residence.
These are cases that have been outlined in my response.

The issue you are raising is irrelevant, because the policies are in place.
It is an agreement between parties to allocate and to decide on the
criteria for housing. The department does not get involved in that. So, I’m
sorry about your information, Sir. It is incorrect. [Applause.]

Mr S J MASANGO: Chairperson, I would like to know how often the Department
of Public Works makes inspections at the parks, because there are so many
people staying at these parks who are neither MPs nor officials.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, I think this is a repetition of
what I have already responded to. I said that once the inhabitants take
occupation of the houses, we then go into a registration process. It might
help the hon member if I add a bit to the replies given. We are busy
looking at the legislation that governs the parliamentary villages
management board. We are going to reconstitute that board and ask from the
Speaker’s Office that somebody be delegated to chair that particular board
with the Deputy Minister of Public Works so that we have MPs playing a role
in the management of the parks. Members of Parliament need to get their act
together and make sure that their residence committees are elected. You
can’t blame the Minister of Public Works if you are not prepared to look
after the parks that you live in. I think they are there for you to reside
in. You must make yourself safe and comfortable. We are there to support
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Before I call the hon M C
Manana, let me just remind members that they must please press the talk
button from their own seats. Do not use other members’ seats, because you
are confusing the records.

Mr M C MANANA: Chairperson, hon Minister, as you may know, parliamentary
villages have become our second homes as hon Members of Parliament. In
light of the many cases reported to be criminal in the parks in recent
years, what measures and plans does your department have in place to beef
up security and ensure proper and ideal access control for all residents in
the parks? Thanks.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, the security in the parks is of
serious concern to our department, and I do get approached by several
members on this issue. I must just quote from a report that has been given
to me. It indicates that we also need the residents in the park to be
serious about crime. For instance, there was a charge of malicious damage
to state property. The person who witnessed this – I won’t mention the name
– identified the suspect, but declined to register a case for further
investigation. Now that doesn’t help us.
The second one is trespassing. Again the person who reported it does not
wish the case to be registered for trespassing. On the matter relating to
the disturbance of peace, no further action was taken by the member. We
also have a problem where the SA Police Service is called out on numerous
occasions. For instance, in the month of August, 190 alarms were activated.
When the SA Police Service went to those residences, it was to find that
somebody had pressed the alarm button or the panic button by accident. That
is a waste of an available resource that could be deployed in other areas
to fight crime.

On the issue of assets, this is something that the Auditor-General has
raised with us. When the audit report comes to Parliament, members will be
able to see what action we are taking. It is of serious concern that our
assets are being moved around in the park without any monitoring or
tracking. That is something we are addressing. Thanks.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, hon Minister, normally it is the park manager
who calls the first meeting. I would just like to ask you that the
particular official of your department should call the first meeting so
that we as Members of Parliament can gather.

I would, however, like to ask the hon Minister whether all of these five
cases he mentioned are because of medical reasons and whether they will pay
a market-related rent for their prolonged stay in the parks?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, the answer to the latter part of
the question is yes. But, hon members, I think it might be important for us
to look at these particular cases. We have cases where former Members of
Parliament did not return, but left their children in the houses. How do we
as a Department of Public Works evict school-going children when there is
no adult in that house?

This is a serious issue and therefore the department did give an extension.
As I said, the state attorney is now dealing with these cases. I think we
should leave it to that process.

 Steps taken to implement ISRDP programme and to eradicate poverty in rural
                                    areas

81.   Mrs D G Nhlengethwa (ANC) asked the Minister of Rural Development and
      Land Reform:

      (1)   Whether his department has taken any steps to implement the
           Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme (ISRDP); if
           not, why not; if so, what steps;


      (2)   whether he has taken any steps to co-operate with other
           government departments to eradicate poverty in rural areas,
           particularly traditional communities; if not, what is the
           position in this regard; if so, what steps?
                                             NO1286E

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson, the answer
to the first question is, yes. The Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
Programme, ISRDP, is currently being integrated into the Comprehensive
Rural Development Programme.

Communication regarding this process has been sent out to all nodal mayors,
provincial heads of departments in the nodal areas, and technical
stakeholders that were involved in its implementation in the nodes.
Stakeholders are also being consulted on how to integrate the lessons of
the ISRDP into the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, CRDP.

The answer to the second question is, yes. Strong institutional
arrangements are key to the eradication of poverty in rural areas. The
premiers of provincial government are currently assisting the Ministry in
getting the commitment of all provincial government departments so that we
can get the desired results from the integrated implementation of the CRDP.


A council of stakeholders consisting of members of community-based
organisations and forums, traditional councils and communities, school
governing bodies, government and community policing forums, and ward
committees will be established. In fact, it has already been established at
Muyexe. The council of stakeholders will, inter alia, enforce compliance
with the conditions for state support to the CRDP beneficiaries; ensure
compliance to the agreed code of conduct; identify community needs, project
management and implementation; and play an oversight and monitoring role.
Thank you.

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Chairperson, despite the significant progress made over
the past 15 years, people living in rural areas continue to face the
harshest conditions of poverty, lack of access to land, and basic services.
Is the programme also linked to agrarian reform, so that the lives of the
farmworkers and farm dwellers can be improved? Are there any support
measures for them?

The second part of the question relates to traditional communities: Are
traditional leaders taken on board in terms of consultation in this
process?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson, the answer
is yes. This programme is linked to agrarian transformation. In fact, as
part of our rationalisation and restructuring of the department, we have
brought together all these programmes under the key rural development
programme of the department and the land reform programmes. These two key
programmes are actually meant to deal with all rural areas, including farm
dwellers.
In this regard, we want to mention that the Department of Rural Development
and Land Reform has a mechanism with a toll-free number to assist,
particularly, farm dwellers who tend to be subjected to evictions. This is
part of a defence mechanism that the department has put in place for them
over the past few years.

We think this is one area that has been lacking publicity. We have taken a
decision that we will publicise this information as much as possible in the
media, both in print and electronically, in the coming weeks.

In terms of the second question, indeed, as I have just mentioned, we have
started working with traditional leaders as part of the programme. In fact,
they are central to participating and determining where land should be
used, and what kind of use that land should be put to, etc. They are part
of the council of stakeholders that we referred to. Thank you.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, through you to the hon Minister, the IFP
has a serious concern when it comes to rural development, because Ministers
and MECs often bypass local government and traditional leaders when it
comes to the implementation of the Integrated Sustainable Development
Programmes, which often results in little or no progress at all. Our worry
is that this happens especially when the traditional councils and local
government do not belong to the ruling party. My question is whether the
Minister is aware of these practices; if he is, what steps the Minister
planning to take? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson,
unfortunately I am not aware of that scenario. However, if I may just say
to the hon member that in cases where we have started with the work, I
actually do not know who belongs to what party, because I don’t participate
in the selection. What we do is to go from door to door in the communities,
without skipping any houses. We don’t know whether there are members of the
ANC, PAC or IFP in those houses. What we do know is that each household
must be involved.

Traditional leaders, as I said, are actually quite involved. They
participate in all the structures. When you get to KwaZulu-Natal, the hon
members will see that and experience it as well. Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Chairperson, we have to accept, hon Minister, that we are
not in a position to change the situation entirely in rural areas, despite
the passion that you demonstrate in your work all of the time. However, if
we don’t take the issue of the roll-out of microlending to the rural areas
to actually make them self-sufficient and also enhance agro-industry in the
rural areas, we will not overcome this imbalance between the urban and the
rural areas. Are there any plans for rolling out microlending in the rural
areas?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson, that is
perfectly correct. The hon members should have followed the policy speech,
because in that speech we presented three phases of development. In the
first phase we are really meeting basic human needs, and the second phase
is about enterprise development. And we mentioned, specifically, that the
second phase is a very important phase in terms of training and developing
people, particularly in financial management.

In the third phase we look at agro-industries, microlending or
microfinancing, and we think that this is an area we want to emphasise. It
has become very important in terms of our ongoing work regarding
microlending and agrovillage industries, to determine which rural areas we
find to be the most critical.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, hon Minister, did the recent policy platform on
rural development held in Durban produce any new proposals to foster
economic development in rural areas where previous efforts have failed,
despite public and private investments; if so, what are the relevant
details; and if not, what plans do you have to stimulate fresh thinking in
this area?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson, I
apologise, I did not get the first part of the question – please repeat
that first part.

Mrs C DUDLEY: It was about the recent policy platform in Durban, a platform
on rural development?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: The one that took place
on Sunday?

Mrs C DUDLEY: Yes.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Oh! Thank you, hon
Chair. We have discussed this morning – my colleague, the hon Minister for
Economic Development, and I – that that is what we are going to do. We are
going to discus the outcome of that platform between ourselves and with top
officials to look at the areas that will help both of us, in economic
development and in rural development. Yes, we are going to do that.

Ms A STEYN: Chairperson, hon Minister, why is the department identifying
new pilot sites if the district municipality has already put a lot of time
and money in the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme, ISRDP?
Will this department consider using the already identified poverty nodes in
the rural development programme? I know that you have answered it in your
first reply. These pockets were identified specifically because they are
rural and very poor areas. I am just wondering whether it is not because it
was launched in the Mbeki era that we are now doing our own new pilot
sites.
The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson, the
Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme, ISRDP, nodal area, for
example, in the Free State has been identified as the Maluti-a-Phofung
Local Municipality. We are going to the other nodal areas and other sites
that we have identified because of their circumstances. For example,
Riemvasmaak, where we are working now, is an area in the Northern Cape that
received a huge stretch of land from government, but there was no support.
So, we thought we should prioritise areas like those.

I think that in Mpumalanga the Mkhondo Municipality could also be – if I am
not mistaken - one of the areas that were part of the nodal areas. So, we
are not excluding them. In fact, we would like to start with them where
possible. We will discuss and negotiate with premiers, and if they prefer a
place different from that, we would go to it. I think in KwaZulu-Natal as
well, Msinga ... Yintoni kanene igama lalaa ndawo? [By the way what is the
name of that area?] [Interjections.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: EMsinga. [Msinga.]

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Yes, Nkosi Shenge,
eMsinga ... that’s a nodal area in KwaZulu-Natal. Thank you.

    Additional funding and other measures to expedite land reform process
77.   Mr N Singh (IFP) asked the Minister of Rural Development and Land
      Reform:

     (1)    Whether, in light of the Chief Land Claims Commissioner’s
           statement that 97 percent of the land acquisition budget had
           been spent three months into the year, additional funds will be
           sourced to ensure that the land reform process is not delayed
           further; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

     (2)    whether this lack of funds will necessitate an extension to the
           deadline for the completion of the land reform process; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


     (3)    whether any additional measures will be introduced to expedite
           the land reform process and correct the inefficiencies that
           exist with its administration; if not, why not; if so, what are
           the relevant details?  NO1092E

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson, the answer
to this question, is that, as stated in the budget and policy speech, this
model does not work. The speech was very clear. Alternative models to the
willing-buyer, willing-seller principle are currently being investigated.
The government is prepared to engage with landowners and other interested
stakeholders to develop cost-effective models to expedite land reform
delivery. Thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, hon Minister for that very short answer. I wish the
previous Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs were here to hear from
you, Sir, that the model that the government used did not work, because
time and time again we did indicate to the hon Minister in debates that the
model did not work, but we were talking to a wall. Maybe sometimes a wall
responds to the things that we say. But, hon Minister, it is a matter of
concern that claims were gazetted in 1998, and in 11 years, as you say, we
still haven’t sorted out these claims.

We as the IFP support land reform because it is an important imperative
that the government needs to pursue in order to redress the wrongs of the
past. What I would like to know from the hon Minister is whether the hon
Minister is aware that the Office of the Land Claims Commission has entered
into contractual agreements with owners of land to buy their land, but they
don’t have the money to pay for that land? When will moneys be paid and
how, so that the beneficiaries can take occupation of the land which they
so richly deserve? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, I am not
aware of whether that specific scenario exists, but I will follow up on it.
What I do know is that, on the desk right now, we have situations where
agreements have been signed, but due to a lack of money, those agreements
have not been carried through. We do know that. As a result, we have
negotiated with Treasury – I think the commissioner has been saying all
along that we do not have money – and, really, that is a very important
aspect.

He made a broad statement which has been interpreted as “if we do not have
money, we will not proceed”. That is not correct. We can only speak for the
current time. As you will remember, this is a new department and we will
have to find money, given the fact that the commissioner has spent all the
money that was available in the first quarter. We cannot then say those who
have signed should not be serviced. We are looking for about R400 million
to service those claims that are on the desk that have been signed already.
And that’s the scenario that the hon member is talking about. Thank you.

Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, Minister, having replied very well, does the
department have a system in place whereby it understands the exact figures
in terms of how many farms it had signed contracts with, and how to pay the
outstanding amounts? How long before these contracts are going to be
settled? We have a contract in our possession from a farmer who has been
waiting for payment from the department for five years already. When is he
going to get his money? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, the hon
member has asked that question in written form and I’ve answered it. And
now the hon member is asking that question again. I’ve got an answer here,
but I wasn’t ready for that particular question, because he asked it and I
answered it. If I’m given a chance, I could try to look for that
information here. But the hon members have got it. Thank you.

Nkosi Z M D MANDELA: Chairperson, in light of the Comprehensive Rural
Development Programme pilot projects launched in Giyani and Riemvasmaak,
what is the status of the land claims, especially in the communities that
launched the claims on the Kruger National Park?

Secondly, the Chief Land Claims Commissioner informed the Portfolio
Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform that for the Kruger National
Park alone, the department will need no less that R15 billion per year to
meet the 2014 land delivery target. With the current global economic
downturn, will all the land claims be settled by 2014, as per the
department’s strategic plan? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, Cabinet took
a decision in 2008 that the land in the Kruger National Park will not be
restored to the communities who launched land claims on it, and that
alternative redress would be sought in the form of financial compensation.
It has come to light that the communities do not agree to financial
compensation and have called for the restoration of the land. The Ministry
will submit this matter to Cabinet for a discussion and a way forward. It
is clear that we do not have sufficient resources to meet our targets –
that is in terms of the second question. This is further compounded by the
current economic crisis.

However, hon Chair, further interactions with National Treasury over the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period, regarding additional
funding for land reform will continue. The commission remains committed to
its mandate of ensuring redress for those who lost their land through past
racial practices and legislation, and will further ensure regular
communication with claimants as to the status of their claims. Thank you.

Mr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson, in fact, what I wanted to ask was
about the Kruger National Park. Can I ask the Minister – and thank you for
that reply to the previous question – whether, when he submits this whole
issue to the Cabinet, he will take into consideration the environmental
part of the Kruger National Park and its tourism potential, and, further,
that he will not reopen this matter just because there are one or two
people who are eyeing concessions that will not be in the interest of the
park?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, a categorical
“no” to that last question. With regard to the first two questions about
the environment and tourism, we should make it clear that we will further
consult with the people there on this matter, and it involves a variety of
communities, ranging from Limpopo to Mpumalanga as the hon member knows.

We want to assure them that government will not do anything without having
consulted them to the full. Now that we understand that they are not happy,
we have to go back to them and discuss it, and then make sure that Cabinet
is well aware of the implications of its decisions.

Secondly, it is very important to note that those communities are not
saying they want to walk into that Kruger National Park and grab it. They
are saying there is a question that must be answered by government – this
was our land. That’s what people are saying, “This was our land and we want
that to be recognised by the government and acknowledged.” The form of that
recognition and acknowledgement is what must be debated with the people. In
our view and our understanding of what people are saying, there is no
threat whatsoever to the environment and tourism in terms of the Kruger
National Park. Thank you.

  Particulars regarding projects to assist persons who are laid off at work
108.  Ms F E Khumalo (ANC) asked the Minister of Labour:

      (1)   Whether there are any projects by his department to assist
           persons who are laid off at work; if not, why not; if so, what
           projects;


        2) whether these projects provide long-term solutions; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             NO1444E

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Mhlalingaphambili, ezona njongo zethu ziphambili
kukuba imeko yezoqoqosho iphucuke, luphinde uqoqosho lume kakuhle kwakhona
ukuze luvule amathuba omsebenzi. Ukuze ke uqoqosho luphumelele koku,
kufuneka sicinge ngokuqeqesha nokuphuhlisa izakhono zabantu, ingakumbi abo
bathe baphulukana nezithuba zomsebenzi. Yeyona njongo iphambili ke le;
akunyanzelwanga mntu.

Zezo nkampani ezithi zibe sengxakini nasengxingongweni kuphela emazize
ngaphambili, zifike zithi thaca ingxaki yazo, ukuze ke thina sikwazi
ukuncedana nazo. Yiyo ke loo nto senze ukuba kubekho imali eyayisele ithiwe
pahaha ngokaPatel, engamawaka azizigidi ezi-4,4 [R4,4 billion], esithe
sayikhupha kule Ngxowa-mali yethu yeInshorensi yaBangaphangeliyo kwakunye
neNgxowa-mali yeZakhono yeSizwe.

Ukuba uyaqaphela ke, zonke ezo mali ziphuma kweli sebe lethu. Into
esingekayiboni ligalelo labanye abantu kulo mcimbi. Okwangoku,
sisebenzisana neKomiti yoXolelwaniso noLamlo, iCCMA, eyiyo eza kuthi
ikhwebe ezo nkampani zisengxakini, ukwenzela ukuba saziswe ukuba inkampani
ethile, ngenxa yeemeko zoqoqosho, ifuna ukuncediswa. Oku sikwenza ngenxa
yokuba sifuna ukuba abasebenzi bangaveli nje badendwe ngokungathi
kukhululwa izihlangu neekawusi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, our main objective is for the economy
to recover and be strong so as to create job opportunities.  If we want to
ensure the success of our economy, we must think of skills development and
the training of people, especially for those who have lost their jobs. That
is the main objective, and no one is being forced to do it.

It is only those companies that are in trouble and in a deep crisis that
must come forward and present their situation to us, so that we are able to
help them. That is why we made available a sum of R4,4 billion from the
Unemployment Insurance Fund and the National Skills Fund, which hon Patel
has already announced.

You will notice that all these funds are from our department. We have not
yet seen other people’s contributions to this issue. For now, we are
working with the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration,
the CCMA, which is the one that will call those companies that are in
crisis so that we are informed that a certain company needs to lay off
workers temporarily because of the economic meltdown. We are doing this to
ensure that workers are not being retrenched as easily as taking off one’s
shoes and socks. [Applause.]]

Ms F E KHUMALO: Chairperson, hon Minister, is there any training for those
who are retrenched; if so, to what extent; if not, what are the plans of
the department in this regard? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, what I like about the way we function
in the Department of Labour is that the responsibility does not lie with
the department only. May I make an example? We have key strategic projects
that are decided on by provincial governments, whom we have given money;
the Eastern Cape has been given R99 million.

Kodwa loo mali bamelwe kukuba babe bayisebenzisile engekafiki uDisemba walo
nyaka ka-2009. [The money is supposed to have been spent before December
2009.]

The Free State was allocated R96 million; Gauteng R99 million; and KwaZulu-
Natal R97 million.

I do want to say in this House, that ...

... ndiyincoma kakhulu iKwaZulu-Natala, ngoba ela phondo lisebenzise
ngaphezu kwama-90 ekhulwini emali ayabelweyo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

ILimpopo siyabele izigidi ezingama-95 zeerandi [R95 million]; iMpumalanga
yabelwe izigidi ezingama-99 zeerandi [R99 million]; uMntla Koloni wona
wabelwe izigidi ezingama-99 zeerandi [R99 million]; uMntla Ntshona wabelwe
izigidi ezingama-98 zeerandi [R98 million]; iNtshona Koloni yabelwe izigidi
ezingama-99 zeerandi [R99 million].

Asibuzanga ke okokuba abantu bakuwaphi na amaqela ezopolitiko. EMpuma
Koloni, iphondo endizalelwe kulo, bathe bona baza kuba namaphulo ofundelo-
msebenzi. Bathi barhwebeshe abaqeqeshwa abali-1 963. Bakwathe baza
kujongana noqeqeshelo-msebenzi kwanokusebenza kwabaqeqeshwa njengabalingwa
emsebenzini. Asithi xa kuthethwa ngoqeqeshelo-msebenzi makungaqatshelwa
abantu abathe nabo badendwa emisebenzini. Asithanga lo makangavunyelwa; lo
makavunyelwe. Wonke umntu onqwenela ukufumana uqeqesho, nonqwenela ukuba
akwazi ukuphakama azenzele ngokwakhe, umele ukuba alufumane olo ncedo.

Ukuba ithuba belikho, mhlalingaphambili, bendiya kuyichazela iNdlu le ukuba
iMpuma Koloni isebenzise ama-66 ekhulwini emali eyabelweyo. IFreyistata
isebenzise ama-70 ekhulwini emali eyabelweyo – ndiyakhawulezisa ke ngoku,
mhlalingaphambili. IGauteng isebenzise ama-42 ekhulwini emali eyabelweyo.
Yaza iKwaZulu-Natala yasebenzisa ama-94,8 ekhulwini emali eyabelweyo. Yiyo
ke le nto ndisithi ndibancoma kakhulu phaya KwaZulu-Natala. ILimpopo
isebenzise ama-33 ekhulwini emali eyabelweyo, phondo elo asuka kulo uWillie
Madisha. IMpumalanga isebenzise ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[... I commend KwaZulu-Natal because they have spent more than 90% of the
money allocated to the province. [Applause.]

We have allocated R95 million to Limpopo; R99 million to Mpumalanga; North
West has been allocated R98 million; and Western Cape R99 million. We
didn’t ask people about their political affiliation.

In the Eastern Cape where I was born, they said they will have learnership
campaigns. They said they have attracted 1 963 learners. They also said
that they will focus on training and internship programmes. We are not
saying that people who were retrenched must not be considered when we are
talking about internships. We did not say that this one should be accepted
and that one should not. Everybody who wishes to receive training and those
who wish to embark on self-sustainable development initiatives must get
assistance.

If there was enough time Chairperson, I would tell the House that the
Eastern Cape has spent 66 per cent of the money allocated to it. Free State
has spent 70 per cent of the money allocated to it - I am speed reading now
Chairperson. Gauteng has spent 42 per cent of the money allocated to it and
KwaZulu-Natal spent 94,8 per cent of the money allocated. That is why I am
saying I applaud KwaZulu-Natal. Limpopo has spent 33 per cent of the money
allocated to it, the province Willie Madisha is coming from. Mpumalanga has
spent ...]

... only R12 million of the R99 million allocated to it.

UMntla Koloni usebenzise ama-32 ekhulwini; uMntla Ntshona usebenzise ama-44
ekhulwini.

USIHLALO WENDLU (Mnu M B Skosana): Uphelelwe lixesha, Mphathiswa.

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Ndiyavuya ke xa lithe laphela ndingekalibizi
elakho iphondo. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The Northern Cape has spent 32 per cent of the money allocated to it, and
the North West spent 44 per cent.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Minister, your time has
expired.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I am glad the time expired before mentioning your
province. [Laughter.]]

Mr A LOUW: Chairperson, is the Minister aware that none of the companies
have applied for the temporary layoff programme, and that more than 300 000
people have been retrenched in quarters one and two, according to
Statistics SA?

What is being done about this disastrous state of affairs?

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Mhlalingaphambili, umntu owayelixhwele phaya
ekhaya ngumakhulu, owasweleka kudala. Nguye ke owayenakho ukuphosa
amathambo azi ukuba yeyiphi na inkampani efake isicelo, iyeyiphi
engasifakanga.

Okwangoku, silindele ukuba inkampani esengxakini ifake isicelo
ngokusesikweni. Ukuba ke iyinyani laa nto ibithethwa ngumhlekazi lowa,
yokuba iinkampani azifakanga zicelo, makube ke besixelelwa into engekhoyo
xa bekusithiwa iinkampani zisengxakini, yiyo loo nto zidenda abasebenzi.
Ndingavuya ke ukuba unokusinika loo ngcombolo, yokuba zeziphi na ezi
nkampani athetha ngazo ukwenzela ukuba sikhangele ukuba ayizizo na ezi
zithi zidende abasebenzi zibe zingenangxaki. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, the only person who was a sangoma at
home was my grandmother who passed away a long time ago. She was the one
who would throw the bones and know which company has made an application
and which one has not.
As of now, we are waiting for a company in crisis to make an application
formally. If it is true what the hon member said about companies not making
applications, it means we have been deceived when we were told that the
reason these companies are retrenching people is because they are in deep
crisis.

I will be very honoured if you can give us information of the companies
that you are talking about in order to establish if they are not the ones
that are retrenching people whereas they are not in crisis. [Applause.]]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, I’ve been covered to a large
degree by your responses already. Possibly, you could just indicate to me
the degree to which the funds you have allocated have already been used for
training purposes, notwithstanding the fact that a number of companies have
not yet applied for those funds. I’m sure that there are already training
schemes on the go, through the usage of those funds that have been
allocated as you indicated. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, fortunately again, the discussion
about these training layoffs was not initiated by the Department of Labour
or by government alone. We took this decision together with the employers’
organisations and the trade union federations.

We have already provided the financial resources to do this work.
Therefore, it is important for us to monitor this. I know, hon member, that
at the end of the day, you will be asking: Out of the R2,4 billion, how
much money has been spent? And I will have to come and account for it,
because that money is not manna.

Mr W M MADISHA: Hon Minister, are these projects linked to the skills
development programme of the economic meltdown rescue package? If so, what
sectors are being targeted?

Secondly, what plans do you have to accommodate the anticipated loss of
70 000 jobs in the construction industry after the completion of the soccer
stadia?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Mhlalingaphambili, ndiyawuthanda laa mbuzo ngoba
ela lungu likulaa Komiti yeMicimbi yeSebe lezaBasebenzi, ...
[Chairperson, I like that question because that member is in the Portfolio
Committee on Labour, ... ]

... which has been fully briefed on this. We are waiting for him to tell us
...

Mr W M MADISHA: Not true!

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: That sounds like in America. But, I will pray for
you.
You know that some of the sectors that are affected are mining and
manufacturing. In particular, the workers within the National Union of
Metalworkers, Numsa, are the ones who made the first approach in relation
to the training for layoffs.

I can also inform the hon members here, that there are many trade unions
that have taken decisions about short time in order to make sure that the
company doesn’t go bust. We really need to commend those trade unions that
participated in taking those decisions. What we are now doing is merely to
say that for the two days or one day that the workers have no work to do,
they must be trained.

We are in dark times now, but I know that the sun will shine again. And
when it does, you must not run around and start looking for people to
train, saying that there are no skills in the country. Start training the
workers now. This is the opportunity for employers to train their workers.
That’s exactly what we are encouraging our employers to do.

The same applies to the construction industry, my brother. In terms of the
agreement that they reached during collective bargaining, they have formed
task teams to discuss relevant programmes and issues such as what’s going
to happen to some of those workers.

Of course, you know, people in the construction industry are not employed
on a permanent basis. When the building has been finished, the worker goes
and looks for a job elsewhere. You know that; you have been leading one of
the best trade unions in the country. I don’t know why you left it. [Time
expired.]

     Particulars regarding awarding of a contract to render services for
                          presidential inauguration

84.   Mr M W Rabotapi (DA) asked the Minister of Public Works:

      (1)   Whether a certain company (name furnished) was awarded a
           contract to render services for the presidential inauguration on
           9 May 2009; if so,


      (2)   whether this contract was awarded on the basis of a public
           tender process; if not, why not; if so, (a) how many tenders
           were received, (b) from whom, (c) what amounts were tendered in
           each case, (d) in which edition of the Government Tender
           Bulletin was the (i) tender advertised and (ii) successful
           tender announced and (e) what criteria were used to assess the
           capabilities of the said company with regard to (i) service
           delivery, (ii) price and (iii) the sustainability of the
           services to be supplied;


      (3)   whether his department has paid the said company in full; if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                                                 NO1398E
The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Chairperson, we have agreed with the hon
member that we will table the question and he will get the response in the
form of a hard copy, because it is six pages long and the annexure is 10
pages, which is too much to handle as an oral question.

With your permission, Chairperson, the question is therefore responded to.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it
not possible for the Minister, notwithstanding the agreement, to give a
précis or summary of that response to the House? It is not an answer to
that individual member, but an answer to the House that is required.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon House Chairperson, as I said, the
response is six pages long. If you allow me twenty minutes then I will do
the response.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): No. I think members know that the
convention is if it is that long, it should be tabled. If the Minister is
unable to make a summary at this moment, then the answer will be tabled.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, the problem with that is it
does not allow for a follow-up question, and the whole point of oral
questions is to allow that interaction with members of the Cabinet.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Davidson, it is a convention
that the House has agreed to follow. We cannot jump and change this
agreement.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: It is a dangerous precedent that you are
setting. It allows members of the Cabinet to get around tricky questions by
submitting an answer the way they have, because then we are not allowed to
ask follow-up questions. I ask you to consider that and come back with a
response.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Davidson, this will be
considered also by the Chief Whips’ Forum to see what it can do about
matters like these. I understand your frustration.

Ms J D KILIAN: Hon Chairperson, would you allow a follow-up statement in
this regard, which is asking for a response by the Minister?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): No. I will not allow that. I’ll
stick to the convention that the answer be tabled because of its length. Is
there any other follow-up question? [Interjections.]

    Effect of fiscal stimulus package, infrastructure programme and other
    measures in cushioning the economy and preventing further job losses

100.  Mr S N Swart (ACDP) asked the Minister of Economic Development:

      (1)   Whether the Government’s fiscal stimulus package and the R787
           billion infrastructure programme has succeeded in cushioning the
           economy against the worst effects of the global economic
           meltdown; if not, why not; if so, how did he reach this
           conclusion;


      (2)   whether any other factors contributed to the recession and the
           loss of 500 000 jobs this year; if so, what are the relevant
           details;


      (3)   whether the additional package of measures announced recently
           flowing from the framework agreement between business, labour
           and Government in February will prevent further job losses; if
           not, why not; if so, how?    NO1433E


The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon member, it is the
view of the government that the stimulus package is cushioning the economy
against the worst effects of the global economic crisis. The cushioning has
been achieved in a number of ways. In the first instance, government took
the deliberate stance that we would not cut spending levels despite the
decrease in revenues and a likely increase in the budget deficit.

Public sector expenditure and investment levels have been maintained in the
face of the serious contraction in private sector investment. By pumping
liquidity into the economy in recessionary conditions, government is using
what economists refer to as countercyclical measures aimed at maintaining
economic activity in the face of international and domestic demand
contraction.

The R787 billion Infrastructure Investment Programme is illustrative of the
significant increase in capital spending by the broader public sector. This
investment programme has two broad effects: Firstly, it has directly
created thousands of jobs during the construction period, assuring our
businesses in several supplies sectors of the economy. A cursory glance at
either the employment data or the gross domestic product, GDP, data shows
that construction and civil engineering have been leading performers in the
economy. If it was not for these projects, the economy would have
contracted faster and more jobs would have been lost.

Secondly, these investments raise the future growth in South Africa through
lifting the infrastructure bottlenecks in electricity generation, roads,
ports, rail, water and other social sectors. These investments provide a
platform for private sector investment that is reliant on reliable,
affordable and efficient public infrastructure.

Now, we recognise that government spending can only partially cushion the
economy against a decline in demand in its exports. For example, if the
global demand for motor vehicles were to fall, as it has now, then, we
would export less platinum. While fiscal spending in itself cannot create
jobs in other sectors, it is not likely to be able to offset job losses in
the platinum mining sector. For this reason government has decided to defer
the introduction of the mining royalty tax by a year to help companies in
the sector to cope with lower demand. So, we’ve tried to give a few
illustrations of different aspects of – if you like - the fiscal stimulus.

Regarding the second part of the question, clearly, the recession is the
critical factor that has led to job losses, as cited by the hon member. The
recession, of course, is the expression of the contraction of the economic
activity which resulted in job losses.
The collapse in global demand was the trigger which has resulted in global
commodity prices and the falling of our exports causing retrenchments,
particularly in mining and manufacturing. And that, of course, has a knock-
on effect in the domestic economy. Nevertheless, some structural features
of our economy clearly make us more vulnerable to this spirit of the
economic turmoil and government is now working on policy initiatives to
address this.

Regarding the third part of the question yes, we believe that the measures
we have announced will minimise the rate of job losses. For example, the
training layoff scheme that my colleague, the hon Minister of Labour,
referred to earlier, will have three positive effects on jobs. Firstly, it
is an alternative to retrenchment. So, instead of the company laying off a
worker, they can be enrolled on the training layoff. Secondly, it’s an
opportunity ... [Time expired.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, thank you hon Minister for your lengthy
response.

We, as the ACDP, share the view that the stimulus package, particularly,
the infrastructure programme, has undoubtedly provided the cushion for our
economy enabling the construction sector to sustain double digit growth
rates over the last three recessionary quarters, and creating jobs, as you
have pointed out.

However, the main engines of our economy - as the Minister of Labour has
mentioned - are mining and manufacturing, and that is where we have severe
job losses. Hon Minister, whilst we appreciate that hindsight is perfect
vision, would the infrastructure plan not have provided more of a boost to
domestic manufacturing if it wasn’t so import intensive?

Secondly, is it not the central reason why South Africa’s fiscal stimulus,
whilst very important, had a limited impact, and not the fact that private
sector investment – which accounts for 76 per cent of net fixed investment,
as well as domestic consumption and bank lending – slowed to a crawl?

Lastly, what further progress has been made regarding the implementation of
the Framework Agreement which you announced on 20 August 2009 in addition
to what the Minister of Labour has pointed out? We will appreciate a short
briefing on that, and we realise that time is very limited. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, in respect of the first
question; yes, Sir, clearly, if we had the industrial policy initiatives in
place some years ago that prepared for a dynamic forward-looking
manufacturing sector more of what is required for the infrastructure
development and infrastructure investment could have been procured locally.
So, we hope part of the R787 billion that the government is investing in
the economy will create domestic demand and industrial policy. Minister Rob
Davis is working on a programme to ensure that – and there is a question
that I will later give more details on – our industrial policy initiatives
enable the economy to provide more goods that could go into our
infrastructure programme. But I will mention that the efficacy of the
R787 billion is going to be dependent on the extent to which we are able to
concentrate resources in the local economy and reduce the level of what
economists call “leakage”.

With regard to the second question of private sector investment, we are
very concerned with the collapse of the private sector investment. One of
the effects – as I indicated in my reply – of government maintaining very
high levels of public investment, relates to crowding in private sector
investment. They are often partners in some of the programmes that we are
involved with, and, at times, in some of the economic activities that the
private sector engages in. These require adequate infrastructure and the
modernisation of our rail and other networks for which the R787 billion has
been earmarked. I thank you.

Dr P J RABIE: Chairperson, and hon Minister, the stimulus package replaces
private sector economic activity that has currently slowed down
considerably. The stimulus package cannot last forever. You have mentioned
in your reply that some concessions were given to the platinum sector. My
question to you, Minister, is what specific steps has government taken to
ensure that private sector activity will resume once the stimulus package
ends? I think that is very important, because we need continuity, Mr
Minister. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, in response to the hon
member’s question, we agree that the stimulus package cannot last forever.
In fact, there was a very interesting debate in the G20 Minister of
Finance’s meeting that Minister Gordon reported on recently, precisely on
this issue.

Firstly, part of government’s response is to ensure that we are able to
save our industrial capacity. If we lose most or much of our manufacturing
sector as a result of the current contraction, then when conditions on the
demand side improve – when consumers buy more; when the exports recover –
we would not have the capacity to employ people in those areas. That’s part
of what we want to do; to rescue companies as a temporary measure and
enable them to resume their normal roles when the economy recovers.

Secondly, we are seeking to facilitate private sector investment,
particularly in the real economy; we are talking to the finance sector to
maintain the flow of credit to the real economy. Companies need working
capital, and without its sustenance, many companies that have markets –
where there is a demand for their goods and services – would otherwise
close down. So, those are two policy initiatives by government to ensure
that we deal with that.

The third aspect is, of course, skills enhancement. The long-term
requirements of growth include a skilled workforce, and we are taking the
challenge of a slowdown in the economy and turning it into an opportunity
to garner skills and train workers. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, some of the issues have already been covered.
The ID certainly agrees with the economic stimulus package, but, as you
said, it cannot continue forever, and we can’t pull off dealing with some
of the structural constraints of our economy.

I think one of the things that this global crisis has exposed is, in fact,
the shallowness of our economy. What we have seen is the erosion of our
industrial capacity over the last 15 years. When we go forward, we have to
put emphasis on how we not only save our industrial capacity but also build
it over the long term and generate local resilience in the process. Has the
Minister considered the long-term plan on how we go about building up that
local industrial capacity again? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Yes, government has commenced work on
an initiative to develop South Africa’s growth path in a way that is more
employment intensive. Hon members would have seen in the release of the
government’s Medium-Term Strategic Framework a new set of challenges and
actions that government is committed to. In this work, we seem to, firstly,
identify ways in the economy in which more people can be employed. For
example, how do we increase the labour intensity in the design of those
programmes?

Secondly, how do we ensure that the capital allocated flows to the most
labour intensive part of the economy? For example, do we put incentives up
that stimulate investment in capital intensive programmes that generate low
employment economic activities, or we do the opposite?

Now, this is complex work. If there were easy answers, then all countries
across the world would implement them immediately. So, I hope we will be
able to report after the completion of this work. It’s officially in the
programme of action, and was publicly announced by the government.

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, and hon Minister, thanks for your responses. As
the IFP we welcome the infrastructure programme. But what we need to know
the hon Minister will motivate that more money be spent on basic
infrastructure in our country, especially when it comes to the
rehabilitation of water reticulation systems. Eskom will have a problem
that we know is a historical problem, but people need basic delivery.
Therefore, we need to ensure that the basic infrastructure is rehabilitated
and that more money goes into it.

My next question is related to subsection 3, and here, in particular, I
refer to the textile industry with cheap imports of goods. Does this
framework agreement protect the workers who are involved in the textile
industry? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Regarding the first question of basic
infrastructure, yes, we agree that it is important, but I would also like
to highlight the importance of economic infrastructure. We have to lay the
foundation for long-term growth as much as we deal with the immediate and
urgent challenges of social delivery. So, the investment that government is
making in energy and transport infrastructure is absolutely vital for
balanced economic development, and for addressing the challenges of
poverty.

In relation to the question of trade policy and distress sectors, the
framework agreement sets out a policy direction. It is up to companies and
trade unions to use the provisions of the law to apply for the necessary
relief. There have been applications for relief which have gone to the
International Trade Administration Commission. It has applied itself to the
matter and made recommendations to the Minister of Trade and Industry who
decides on these matters. It’s in the public domain that, in fact, parties
in the clothing and textile sector, including employers and trade unions,
have made applications, and these matters are receiving the necessary
attention.

      Minister’s intentions regarding migration of PBMR into Eskom, and
 facilitation of nuclear partnership and nuclear energy programme for Eskom

112.  Ms M P Mentor (ANC) asked the Minister of Public Enterprises:


      (1)   Whether she intends migrating the pebble bed modular reactor
           (PBMR) into Eskom as the main nuclear energy generator; if not,
           why not; if so,


      (2)   whether her department will consider facilitating a nuclear
           partnership and a nuclear energy programme for Eskom within the
           country and abroad; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                       NO1448E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, the Pebble Bed Modular
Reactor, PBMR, business model is in the process of being revised in light
of the current global economic conditions and also because of the pressures
placed on the fiscus. It is expected that this will be finalised during the
course of this year.

There is consensus though that the highly specialised and sought after
human resources and intellectual property that have been developed within
the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, PBMR, are of significant value to the
country and it must be retained. This is especially important in light of
the country’s intended future pressurised water reactor nuclear procurement
and the build programme. The capacity developed in terms of human resources
in the PBMR can undoubtedly be leveraged to fast-track and reduce the risk
of nuclear build and localisation.

In response to the second question, as directed by Cabinet at the end of
2008, a government task team is working on the framework for the
procurement of a fleet of nuclear reactors through strategic partnership
and the associated localisation of the advanced manufacturing of the
components as well as the implications in terms of government’s policy.
This work is well underway, and we should be able to provide some clarity
on the outcome of the work by the end of the year, as promised, and map the
way forward.

Ms M P MENTOR: Chairperson, I will make two follow-ups, because there are
two questions. With regard to the first question, will the Minister take
steps to ensure that she prevents the possible skills flight or brain drain
on the part of the expertise at the Pebble Bed Module Reactor that might
occur because of uncertainty?

With regard to the second question, in line with the industrial policy
framework within which manufacturing is a key focal point for economic
development, will the Minister ensure that all state-owned enterprises
interact with the Department of Trade and Industry and get ready for the
manufacturing of all key components that would become necessary for the
nuclear project in order to continue to stimulate the economy and avoid
importing such components? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, thank you for the
question. One of the benefits of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, PBMR, has
been that we, as government, were able to leverage the nuclear skills and
capabilities that were in the country after apartheid. These people have
been instrumental in building up the PBMR model, and have also been
instrumental in building a new generation of nuclear engineers in the
country.

For those who are interested, if you go to North West University, there is
a training facility that was specifically designed and set up by these
nuclear engineers of the past for nuclear engineers in the country. Every
country in the world is going to have to face the possibility of going
nuclear because of the clean energy requirements. We are very fortunate in
this country that we have been able to shore up a considerable nuclear
skills capability in this country, and I say to my colleague, most
definitely, these people’ skills and abilities will be retained in this
country. We need them.

In terms of nuclear build, Eskom embarked on a nuclear procurement process
the last 18 months or so. We did not then go ahead to procure, but in the
process an enormous amount was learnt about the procurement of nuclear
capability. In addition to that, there are the localisation components, and
we will still be going further with regard to that. One of the issues that
we do need to address is that, if you are going to build up any major
advanced manufacturing capability, you have to make sure that there is
sufficient procurement within a country to warrant the kind of investment
in significantly advanced manufacturing capability. That is why the
possibility of a fleet of nuclear reactors is more beneficial than just one
simple nuclear reactor, because it gives us the ground basis for going
forward.

Obviously, that nuclear engineering capability is then used to run the
nuclear generators to go forward. May I also add that the Nuclear Energy
Corporation of South Africa, Necsa, itself, is now the world’s only
producer and exporter of medical isotopes in the country, and we were able
to do this because of our nuclear engineering capabilities. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms E M COLEMAN: Chairperson, my question is related to the previous
question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you.

Mr P D DEXTER: Chairperson, I must say that, listening to the Minister, the
process of procuring and then stopping the procurement of a nuclear reactor
was a way to learn how to procure, and that was a very expensive way to go
about it. Nonetheless, I have two questions to the Minister. The first one
is, whether government actually has an intention to invest in conventional
nuclear energy; and if so, when will we see the results of this? The delays
in Eskom’s build programme clearly indicate that if government does intend
doing this, there is no fixed timeframe, and I think without that it really
is of no use to the economy.

Secondly, when will a Pebble Bed Modular Reactor be built, if ever; and if
so, when?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: As I indicated in the second part to my
question, there is a government task team whose task is specifically to
work on the framework for the procurement of a fleet of nuclear reactors.
So we are in the process of doing that procurement on the pebble bed, which
are smaller nuclear reactors that are much more flexible. It’s a very
different thing to the high-powered third-generation nuclear power reactors
that we’ve been looking at. Yes, government is committed to that. We have
to, in terms of our base load, invest in nuclear energy. So we will be
going forward.

In addition to that, government has to look at its energy mix. It is not
only nuclear; it is sustainable energy as well. We are building Kusile and
Medupi Power Stations, but we all know that we cannot just be coal-reliant.
We have to look at a complete range of energy.

Whether the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, PBMR, will ever be built, the
Chinese are engaged in the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor industry. They are
going full-steam ahead and they will use it to supplement it as most people
would. For us, we are facing major fiscal constraints at the moment. That
does not mean that we will shut down the PBMR at all, but it does mean that
we cannot go ahead at the pace that we would have wanted to on the matter.

We have been submitting and are engaged with the Americans’ programme of
new generation nuclear power, and have been engaged with some of the
testing of the facilities for the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor. You would
have seen that we are also engaged with the Russians. They are going to
test some of the things that we have been doing.

We, as South Africa, are still on the cutting edge of that nuclear
technology, but the pebble bed is not going to be the primary base of our
nuclear buy. Our primary base pebble bed is very good for heat process
work, not just for the generation of electricity. Ours would be looking at
second to third-generation nuclear generation. Thank you.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, Minister, I disagree with you. This experiment
of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, PBMR, nuclear was rejected by Germany
who initiated this project. PBMR struggles to get international funding and
partnership, and it will cost the taxpayer in South Africa R80 billion to
generate a possible only 165MW over six years.

You also requested Parliament in August 2009 for an extension regarding the
submission of the PBMR 2009 annual report to avoid a qualified audit
report. There appears to be no fixed policy with regard to the direction of
PBMR. Originally, the PBMR was established in 1999 with the intention to
develop and market small-scale high temperature reactors both locally and
internationally. Then earlier this year, PBMR redesigned itself from the
original concept as a single direct cycle electricity-generating machine
that would use helium to power a gas turbine to a more flexible machine.
Now it seems as if PBMR is not sure about its own future. What is the way
forward or should we expect a repeat of the uncertainty that has
characterised the implementation of this project? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, I don’t know, but would
like to discuss with Dr Van Dyk the amount of R80 billion. I know that
government’s commitment at this stage has been R8 billion, but perhaps lets
look at those figures and I’d like to compare your estimation on that.

Definitely, I would like to agree with everyone here that the future of the
PBMR is of concern to all South Africans. As I said in my question, the
model is in the process of being revised in light of the current economic
situation and the restraints on the fiscus. That is why we have asked for
postponement of the Annual General Meeting, AGM, because we want to engage
in a serious review of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, PBMR, programme. We
will be coming to Parliament and to the AGM with a better understanding of
that particular programme.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, Minister, has your department been involved in
prioritising and interrogating issues around waste management and other
security concerns; and have community concerns been thoroughly investigated
and engaged from the perspective of public enterprises? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Our department is really not
responsible for waste management. That falls under the Department of
Energy. But let me just say in respect of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor,
PBMR, perspective, it is regarded as possibly the safest of the nuclear
reactors, because its technology means it cannot go into a meltdown. So,
from that perspective it is regarded as safer than anything else.

In terms of waste management, obviously there is waste generated at
Koeberg, and there is medium-risk waste that is sited further away in the
Northern Cape. This site is very far away from any local community. I think
we have to distinguish between concerns that are raised by residents who
live around Pelindaba – and I don’t think many of them are well founded —
and concerns around waste management, which is in a very remote area and
subjected to international protocols. It is not high-risk waste that is
stored there, but simply medium-risk waste.
  Steps taken to promote export opportunities for agricultural products at
           competitive prices and to protect local grain producers

94.   Dr L L BOSMAN (DA) asked the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and
      Fisheries:

      (1)   Whether her department has taken any steps to (a) promote export
            opportunities for agricultural products and (b) ensure
            competitive prices for these products on global markets; if
            not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what steps;


      (2)   whether any mechanisms are used by her department to protect
            local grain producers from competing against the importation of
            highly subsidised products from abroad; if not, why not; if so,
            what are the relevant
           details?                                                 NO1408E


The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, the
Department of Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries works closely with the
Department of Trade and Industry on the agricultural export promotion
drives. We hope to work even closer on export promotion for agricultural
products.

Since the phasing out of export subsidy schemes, like the General Export
Incentive Scheme of the Department of Trade and Industry, the government
does not subsidise exports or prices in any distorting way. There are no
direct interventions to ensure that prices are internationally competitive.


The Department of Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries has been working very
hard for a number of years to lobby international forums to motivate for
the elimination of export subsidies because of its distorting effects on
trade. The removal of these subsidies will ensure that our products compete
on a fair basis. Direct export subsidies will be removed only by 2013, if
the Doha Round concludes, and other production subsidies that could result
in unfair competition will be reduced.

It is also important to acknowledge that the global trading system is
unfair and inequitable, particularly with regard to agricultural products.
Trade remedies offer only limited possibilities. The real challenge is to
continue to campaign against unfair trade rules. Both the United States and
the European Union have recently reinstated export subsidies on dairy
products. Thank you.

Dr L L BOSMAN: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Minister for the
answer. I think the hon Minister will understand that the local wheat
production industry has decreased, in terms of the area planted, by 52,7%
since 1997, due to these uncompetitive prices and the scenario sketched.

The question is: Is the Minister considering introducing an import tariff
in line with the World Trade Organisation, WTO, Rules, which she has just
mentioned, to stimulate local wheat production for South Africa to become
self-sufficient again?

The import levy system used by government before 2003 imposed levies of up
to 34%, while thereafter it was replaced by an import tariff which varied
between zero and 2,32%, which resulted in huge losses to producers and
consequently also a decline in the production of wheat.

Due to this decline in production, South Africa currently imports 1 million
tons of low-grade wheat, resulting in the industry losing local producers,
thousands of job opportunities, as well as hard-earned foreign exchange.
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, the
farmers and farm organisations have, over a number of years, approached the
International Trade and Administration Commission, Itac, where they
experienced unfair trade, and the commission has always investigated such
requests.

The wheat industry has recently approached the Minister of Trade and
Industry as well as the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
regarding the possibility of import tariffs to stimulate the wheat
industry. We have invited the organisation to apply and put their request
in writing in order to be considered.

We, as the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, also
developed an Agricultural Tariff Policy Framework for consideration by the
DTI at its International Trade and Administration Commission. We are, in
particular, looking at the application of a tariff policy on agricultural
products. Thank you.

Mr M N PHALISO: Chairperson, regarding the Minister’s response to question
1(a), I would, firstly, like to ask the hon the Minister what the role of
the National Agricultural Marketing Council is.

Secondly, arising further from the hon the Minister’s reply to 1(b), there
are commodities which are being imported from countries which are highly
subsidised. Yet, there are no import tariffs and our emergent sector needs
to be protected against cheap imports.

What measures do the hon the Minister’s department and other departments
have in place? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, I would
like to thank the hon Phaliso for the question.

The Agricultural Marketing Council assists the Department of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries in ensuring that all sectors in the industry, as
well as all commodity sectors, have access to equitable shares in the
agricultural marketing sector. The department has been working quite
closely with the Agricultural Marketing Council to ensure that historically
disadvantaged farmers or black farmers have equal access to markets.

However, we are compromised by countries which are highly subsidising their
agricultural products. As I have previously expressed, we are working with
the Department of Trade and Industry in our application of trade policy on
all agricultural products. Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Chairperson, I’m sure that we would accept the explanation
that the Minister has given to us with regard to the cushioning of some of
these produce, especially grain.

Firstly, we would actually like the Minister to explain exactly which of
the other agricultural produce – except for grain – are actually affected
by these heavily subsidised importations.

Secondly, in South Africa we are beginning to experience a situation with
regard to agriculture where we are importing more than we are exporting. It
means therefore that agriculture is shrinking. Is there any strategy in
place to revive and reinforce agriculture in South Africa so that it
becomes self-sufficient? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, the
product that I can immediately speak of, off the cuff, is the importation
of sugar from Swaziland. Swaziland produces sugar at a price that is hugely
reduced in comparison to South Africa, and imports of sugar from Swaziland
thus happen to be far cheaper.

The situation in our country, as of the end of last year, including the
first quarter of this year, showed a net decline in agricultural production
by more than 17%. Our country has also, for the first time, recorded being
a net importer of food instead of being a net exporter of food.

The cost of production in agriculture is extremely high. It is this type of
production costs that we are looking at in terms of the industry sector
organisations, as well as the Department of Trade and Industry.

Mitigating the high production costs is a very challenging situation for
us. It is particularly challenging when it comes to production costs for
our historically disadvantaged farmers. It is one of the reasons why a
number of farms, which were sold via the Land Bank, could not repay their
debt burden. It is now the department’s programme of action to intervene
with regard to these distressed farms, particularly when it comes to
production capital or production loans. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the hon Minister has been quoted as saying that
South Africa was spearheading a debate in Africa on the decommodification
of basic foodstuffs. So, I was wondering if the hon Minister could give us
some idea, from the department’s point of view, of what decommodification
of basic foodstuffs actually means, what the benefits are and where the
challenges lie. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, the
decommodification of basic foodstuffs is in line with the African Union as
well the Southern African Development Community’s emphasis on food security
and food sovereignty.

We are specifically looking at the development of drought-resistant seeds
for basic foodstuffs like maize, sugar and wheat. We then look at the
tariffs which are imposed on these foodstuffs and how the tariffs make
these foodstuffs totally too expensive and beyond the reach of the general
working class population in Africa. So, when it comes to decommodification,
the discussion and the debate is still ongoing. I thank you.

  Steps to ensure financial accountability from new Board and management of
           the SABC, as a politically unbiased public broadcaster

101.  Ms J D Kilian (Cope) asked the Minister of Communications:

      (1)   Whether his department intends taking any steps to ensure
           financial accountability from the new Board and management of
           the SA Broadcasting Corporation (SABC); if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether he will take any steps to ensure that the SABC carries
           out its mandate as an independent, politically unbiased public
           broadcaster; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                          NO1434E

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, the answer to the first
question is as follows: The Department of Communications intends taking
additional steps to ensure financial accountability from the new board and
management of the South African Broadcasting Corporation, SABC. These will
be based on the provisions of the Broadcasting Act of 1999 and the Public
Finance Management Act of 1999, the relevant treasury regulations, the
Articles of Association for the SABC, and the Shareholder Compact agreed
upon annually with the SABC. All of which define specific roles for the
Ministers, directors-general and Parliament regarding financial
accountability and oversight. I am committed to ensuring adherence to these
principles, as mentioned, and I will also ensure that the SABC board
adheres to the principles of good corporate governance outlined in the King
III report.

The specific steps the department intends to take are as follows: Firstly,
more regular meetings between the SABC board and management and the
department; secondly, regular meetings between the department and the SABC
to discuss the SABC’s quarterly performance report, both financial and
nonfinancial; thirdly, more regular financial reporting to the department,
that is quarterly financial statements and monthly management accounts;
fourthly, regular reports to the department from the audit and/or risk
committees; and, fifthly, access to all internal audit reports of the SABC.
The pending reports from the Auditor-General and the SABC interim board, as
well as the SABC task team, will also indicate what steps need to be taken.

My answer to the second question is that it should be noted that the news
editor of the SABC is always appointed by the board of the SABC without any
interference or influence from or by the Minister. In addition, the
Broadcasting Act of 1999, specifically protects the SABC’s editorial
independence. Section 6(3) states:

    In terms of the Charter, the Corporation will, in pursuit of its
    objectives and in exercise of its powers, enjoy freedom of expression
    and journalistic creativity and programming independence.

Section 6(2) of the Act gives the responsibility of ensuring compliance
with the Charter of the SABC to the Independent Communications Authority of
South Africa, Icasa. Furthermore, the Shareholder Compact shall also
provide that the corporation adheres to all the provisions of the
Broadcasting Act, including the ones on the independence of the SABC. The
Department of Communications and I are committed to the principle of
editorial independence and freedom of expression as enshrined in the
Constitution of South Africa. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Minister, unfortunately your time
has expired. I gave you an extra one minute for your maiden speech, but it
has expired.

Ms J D KILIAN: Chairperson, firstly, let me say that we are particularly
happy, as Cope, that the Minister has expressed his firm support for an
independent news bulletin and coverage. However, we would like to make two
points as far as this is concerned.

Firstly, there is a concern that, as a result of very eager participation
by the ruling alliance in the nomination of the board process, there is a
perception that many of the candidates have very straight links with the
ANC at very high levels, and it will, therefore, be particularly important
for the Minister to prove that he will make sure that there will be no
further political interference.

By way of indication, would he support an independent investigation by an
independent agency into news coverage that is being portrayed on the news
bulletins, as well as the daily news activity programmes, to ensure that
there is equitable coverage of all political parties in South Africa?

Secondly, will he ... [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: On a point of order: Chairperson, I want it to be clarified
to the House that we only have one ruling party, which is the ANC. We don’t
have what is called “the ruling alliance” in South Africa.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): It is not a point of order. Thank
you very much.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, as I said, we will jealously
guard the independence of the SABC, its news and editorial policy. We will
support any measure that seeks to ensure that this happens. I thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, let me thank the hon Minister for the responses.
Except for coverage during the election debates on a Sunday evening, which
were fair in terms of time representation, it is common knowledge that the
ruling party of this country gets more time than any other party on news
coverage.
Will the hon Minister be able to obtain and furnish this House with
statistics of times that different political parties receive in the news
broadcast in a period of, say, six months?

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, the SABC and its board are
appointed by this Assembly. If there are any doubts as to its editorial
independence or bias in the news, they are summoned to this Assembly and to
the relevant portfolio committee to answer and that should be explored. We,
from the point of view of the Department, will ensure, as I indicated,
greater monitoring of the SABC, as well as of its editorial independence
going forward. Thank you.

Ms M R MORUTOA: Chairperson, thank you Minister for the commendable efforts
with regard to ensuring sound corporate governance and financial
accountability within the SABC. We are satisfied that the Ministry of
Communications supports an independent and politically unbiased public
broadcaster.

However, we need more clarity on the financial model proposed for the SABC
in the intended Public Service Broadcasting Bill. Thank you very much.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, in the Bill it is proposed
that a public service broadcasting fund be established. Money paid to this
fund will come from, amongst others, public service broadcasting levies
collected in terms of the Income Tax Act of 1962, money appropriated by
Parliament, money accruing to the public service broadcasting fund from any
other sources and contributions from business. [Interjections.]

We have tabled a Public Service Broadcasting Act for public discussion, and
it contains some of these provisions. The money from this fund will be
utilised for the purpose of international service divisions; to pay
subsidies to the media development and diversity agency; to subsidise
broadcasting licences; and any such measures and uses determined by the
Minister from time to time after consultation with the Minister of Finance.
I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order!

Mr N J VAN DEN BERG: Chairperson, I’m sure the Minister hasn’t got a
written reply to my question. [Laughter.] I’m sure about that. It’s very
easy to talk about independency and throw around a lot of words, but the
House would want to know what the Minister’s definition of independency is.
Is it the ANC’s version of independency or the real meaning of the word, as
the DA sees it? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, I don’t know through which
eyes or tainted spectacles the DA sees the issue of independence.
Independence is an objective term. It means that the broadcaster is free to
determine its own editorial policy without any interference from any
political party.

Ms M P MENTOR: Chairperson, on a point of order: There is no such thing as
“independency”. I would just like to point that out to hon Van Den Berg on
that side.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, grammar can be rectified
somewhere else.

 Strategies of Khula to deal with risk factors faced by commercial banks and
                      risks attached to loadable funds

120.  Mr A J Williams (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (a) How will Khula deal with (i) the risk factors faced by commercial
      banks and (ii) the high risks attached to loadable funds and (b) how
      will Khula’s strategies differ from those used by commercial banks?
                             NO1459E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, the answer to (a)(i) is
that the risks that Khula is facing are essentially the same as those faced
by any other lending institutions. Khula, therefore, needs to ensure that
its credit passing and collection are in line with the lending criteria and
benchmarked against similar development finance institutions. Khula does
however understand the requirements of small businesses, perhaps even
better than many other financiers. It is more sensitive to the requirements
of small businesses and the problems that may result in them not being able
to meet payment obligations.

The answer to (a) (ii) is that Khula does not presently make use of
loadable funds.

The answer to (b) is that Khula is a development finance institution
committed to providing finance to small and medium-sized enterprises, SMEs,
particularly those that are unable to borrow from banks. Khula’s risk
appetite is therefore different to that of commercial banks. It is prepared
to fund businesses that experience problems obtaining bank finance, namely
start-up businesses; business in early phases of expansion; businesses that
cannot provide collateral for their loans; and businesses requiring loans
of less than half-a-million rand. Its priority target market includes
businesses owned by women and businesses in the less economically developed
provinces.

During the 2008-09 financial year, Khula disbursed R281 million to 2 829
SMEs, of which 36% were in targeted provinces. The main criteria Khula uses
to determine whether it will lend to a small business is to evaluate
whether the business will be sustainable. If necessary, it will provide
mentorship to support and assist business owners in becoming established.
Thank you.
Mr S J NJIKELANA: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Minister for his
illustrative answer.

Now, some banks such as Absa have revised their policy on guarantees issued
by Khula to finance start-up businesses. The guarantee scheme offers up to
R1 million in finance, but banks are unfortunately not willing to go that
far. What plan of action does Khula have to close the gap, considering the
economic crisis? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I think hon Njikelana is
quite right that, despite the provision of guarantees, this has not
leveraged from banks the desirable amount of lending to small businesses,
particularly small businesses among historically disadvantaged people. For
that reason, while we are not abandoning the guarantee programme, we are
actually launching Khula as a direct retail operation. So, it is going to
move from being a wholesaler working through other intermediaries to
providing direct services to customers. By the end of this year or early
next year, the first phases of the roll-out of the Khula Direct launch
should be completed.

At the same time, and in the context of a number of initiatives, including
the continued discussions around the Financial Sector Charter, we are
trying to press the commercial banks to increase their lending to small
enterprises. It is however the category of between R50 000 and R500 000
that is a particularly hard nut to crack, but that is precisely the area
where there are real opportunities for sustainable livelihoods to be
created. That is why we are going to have to enhance the role of Khula.
Thank you.

Mnr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Voorsitter, ek wil die agb Minister bedank vir
sy verwysing na die uitbreiding van Khula Finance na Khula Direct. Dit word
voorgehou as ’n antwoord op die finansieringsprobleme van
kleinsakeondernemings.

Met betrekking tot die vestiging van Khula Direct het die agb Minister nou
gesê dat dit moontlik aan die einde van die jaar sal geskied. In die lig
daarvan dat die Kabinet reeds in 2008 verlof verleen het vir die stigting
van Khula Direct, kan die agb Minister meer spesifiek wees?

Eerstens, hoe ver is daar gevorder met die implementering van Khula Direct,
en wanneer sal die eerste entrepreneurs onder hierdie skema gehelp word?

Tweedens, wat is die begroting vir Khula Direct en die vestiging van
hierdie program?

Derdens, hoe gaan die agb Minister verseker dat die fondse effektief
aangewend word sodat die mees verdienstelike ondernemings voorrang sal
geniet? Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Chairperson, I want to thank the hon Minister
for referring to the expansion of Khula Finance to Khula Direct. It is
proffered as an answer to the funding problems that small businesses
experience.

With regard to the roll-out of Khula Direct, the hon Minister announced
here that it would probably take place at the end of the year. In light of
the fact that the Cabinet granted permission for the establishment of Khula
Direct in 2008 already, could the hon Minister be more specific?

Firstly, what progress has been made with regard to the implementation of
Khula Direct, and when will the first entrepreneurs be assisted under this
scheme?

Secondly, what is the budget for Khula Direct and the roll-out of this
programme?

Thirdly, how will the hon Minister ensure that the funds are utilised
effectively so that the most deserving enterprises receive preference?
Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I agree that, in terms of
the timetable, we have been talking about Khula Direct for a while. One of
the reasons we have had a bit of a delay was that we had to transition to a
new CEO or managing director, MD, and that the new MD took his post on 9
July. Then there is also the question of the board. Notwithstanding those,
I think we envisage that the roll-out will hopefully begin before the end
of the year, if not, then early next year.

As far as the budget is concerned, even if I had the figures at my
fingertips – which I don’t, and that’s not what was asked in the question –
I’m afraid that I am not at liberty to disclose what budget decisions are
going to be, ahead of the budget itself. So I cannot give any indication of
that.

I want to say that we are aiming at the provision of direct access to the
public. Small businesses that need finance should be able to approach the
institution directly and make their case directly – that is what Khula
Direct is all about - instead of having to operate through NGOs,
intermediaries or through the banks. Now, those routes will still be
available, but we think that Khula Direct will give greater access to the
public. Of course, we are looking at this as an expanding programme as we
move ahead. Thank you.

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Chairperson, the IFP believes that successful small
businesses and co-operatives are essential to the development and growth of
our economy, especially in the current economic conditions. My question to
the hon the Minister is whether there has been an increase in nonpayment
during this period and whether Khula has measures in place to assist their
customers who are struggling to pay back their loans. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I think that question is
actually one the hon member should consider putting down for a more
detailed answer.

I don’t have the figures with me right now, but I think it is probably
worth putting that down as a real question, so that we can see the extent
of this.

I am not particularly aware that there is a major emergency, but I do have
a sense – as I suppose many hon members do – that small businesses are
probably disproportionately affected by the crisis. I have been trying to
see what we can do to find out the extent of this but, as far as I am
aware, it is not particularly evident in defaults to Khula, but I do think
it would be worth putting down the question so that we can find out the
exact picture. Thank you.

Mr P D DEXTER: Chairperson, despite what the hon Minister says, all the
evidence seems to bear out that the terms that Khula gives are as onerous
as those of private institutions, that the defaults are as high as those
experienced by private lenders, and that the success rates – in terms of
the performance of the companies – are as low. How will direct lending
change this reality?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I don’t think that direct
lending is a magic bullet; I think there are some very important debates
about development finance institutions which we still have to have.

If we want institutions like Khula to take more risk – in particular in a
sector where the rate of survival of small businesses, from start-up to
surviving the first year, is only about 50% - are we then willing to
address the issues of financing in that kind of context? I think those are
some of the bigger debates.

Direct lending itself will improve access to the products. Some small
businesses obviously seek finance through intermediaries, but then the
intermediaries also take their cut.

Some of the work, in particular work done by intermediaries through the
banks, has been through the guarantee scheme. We had a long debate with the
banks and at the end of the day the banks said that they did not want
guarantees against defaults; they actually wanted other customers that they
wanted to support. I think that indicates that there is a failure in the
market and that there is a gap that Khula needs to fill progressively on an
improved basis. Thank you.

       Investigation into alleged inhumane treatment of farmworkers in
                                Stellenbosch

125.  Mrs N M Twala (ANC) asked the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and
      Fisheries:

      Whether, with reference to a protest by farmworkers outside Parliament
      recently, she or her department has conducted any investigation into
      the alleged inhumane treatment of farmworkers in Stellenbosch; if not,
      why not; if so, what were the findings of the investigation?
                  NO1465E

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, yes, the
department is aware of the farmworkers’ protest outside Parliament
recently. Our mandate as the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries is to liberate black people in general and African people in
particular. Most of the farmworkers who are affected are the black
majority, the poorest of the poor and rural women to be exact.

The national Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries is working
with the Western Cape department. They have been requested to liaise with
relevant farmworker organisations to investigate where there are
allegations against any commercial farmer, be it in the country or in
Stellenbosch.

We are of the opinion that when we do meet with the Food and Allied Workers
Union, Fawu, the Department of Labour, as well as the Department of Rural
Development and Land Reform, we will have a summit to address the plight of
farmworkers. We are not asking for something that is impossible, but we are
asking for something that is within reach. For now we think we are moving
very slowly in this regard. We think we should be more decisive around
protecting the rights of farmworkers.

As Parliament, we thank the member for providing a strategic direction and
for developing a critical opportunity for us to develop this sector for
farmworkers in agriculture. Thank you.

Ms N M TWALA: Chairperson, thank you Minister for your elaborate response.
Our concern has been about the abuse by farmers that has been taking place
on farms. We are happy that there are steps that have been taken. Thank
you.

Mnr P J C PRETORIUS: Minister, ons glo dis verkeerd om Stellenbosch in
hierdie geval uit te sonder. Stellenbosch verskil nie van die res van die
land nie.

Huisvesting is sekerlik een van die kernkwessies wat hier ter sprake is.
Terwyl dit die regering se grondwetlike verantwoordelikheid is om toegang
tot voldoende huisvesting vir almal te verseker, is die vraag of die
regering die afgelope jare sy plig nagekom het om behuising vir
plaaswerkers te voorsien. Die vraag is ook in watter mate boere finansieel
ondersteun was om behuising vir plaaswerkers te voorsien. Indien nie, hoe
beplan die regering om toekomstige huisvesting vir plaaswerkers te
verseker, ter bevrediging van boere sowel as plaaswerkers? Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J C Pretorius: Hon Minister, we believe it is wrong in this case to
single out Stellenbosch. Stellenbosch does not differ from the rest of the
country.

Housing is surely one of the key issues that is relevant here. Whilst it is
the government’s constitutional obligation to ensure access to adequate
housing for all, the question remains whether the government has fulfilled
its obligation to provide housing to farmworkers in recent years. The
question is also to what extent farmers were supported financially to
provide housing to farmworkers. If not, how does the government intend to
ensure housing for farmworkers in the future, to the satisfaction of
farmers as well as farmworkers? I thank you.]

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, I have
explained that we are looking at all farmworkers in the country. But since
the protest was from farmworkers in the Stellenbosch area, we are focusing
on this area. We agree that Stellenbosch does not differ from other areas.
At least for now the member is acknowledging that there is abuse. In the
past, they even refused to acknowledge that such abuse existed. I am glad
that at last the member is acknowledging that there is abuse. [Applause.]
About the development of housing on farms, a farm happens to be private
property. The state has no legal opportunity to develop state housing on
private property unless farmers allow a certain section of the farm to be
rezoned as housing land. The state has no legal right to develop housing on
the land of the private property of farm owners. Up until now, particularly
white farm owners have been reluctant to give up land for the development
of housing by the state.

The approach we are developing now with the Minister of Human Settlements
is to request different organisations that organise farm owners to allow us
to cordon off and to rezone a piece of land from farms which are privately
owned to ensure that we can establish housing villages which will be in the
form of eco-villages for farmworkers. I think that the state has had no
opportunity to do this. Where there is private property, there is limited
opportunity available for the state to intervene. You would notice that
where there were farm schools, those farm schools were treated as public
schools on private property. The state had limited opportunity to even
renovate those schools since they belonged to the owner of the farm as
private property. [Interjections.] Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Minister, I wanted to ask you whether the department has
plans to create agrivillages in the Stellenbosch area. Obviously, from what
you are saying, you’ve moved in that direction. How will this address the
abuse of farmworkers?

Obviously it is much easier to deal with abuse if it is specified and if we
know what is classified as abuse. Do you foresee a situation where
farmworkers will ever be able to access something like the Commission for
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, CCMA, or some other mediation
process? What thoughts have gone along these lines, and how do you see that
developing? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, thanks to
the hon Dudley for once again acknowledging that there is a problem of
abuse of farmworkers. I have already spoken about agrivillages.

Yes, farmworkers do have access to the Commission for Conciliation,
Mediation and Arbitration, CCMA, but they are more often than not denied
this access because of their low standard of living and low opportunities.
This is a matter that we are developing with the Department of Labour to
ensure that where there are cases that should be reaching CCMA, we assist
farmworkers through legal aid.

We are also looking at the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs to investigate the opportunities of having community
development workers assisting farmworkers when it comes to their rights.
The basic rights of farmworkers are still being undermined. The rights of
farmworkers are human rights which are being neglected. When we speak about
human rights, we often neglect to mention the rights of farmworkers. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Chairperson, I am happy that the Minister mentioned that
they are working together with the Department of Labour and its Minister. I
just wonder whether the rescue package that the Minister explained is also
applicable to farmworkers in terms of their plight on the farms. Maybe the
Minister must comment on this issue.

The second issue I want to mention is the matter of abuse. Is the abuse of
farmworkers viewed in a very serious light? If abuse has happened, we would
like to see a proper investigation around what actually happened to that
particular farmworker. We want to know the facts about it.

More importantly, I am also happy that the Minister mentioned that they are
looking at this problem nationally. We wonder whether the Minister will
accept the issue of actually having a proper independent investigation,
because farmworkers are at the heart of nation-building as well. This is an
issue about having a commission to make sure that we understand the whole
problem as a country and understand how to deal with these particular
instances - an independent commission that government will put together to
investigate this matter holistically and then table its findings. Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, the Human
Rights Commission and the Department of Police have been included in this
initial investigation. We do not have a rescue package for farmworkers, but
we have one for historically disadvantaged farmers who took loans through
the Land Bank. The rescue package for now pertains specifically to the Land
Bank farms that are in distress.

Once we have done our preliminary findings, we will then be able to appoint
a commission which will then be able to work with specific instructions and
with a particular mandate. We cannot just immediately and summarily appoint
a commission without a specific mandate. We are convinced that such a
commission is required. I do not think that after 15 years we can still say
that this evil of abuse against the poorest of the poor is still being
perpetuated. I thank you. [Applause.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall
move at the next sitting:
   That this House –


   (1)      notes that –


        (a) the Department of Environmental Affairs has reported that
            abalone poaching has reached a crisis point; and


          b) large sections of our coast are not monitored and that the
             Department has lost control;


     2) requests the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs to
        immediately start an investigation to establish why this state of
        affairs occur and take immediate steps to remedy it.


Mr K S MUBU: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion:

   That this House debates South Africa’s position on the creation of united
   states of Africa as currently under discussion at the African Union, and
   as advocated by President Muammar Gaddafi of Libya in his famous book,
   The Green Book.

Mr D A KGANARE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of this House, I will move the following motion:

   That this House –
     1) notes that –

        (a)      pressure has been placed on one of the strong candidates
              for appointment as the chief executive officer of Transnet;
              and


           b) the preferred candidate of the Minister of Justice and
              Constitutional Development and the Minister of Communications
              is facing disciplinary action for allegedly interfering in
              two contracts, including one that has links with the Minister
              of Communication, Mr Siphiwe Nyanda; and


      2) request the Minister of Public Enterprises to ensure that the
         appointment of the chief executive officer of Transnet is based on
         transparent criteria to ensure that the best suitable candidate is
         appointed rather than a favourite candidate of the SACP-led ANC
         Government.


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, the Speaker ruled that
notices for motion should be as brief as possible, and people are expanding
on that particular issue unnecessary. But thank you, nonetheless.

Mr N J VAN DEN BERG: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move
the following motion:
   That this House –

      1) debates the wasteful expenditure incurred by the SABC in producing
         programmes that are not being broadcast; and


      2) the intention of the SABC not to produce any further local
         content. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    SOUTH AFRICAN HOMELESS WORLD CUP TEAM

                             (Draft resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes the presence in Parliament today of the South African team who
        just arrived back from Milan as the champions of the Homeless World
        Cup Tournament;


     2) further notes that the team competed against teams from 48 countries
        and beat Malawi 9-1 in the finals;

     3) congratulates those who are associated with this magnificent
        achievement, including the My Life Foundation and the South African
        Homeless Cup Steering Committee; and

     4) affirms that through their endeavours, these young people have shown
        us that adversity in life is no determinant of achievement or
        success, but that it is hard work and the passion to succeed that
        set winners and champions apart.

Agreed to.

                                LAYLATUL QADR

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House –

     1) notes that today is “Laylatul Qadr”, the culmination of the month-
        long fasting of Ramadan for the Muslim community, a day singled out
        for special worship and special blessings;


     2) further notes that tonight is also known as the night of power, and
        is regarded as the holiest night of the month of Ramadan during
        which the faithful seek pardon from Allah;
     3) acknowledges and thanks the Muslim community for their selfless
        contribution to charity during this period;

     4) wishes all Muslims across the country Eid Mubarak, and

     5) trusts that this festival will be one of joy, family reunion and
        thanksgiving.

Agreed to.

           PASSING OF NORMAN BORLAUG, FATHER OF “GREEN REVOLUTION”

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I move without notice:

  That the House –

     1) notes with sadness that agriculture pioneer and Nobel Prize
        recipient Norman Borlaug, also known as the father of the Green
        Revolution, has passed away;


     2) further notes that the Green Revolution helped food production more
        than double between 1960 and 1990, thereby averting a worldwide
        famine, saving hundreds of millions of lives in Asia, Africa, and
        Latin America;

     3) acknowledges that despite this massive contribution millions of
        people, including a large number of people within our own country,
        are still faced with hunger on a daily basis;

     4) calls for a Green Revolution within South Africa to turn this
        unnecessary situation around; and

     5) conveys its deepest sympathies to the family and friends of
        Professor Borlaug during this difficult time.

Agreed to.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:11.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
    (a)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Public  Investment
        Corporation Limited for 2008-2009,  including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2008-2009 [RP 59-2009].

2.    The Acting Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the  South  African  Council
        for  Educators  for  2008-2009,  including  the   Report   of   the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial  Statements  and  Performance
        Information for 2008-2009.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Management
        of Job Applicants with a Criminal Record in the Public Service  [RP
        20-2009].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee to Nominate a  Person  for  Appointment
     as Public Protector, dated 16 September 2009:

     The Ad Hoc Committee to Nominate a Person  for  Appointment  as  Public
     Protector was established on 25 June  2009.   The  Committee  held  its
     first meeting on 25 August 2009. The Committee  noted  that  more  than
     half of the nominations / applications received did not meet the  basic
     requirements as laid down in the Public Protector Act, 23 of 1994.  The
     Committee further noted that the advertised deadline of 8 May 2009  for
     the submission of nominations coincided with the  recent  national  and
     provincial elections. The Committee decided to extend the deadline  for
     nomination to 4 September 2009.

     The Committee shortlisted and interviewed the following 8 candidates:


     Mr Mhlaliseni Michael Mthembu
     Ms Thulisile Nomkhosi Madonsela
     Professor Mzamo Alexander Gumbi
     Advocate Linda Pienaar
     Advocate Audrey Elisa Mpofu
     Advocate Mamiki Thabitha Shai
     Advocate Mohammed Alli Chicktay
     Advocate Loyiso Khanyisa Bunye Mpumlwana


     Having considered and deliberated on the outcome of the interviews, the
     Committee unanimously recommends that Ms Thulisile  Nomkhosi  Madonsela
     be appointed as Public Protector.


     Report to be considered.


