---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 September 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-09-17
---

THURSDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

House Chairperson Mr K O Bapela took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs S P KOPANE: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the devastating effect of the breakdown of
  traditional family and other social support structures as a result of the
  HIV and Aids pandemic, and possible solutions to the problems faced by
  the growing number of child-headed households in our communities.

Mr K B MANAMELA: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
   That the House debates the current global crisis as an opportunity in the
   search of a just, humane and equitable world order – a world with greater
   security, peace dialogue and better equilibrium among all nations of the
   world.

Mr S J MASANGO: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the Expanded Public Works Programme and its effect
  on eradicating poverty, as it was initially intended to.

Mr M WATERS: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the logistical problems and personnel shortages
  hampering the roll-out of ARVs to people living with HIV and Aids, and
  possible solutions to ensure that the target set by the President is met.

   SOUTH AFRICAN DAVIS CUP TENNIS TEAM PLAYING IMPORTANT TIE AGAINST INDIA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairman, I move without notice:
  That the House –


  (1) notes that the South African Davis Cup tennis team is playing an all-
       important tie against India this weekend in Bloemfontein;


  (2) further notes the importance of this tie, as a victory would mean that
       South Africa will be able to rejoin the top 16 countries in the World
       Group;


  (3) acknowledges the hard work and dedication of team captain John-Laffnie
       de Jager, team members Rik de Voest, Kevin Anderson, Izak van der
       Merwe, and Raven Klaasen, supported by the experienced Wesley Moodie,
       and Jeff Coetzee in building up this squad;


  (4) trusts that they will do us proud, and put us back up in the ranks
       where we belong;


  (5) wishes them the best of luck; and


  (6) assures them of our undivided support.


Agreed to.

                            ICC CHAMPIONS TROPHY
                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

  (1) notes that from Tuesday, 22 September 2009, our country will be
       hosting the ICC Champions Trophy for the first time since its
       inception in 1998;


  (2) further notes that the ICC Champions Trophy is a One Day International
       (ODI) cricket tournament, and the Mini World Cup, as is popularly
       known, is the second biggest tournament after the “Cricket World
       Cup”;


  (3) recalls that sport is an integral part of reconstructing and
       developing a healthier society;


  (4) believes that youth cricket is all about enhanced fitness, team work
       and personal responsibility and that these are some of the qualities
       necessary for the challenging life;


  (5) further believes that the hosting of the tournament demonstrates the
       confidence the world community has in our country’s ability to host
       major international events;
  (6) extends its best wishes to the organising team, the participating
       teams and the ICC leadership; and


  (7) wishes our team, the Proteas, the best of luck in the tournament.

Agreed to.

                LAUNCH OF SOUTH AFRICAN SATELLITE SUMBANDILA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I move without
notice:

  That the House –


  (1) notes that today, Thursday, 17 September 2009, the South African
       satellite known as Sumbandila is expected to lift into space on a
       Russian Soyaz Rocket in Kazakhstan at 17:55 South African time;


  (2) further notes that, Sumbandila is the second satellite launched by
       South Africans, after SunSat 1, a modest satellite built by students
       and lecturers at Stellenbosch University in 1999;
  (3) acknowledges that the 81kg microsatellite, measuring 1m by 0,5m, is
       the product of a three-year satellite development programme
       commissioned by the Department of Science and Technology and
       implemented by Stellenbosch University’s engineering faculty;


  (4) believes that the data to be collected by the satellite will play a
       meaningful role in monitoring sea and land temperatures, clouds and
       rainfall, winds, sea levels, ice cover, vegetation cover and gases;


  (5) further believes that the data collected will be helpful in the
       management of natural disasters such as floods and fires; and


  (6) thanks SunSpace and Information Systems, the University of
       Stellenbosch and the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research’s
       Satellite Application Centre and others who contributed to making
       this project a success.

Agreed to.

                  GANG-RELATED VIOLENCE IN MITCHELLS PLAIN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G LEKGETHO (ANC): Chairperson, a 47-year-old father of three children,
confined to a wheelchair, was carelessly killed by thugs in an area
affected by drugs and gangs of Mitchells Plain just before midnight last
Friday. This hero of Cape Town paid the ultimate price of his life when he
left his wife Cheryl, family and house to voluntarily guard Lariat and
Tallyho Streets in his suburb of Westridge.

Mr Vincent Naidoo was an executive member of his street committee in the
Mitchells Plain community policing forum. Five months ago he started
voluntarily to guard the area against gang and drug-related activities. Mr
Naidoo and other residents were at a bonfire when thugs started wildly
shooting at them. Mr Naidoo was killed, and Michelle Gurling and Hassiem
Jansen were wounded.

The ANC hails Mr Naidoo, the wounded and all the people who have sacrificed
with their lives and who have sacrificed their personal time to curb
criminality. We hope his loved ones and the community will be consoled in
the knowledge that Mr Naidoo served his people and the country to the full.
We also bid the wounded a speedy recovery. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

               DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION OF NEW-GENERATION PRISONS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr J SELFE (DA): Chairperson, in his state of the nation addresses in 2005
and again in 2006, the then President, Thabo Mbeki, announced that eight
new-generation prisons would be constructed to alleviate overcrowding and
to provide the Department of Correctional Services with a better
opportunity to correct offending behaviour and to rehabilitate offenders.
Four years and seven months after the first announcement only one new-
generation prison is nearing completion and that one has been delayed by
one and a half years.

The prison construction saga has been a chapter of mismanagement. Prison
specifications and plans were drawn up and then withdrawn; money was
appropriated for their construction and then returned to the Treasury;
sites were identified and then abandoned; site works for the Nigel and
Leeuwkop facilities were commenced and then discontinued.

In 2007, the then Minister of Correctional Services, Ngconde Balfour,
announced that prisons would be constructed and run by the private sector
by way of a public-private partnership. Shortly after taking office, the
current Minister announced that she was reviewing this decision in order to
establish whether we would get “value for money”. This, after the Treasury
had already established that public-private partnerships were the most cost-
effective option and after a number of consortia had already submitted
tenders for the business at considerable cost.

We, in the committee, heard yesterday that 19 correctional centres
accommodate in excess of double the number of inmates they were designed
for. We need to get on with the construction of these prisons as a matter
of urgency. To delay or, worse still, to abandon this process will
irreparably damage the credibility of government. We have wasted enough
time and money already. A decision to go ahead must be made and made fast.
[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order.
This is a problem that is going to develop. Unless we stop it immediately,
it is going to get worse. We are here to make statements to the House, to
which Ministers are supposed to respond. Yet when I look across to the
benches where the Ministers are supposed to be sitting, I see a swathe of
blank spaces. If we are going to have meaningful debate in this House, then
these benches need to be filled. I would think, Mr Chairman, that you would
take this back to the presiding officers so that they enforce the authority
of this House and make sure that Ministers are in this House at the
appropriate time. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, member. Order! I have
already made the observation that statements are made and quite a number of
executive members are not in the House. We’ll indeed take up the matter
with the Speaker and follow it up with the Leader of Government Business.

                  ANTIRETROVIRAL AVAILABILITY IN FREE STATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Chairman, recently I stood up in this House to
express my deep concern and anxiety about the lack of certain medicines in
Free State public hospitals and clinics. If the President had been in this
House then, he would have certainly shared my concern. It has not been so
with members of his party on the other side who hackled me instead of
supporting me. Worse still, the hon Minister in the Presidency: National
Planning Commission, rising in response, declared to the House that what I
had said was old news. Unfortunately, the situation today is as I had
depicted it then.

The crisis started a while ago, but nevertheless remains an unresolved
crisis even now. The ARVs that were unavailable last year still remain
unavailable to queues of patients today. People who may have continued to
live are now going to die because of an administration that has gotten its
priorities wrong. It is immoral for the province to be spending R25 million
on Letlaka Communications to bring out a weekly newspaper to sing only the
praises of the premier and some of his MECs.

Furthermore, the province has allocated R45 million to the Mangaung African
Cultural Festival – Macufe - and this vast amount of money will be jived
away by the end of this month. Do people’s lives count for nothing? Is self-
promotion and self-gratification more important to the elite in the ruling
alliance than meeting the most urgent and dire needs of the people.

There is a clear moral choice to be made between what is nice to have and
what must be had and between spending on jiving and surviving. Macufe must
... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The Chief Whips should have informed
you that you only have two minutes to make a statement. Oh, it is one and
half minutes, not even two minutes.

                              SERVICE DELIVERY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M F TLAKE (ANC): Chairperson, service delivery and bringing facilities
and services to the areas where people reside is at the core of the ANC-led
government programme for the next five years. Once more, the ANC-led
government is upholding the values of respect and the protection of human
rights in order to give effect to the spirit and letter of the
Constitution.

On 28 August 2009, at Botshabelo Stadium in the Free State, the Minister of
Justice and Constitutional Development, Mr Jeff Radebe, designated all
magistrate courts as equality courts in order for them to be used as tools
for gender transformation and a means to redress gender-based violence, the
protection of victims of such violence and all other practices including
traditional, customary and religious practices that impair the dignity of
women, undermine equality between women and men as well as the dignity of
the girl-child.

We call on all South Africans, including ourselves and the courts, to
educate our constituencies about this Equality Act by raising public
awareness so as to enhance understanding and public participation in order
to enforce the principle, “Working together we can do more.” I thank you.
[Applause.]

                          VIOLENCE IN TAXI INDUSTRY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Hon Chairperson, violence in the taxi industry
has been a problem for some time now. We often read or hear about taxi
bosses being murdered, and this trend seems to be continuing with no end in
sight.

In Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal in particular there seems to be numerous
assassinations or assassination attempts on the lives of taxi owners, many
of whom are in positions of leadership. In one of the most recent
incidents, Bhekokwakhe Shezi, who was the vice-chairman of the MNR Taxi
Association in Umlazi, was gunned down at his home in Montclair. His young
daughter had to scream for help while he lay bleeding in the driveway.

The taxi industry is a crucial part of our transport system as millions of
South Africans make use of this mode of transport daily. We cannot allow
these assassinations to continue.

The IFP believes that the SA Police Service must set up a unit which is
dedicated to rooting out violence in this industry. Competition must be
free and fair without any intimidation or violence. We must clean up this
industry ...

... kuphele izinkabi Sihlalo [Ihlombe.]. Abantu abahlalela ukukhokhelwa
ukuyobulala abanye abantu abanikwa igama esingalazi ukuthi laqhamukaphi
elithi izinkabi. [... and do away with hitmen, Chairperson [Applause.].
People who get paid for killing other people have been given the name
izinkabi and we do not know its origin.]

                         SMART-CARD ID TENDER DELAY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J J MCGLUWA (ID): Chairperson, the ID calls upon Home Affairs Minister
Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma to release the forensic audit report on the tender
process surrounding the company that was initially awarded the State
Information Technology Agency tender for the smart-card ID, as a matter of
urgency.

The Minister gave a very confusing response to a question I asked for
written reply surrounding the 14-month delay. The Minister said:

   In the ensuing tender process, the department was advised by the State
   Information Technology Agency in April 2009 that the forensic audit of
   the tender process was being carried out to investigate the apparent
   irregularities.

However, she then explained that although the department had, by the end of
August this year, still not been advised of the outcome of the forensic
audit, the department had already decided to cancel the tender. This begs
the question: What circumstances informed the cancellation of the deal?

Our people remain in the dark not only about the endless delays, but also
about why the department is dragging its feet over a plan which R114
million was allocated to last year for this project.

We would like to know whether the Minister has received the forensic audit
report, and, if so, when is she going to present it to Parliament and to
South Africa? I thank you.

                            DIMBAZA BUS ACCIDENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J M MATSHOBA (ANC): Chairperson, it is with deep sadness that we note
the tragic deaths of 10 people at Dimbaza on Saturday, 12 September, when
their bus returning from Keiskammahoek to King William’s Town overturned.

The ANC wishes to express its gratitude to the emergency services for their
swift response in attending to the injured. We wish those who were injured
a speedy recovery. We urge the Department of Transport and the SA Police
Service to investigate this tragedy without delay. We also acknowledge the
efforts by our government to prevent the increasing carnage on our roads.

We further wish to urge public transport operators to heed the appeal made
to them by the Minister of Transport, “to exercise extreme caution as we
cannot continue putting the lives of innocent commuters at risk”.

On behalf of the ANC, I wish to extend sincere condolences to the families
who have lost loved ones. May they find comfort in prayer, and may the
memory of their loved ones give them strength. Thank you. [Applause.]

                      SUMBANDILA MICROSATELLITE LAUNCH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M S MANGENA (Azapo): Chairperson, South Africans, particularly those
directly involved in the science and technology environment, have been
holding their breath in the past two days praying for the successful launch
of the Sumbandila microsatellite by a Russian rocket, as the Deputy Chief
Whip indicated in his motion. The launch has been postponed twice in as
many days due to technical hitches and adverse weather conditions in that
part of the world. It is now hoped that Sumbandila will be launched today.

This 81kg microsatellite is a product of South African knowledge, skill and
technological expertise. It was built by SunSpace, a company based in
Stellenbosch, on behalf of the Department of Science and Technology.

The construction and launch of this satellite is one building block in the
creation of a South African national space agency. Our country already has
the capability to track and control satellites, as well as to download
information and imagery provided by satellites. Thus far, we have been
doing it for other nations or downloading data we have bought from
satellites owned by others.

Our ability to plan towns and settlements better, monitor our agriculture
and crop yields, communicate electronically, navigate the seas better,
monitor our forests, manage national disasters and our environment, and
fight crime will grow in tandem with the growth of our prowess in space
science and technology.

Although our fingers are already sore and numb from being crossed for so
long, we still keep them firmly crossed for the successful launch of
Sumbandila tonight. We are all saying: “Sumbandila, fly!” [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                             OVERCROWDED PRISONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H N MAKHUBA (IFP): Hon Chairperson, our Correctional Services is plagued
with many problems, one of which is overcrowding. South African prisons are
notoriously overcrowded and are seen as a breeding ground for criminality.
This is an unsustainable situation which must be remedied if various social
and other objectives are to be reached.

The IFP therefore welcomes comments made by the Correctional Services Chief
Deputy Commissioner of Security that overcrowding has been reduced from
about 164% in 2004 to 142% this year. This is a step in the right
direction, but much more still needs to be done as, while the situation has
improved, overcrowding is still a major problem.

The IFP will therefore closely monitor the situation, especially the
creation of additional capacity and progress being made with regard to the
various completion dates, as highlighted by the deputy commissioner. As
long as prisons are overcrowded, the rehabilitation of prisoners and other
objectives will not be successful. I thank you.

                            EMANCIPATION OF WOMEN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J C MOLOI-MOROPA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC firmly believes that the
emancipation of women is not an act of charity, nor is it the result of a
humanitarian or compassionate attitude. The liberation of women is a
fundamental necessity for the national democratic revolution, a guarantee
of its continuity and a precondition for its victory.

The women of our country have conducted a struggle for the emancipation of
women guided by the objective to defeat an unjust system that brought
untold suffering to every African family. They have pursued the national
liberation and gender struggles fully conscious of the fact that these are
integral parts of the struggle to abolish all forms of oppression and
exploitation.

In embracing the objective of the creation of a nonsexist society in our
Constitution, the ANC ensured that in totality the people of our country
commit themselves to the goal of gender equality. For this reason, we
welcome the decision of the national executive committee to appoint Ruth
Kgomotso Magau to be among its members. We congratulate her and wish her
well in this new assignment. Thank you. [Applause.]

   CALL FOR RELEASE OF GREEN DROP CERTIFICATION REPORT ON SEWAGE TREATMENT
                            WORKS IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs A T LOVEMORE (DA): Chairperson, the Green Drop Certification Programme
is intended to measure the efficacy of South Africa’s sewage treatment
works. It was launched late last year by the then Minister of Water Affairs
and Forestry. We read every week of failures of our sewage treatment works.
We read of raw sewage entering rivers that are choked with water hyacinth
and potentially toxic algal blooms. We read of the death of rural
residents, apparently after drinking water from contaminated rivers. We
read of young animals in our famed Kruger National Park being at threat
through exposure to faecal-contaminated river water.

The DA has visited numerous sewage treatment works over the past few months
and has been alarmed to see the level of dysfunctionality in places like
Umtata and Port St Johns. We have not, however, yet seen the Green Drop
Report, which has apparently been an internal document for some months now.
The DA has been told, off the record, that there is no good news in this
Green Drop Report. We have been told that only 32 of South Africa’s sewage
treatment works have been able to comply with the criteria for Green Drop
certification, with 10 of those plants being in the Western Cape. These
figures, if they are correct, are startling.

The South African public is entitled to transparency. It is entitled to
know the threats with which it is faced and, more importantly, it is
entitled to know exactly what action is being and will be taken to address
these threats. The DA has raised numerous questions in this regard with no
reply to most and has publicly called for the release of the Green Drop
Report by the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs, and we hereby
reiterate that call. [Applause.]

          INTERRUPTION OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY TO SCHOOLS IN TSHWANE
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W M MADISHA (Cope): Chairperson, Cope calls on the Minister for Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs as well as the Ministers of
Basic Education and Public Works to intervene urgently to resolve the
unfortunate interruption of the electricity supply to public schools in the
Tshwane Metro Council area during a period when learners were writing their
examinations.

Apparently, the electricity cuts are the result of nonpayment of property
tax by the Department of Public Works. In some cases, the property arrears
amount to hundreds of thousands of rand. The Tshwane Metro Council has
reportedly entered into an agreement with the Department of Public Works to
pay the arrear amounts on property tax by 1 August this year, which, to the
best of our knowledge, has not been done. We call on the relevant Ministers
to stop the blame game and to accept accountability to resolve this serious
problem as a matter of urgency.

Government is failing school-going children. Schools need all the support
they can get from government to ensure that children are able to write
their exams without these additional frustrations and unacceptable
disruptions. And, while I have the floor, I would like to emphasise that we
are not happy with the absence of Ministers and we hope that the Speaker
will indeed look into this. Thank you. [Interjections.]
                      TRANSNET’S EXCEPTIONAL PERFOMANCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr G W KOORNHOF (ANC): Chairperson, against the background of the current
worldwide economic downturn, one of the leading South African state-owned
entities, Transnet, has been performing exceptionally well.

During the past financial year of 2008-09, Transnet has managed to keep
their budget targets to produce a strong balance sheet, receive a clean
audit report, successfully succeed in growing their core business, and
reduce the cost of doing business in South Africa through the provision of
port, rail and pipeline infrastructure.

Transnet is a shining example that it is possible to grow your business
under difficult economic circumstances. This state-owned entity is under
good management and is providing value for money to its shareholder, the
South African government, in the roll-out of infrastructure development.

Transnet is continuing to dispose of their non-core assets in a responsible
manner, which enables management to focus on the core operations of
Transnet: strengthening the balance sheet of the entity further. In his
2009 state of the nation address, President Jacob Zuma highlighted the
importance of the performance of state-owned entities when he said: “We
will also involve state-owned entities in the government planning processes
and improve the monitoring and evaluation of their performance.”


We congratulate Transnet, including management, all workers and
stakeholders, on their good financial performance during the past financial
year. May they continue to grow in performing exceptionally well in their
core business: creating a better life for all our people. Together we can
do more. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Is that a point of order?

Mr P D DEXTER: Chairperson, yes. I would like to know whether the hon
member is related to another Koornhof in this House, because they bear such
a distinct ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): That is not a point of order, hon
member.

Mr P D DEXTER: I’m sure it is a point of order, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): To us that is a relationship of an
hon member. That’s not a point of order.

            FREE STATE FARMER OF THE YEAR ORDERED TO VACATE FARM
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J C PRETORIUS (DA): Mr Chairman, according to media reports, the Free
State Female Farmer of the year for 2008, Ms Kero Kgobe, has been ordered
by the High Court to vacate the farm Vergezocht, which she has been renting
from the state. But she refuses to do so and now apparently lives in a
vehicle on the farm.

According to reports, she was also found guilty in the Bloemfontein
magistrate’s court in April 2009 for shooting two gemsbok illegally on a
farm with an AK47.

The once-flourishing farm was sold to the state in 2007 for R8 million and
Kgobe became the first farmer to rent it from the state. Today the farm is
in shambles, with only a handful of cattle, sheep and pigs remaining. In
addition to this, allegations have surfaced that she has been illegally
operating a shebeen on the farm.

These shocking allegations indicate that there is no follow-up assistance
and support from government for emerging farmers once farms have been
awarded. Had government provided the necessary support and guidance, these
disastrous circumstances involving an award-winning emerging farmer would
not have developed.

There are many other emerging farmers faced with similar problems. The
question remains whether, despite these allegations, Ms Kgobe could have
made a success of the farm. But as a result of inadequate support and
guidance, she is now faced with criminal charges. Why did the provincial
government not anticipate these problems arising? What criteria were used
to determine the winner? What form of support, guidance and mentorship does
the government extend to emerging farmers? The government should account
for that. I thank you. [Applause.]

             GRADUATION OF 2 062 STUDENT NURSES IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T M A GASEBONWE (ANC): Chairperson, on behalf of the ANC, it is with
great pleasure and pride that I extend our congratulations to the 2 062
student nurses in KwaZulu-Natal, who graduated on 15 September and 16
September this year after successfully completing their studies. This is
indeed a reflection of the progress we need to make in our struggle to
provide health care to our people and to advance towards a better life for
all. The ANC trusts that these graduates will serve the people selflessly
and help to build the caring society we desire.

The ANC government will continue to work to reduce inequality in our health
care system, to improve health care in public facilities, to boost our
human resources and to step up the fight against HIV and Aids and other
diseases. I thank you. [Applause.]

                         SMART-CARD ID TENDER DELAY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, this is in response to the hon
member who spoke about the forensic audit regarding the smart identity
card. As you know, hon member, the State Information Technology Agency,
Sita, is under the Department of Public Service and Administration.
Naturally, if the Sita does a forensic audit, the report will be submitted
to the relevant Minister.

In that regard, our Minister has not been furnished with the report. So, no
matter how much we try to force her to release the report, she doesn’t have
it. The decision that we took in requesting the National Treasury to take
over this process arose from the concern that the mere fact that a forensic
report had been commissioned meant that there were problems.

To pre-empt whatever problems there may be, we made a request to the
National Treasury to take over this process to safeguard its integrity.
When the report is ready, it will be made available. In the meanwhile, the
National Treasury has been requested to take over the process to safeguard
its integrity, so that we can move on with the smart ID card. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Deputy Minister. Are
there any more ministerial responses?

Hon members, I know you have raised the issue, and we will follow it up
with the Minister. [Interjection.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order.
The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform is in the House, and one
of our members, the hon Pretorius, raised a question directly related to
his portfolio. I would like the Minister to respond. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, do you want to
respond?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, I didn’t
regard that question as having been referred to us; I thought it referred
to agriculture. But the hon member may repeat the question and I will look
at it, and then take it to my colleague. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, you have expressed a
view and an opinion of the situation we see in the House now - that
Ministers are not here. And I think we have agreed that we will refer the
matter to the Speaker. Yes, this is not a good reflection on our working
democracy. Also, this is not very good for Parliament’s image, integrity
and standing in society. [Applause.] So, let’s just leave it at that for
now until the Speaker takes up the matter up with the Leader of Government
Business. [Applause.]

    CELEBRATING OUR TANGIBLE AND INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE FOR SOCIAL
                                  COHESION

                          (Debate on Heritage Day)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon House Chair and hon members, our
material heritage which is tangible, and our immaterial heritage which is
intangible are embedded in the earthly and spiritual world respectively.
The spiritual and earthly realms are, however, each other’s image. This
reality is embodied in the maxim “As above, so below”.

In other words, if we know ourselves and our environment we can know and
respect the origins and nature of the spiritual or intangible reality that
informs our spiritual and material existence. This is important because
self-knowledge is a key requirement for holistic, - that is, spiritual and
material - human development.

The underdevelopment of black people and Africans in particular resulted,
first and foremost, from the forcible deprivation of their intangible
heritage, land and the natural resources from which they derived sustenance
from time immemorial.

Heritage month is a time of renewal or rebirth of our identity and values,
and a rededication to what makes us human. It is a time to recover our
humanity and its values and principles of equality, freedom and justice for
all. September is described as Heritage Month, because it offers us the
opportunity to understand our origins, identity and interrelationships
between our spiritual and material existence.

It also assists us to understand the critical importance of social cohesion
and nation-building, and rural development and agrarian land reform as
priorities for the current term of President Jacob Zuma’s administration.
This strategic priority affords us an opportunity to restore our indigenous
knowledge systems for sustainable development. Hon House Chair, it is so
noisy that I cannot continue.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, order please!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: The founders of our democracy
understood their spirituality and its relationship with the land and
therefore waged protracted struggles to defend both. Even today we still
have sacred spaces which require protection, for example the Motoulong and
Makhakha caves in the Free State.

Our icon, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, traces the relationship between the
ANC and the church back to the 1870s, when the Ethiopian Church Movement
was formed as a response to the rapid land dispossession from the 1800s.
The African clergy sought to free themselves from the fetters of the
missionaries by establishing African independent churches that came to be
known as Ethiopian churches.

The role that the missionaries played in the accelerated African land
dispossession of the late 19th century called for a response from the
African people in general and from African spiritual and religious leaders
in particular. The response took a political form, on the one hand, and a
spiritual form, on the other.

On the spiritual side, the response was sparked by racially discriminatory
practices and the suppression of the African cultural heritage in the
missionary churches. This led to the secession of the African clergy from
missionary churches and the founding of the Ethiopian churches. The first
breakaways were that of Nehemiah Tile, who founded the Thembu National
Church in 1884. The most notable breakaway was that of Mangena Mokone,
called the Ethiopian Church of Africa, which was founded in Marabastad,
Pretoria, in 1892.

The Ethiopian movement was both a spiritual and a political movement.
Though its fundamental basis was the African interpretation of the
scriptures, it went well beyond the churches it had helped produce.

The fundamental tenets of the Ethiopian movement were self-worth, self-
reliance and freedom. African people were forcibly deprived of these values
by colonialism and cultural imperialism. Thus, the wars of resistance and
later the struggles for freedom included the struggle for the recovery of
the African humanity and its inherent values of self-worth, self-reliance,
self-help and a sense of development and progress.

These tenets therefore drew the Ethiopian Christians like a magnet to the
growing Pan-African nationalism of the early 20th century. This Pan-African
movement was to produce provincial native congresses, which culminated in
the formation of the South African Native National Congress in 1912,
renamed the African National Congress in 1923. It is in this sense that our
icon, Nelson Mandela, traces the seeds of the formation of the ANC to the
Ethiopian movement of the 1890s.

The Ethiopian Christians fought alongside traditional communities during
the Bambatha Rebellion, which marked the end of the wars of resistance and
the birth of liberation politics.

In his speech to the Free Ethiopian Church of Southern Africa in
Potchefstroom on 14 December 1992, the honourable Nelson Mandela had this
to say on heritage:

  The centenary of the Ethiopian Church should have been celebrated
  throughout the length and breadth of our country, because it touches all
  the African people irrespective of their denomination or political
  outlook.

He went on to say that:

  The Ethiopian Church is the only surviving institution that is in the
  hands of the African people. This is a remarkable feature for which we
  have to give credit to the leaders of this church throughout the
  difficult years of final dispossession of the people. Indeed, our people
  were not dispossessed only of their land and cattle, but also of their
  pride, their dignity and their institutions.

The honourable Nelson Mandela also appreciated the positive role that our
religious heritage can play to advance social cohesion and nation-building.


In his lecture titled “Renewal and Renaissance: Towards a New World Order”,
delivered at the Oxford Centre for Islamic studies on 11 July 1997, Mandela
pointed out that religion could provide spiritual leadership in bringing
about the social renewal of our continent and the world. He observed, quite
correctly, that African history had also been profoundly shaped by the
interplay between these three great religious traditions: Islam,
Christianity and African religion. He went on to say that the way in which
these great religions of Africa interacted and co-operated with one
another, could have a profound bearing on the social space we create for
the rebirth of our continent.

Last, but not least, Mandela observed that the relationship of Islam and
Christianity to one another and of these two to African religion may be
pertinent aspects of the African rebirth and renewal. He called on Muslims
to harness the more inclusive strands in their own theological heritage in
order to contribute to a more humane Africa, acknowledging the humanity of
those traditions that are unique to the continent.

In this regard, Nelson Mandela observed:

  As with other aspects of its heritage, African traditional religion is
  increasingly recognised for its contribution to the world. No longer seen
  as despised superstition which had to be superseded by superior forms of
  belief, today its enrichment of humanity’s spiritual heritage is
  acknowledged. The spirit of ubuntu, that profound African sense that we
  are human only through the humanity of other human beings, has added
  globally to our common search for a better world.

In conclusion, Mandela observed the strength of interfaith solidarity in
action against apartheid, which enabled each religion to bring its best
forward and place it at the service of all. He then challenged all the
religions of the continent to walk a similar path in the reconstruction and
renewal of our continent.

In the struggle for preservation and development of our natural heritage,
African people were not only degraded and dehumanised, but were also
forcibly deprived of their land and its resources, which formed the basis
of their natural heritage. The convener of the founding conference of the
ANC and an advocate of unity and co-operation, Pixley ka Isaka Seme,
responded by buying farms in the Eastern Transvaal, now Mpumalanga, to
promote agriculture and ensure food security.

Seme’s initiative was so successful that the white farmers called on the
union government to take away land from African people and prohibit them
from buying farms.

This was achieved through the enactment of the Land Act of 1913, which only
allocated 7% of the total land surface of South Africa to African people.
This percentage was increased to 13% in 1936. African people were then
forced into native reserves, which were too small and barren for
agriculture and livestock.

The loss of land and its natural resources deprived Africans of skills in
farming and indigenous knowledge systems and their underlying intangible
heritage. This denied Africans the means for self-help, self-reliance and
survival. Thus, Africans were forced to become mine, farm and domestic
workers and to live in shacks and single-sex hostels.

The resulting inhumane situation sparked off popular struggles for the
recovery of African humanity, national pride, identity, self-determination,
human and people’s rights. Thus, the Ethiopian and Pan-African struggles of
our forebears were intertwined.

No wonder that the founders of our democracy were both religious and
political leaders. The founding president of the ANC, John Langalibalele
Dube for instance, called for a spiritual, humane and prosperous Africa as
early as 1892. In 1905, Seme not only echoed these values, but also called
for a unique civilization for Africa and Africans. The third president of
the ANC, Z R Mahabane, articulated what became the ANC moral vision in his
1921 speech titled: “We are not political children”.

Mahabane observed that African people were landless, voteless, homeless,
hopeless, degraded and dehumanised by colonialism and cultural imperialism.
He maintained that in such circumstances the ANC had to strive to restore
the humanity of the African people as a prerequisite for the restoration of
the humanity of the people of South Africa as a whole. Thus, the 1923 ANC
national conference adopted the first bill of rights on the African
continent, which reclaimed the African humanity and the participation of
African people in the economy. This Bill was amplified by the 1943
Africans’ Claims and the 1955 Freedom Charter, which laid the foundation of
a value-centred postapartheid society.

The Freedom Charter was adopted under the stewardship of Inkosi Albert
Luthuli, a worker, a lay priest in the Congregational Church, and a
cultural and traditional leader. Luthuli also reaffirmed the need for the
unique African civilisation propounded by Seme.

The African national liberation struggles were informed by spiritual,
cultural and material conditions, including land dispossession. Thus, the
struggle for land started long before the founding of the Union of South
Africa in 1910.

Ubuntu values and principles found their way into both the 1993 and the
1996 Constitutions. This prompted President Zuma to say that we wanted to
build a society based on ubuntu values and principles. The strategy and
tactics document, adopted at the Polokwane conference, mainstreamed the
spiritual philosophy of ubuntu and its inherent values of human solidarity,
equality, freedom and justice for all. It calls for the creation of a truly
united, democratic and prosperous South Africa in which the value of all
citizens is measured by their common humanity without regard to race,
gender and social status.

On 23 September 2008, President Zuma delivered the Gert Sibande Memorial
Lecture in Secunda where he asked the gathering to honour the memory of
Gert Sibande, a revolutionary leader, by remembering that he was a rural
activist who stood for the distribution of land to many rural people who
were exploited by farmers.

Gert Sibande’s life, therefore, was about the fundamental changing of the
socioeconomic relations between farmers and farmworkers. He stood for the
redistribution of land to those who worked it.

In conclusion, the President stated that September, our Heritage Month,
“... marks the beginning of Ramadan for the Muslim communities, the
beginning of the New Year for Jewish and African communities. Many African
indigenous churches, for example the Zion Christian Church in Moria, also
celebrate their New Year in September.”

The President used his memorial lecture to congratulate all cultural and
religious communities, which had been celebrating their festivals, and
invited all South Africans, both black and white, to take part in Heritage
Month celebrations.
At the Presidential Religious Summit, held on 27 November 2008, President
Zuma told the delegates that, I quote:

   Nation-building and achieving social cohesion are some of the most
   important responsibilities of the ruling party. Central to the two tasks
   is the need to reaffirm and recommit to the moral vision and the value
   system of our nation, as outlined in various historical documents and the
   Constitution of the land. The ANC has always valued the interaction with
   faith communities because its history and moral vision are rooted in the
   religious sector.

We, therefore, would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mcebisi
Xundu on his election as President of the National Interfaith Leaders
Council.

September marks the beginning of a new year rooted in the spirituality of
many ancient nations, including those of Africans, which transcend race,
class and gender. The African New Year, in particular, provides a home-
grown framework for cultural and agricultural festivals which are necessary
for inculcating moral, social and economic values in our children. The
adoption and mainstreaming of the African and related calendars would
realign our spiritual and material existence and make us a truly value-
centred society.

We need new ways of celebrating our national holidays and of using them as
instruments for imparting moral and social values to our youth. A short
exposition of the African calendar will illustrate the desired realignment
of our spiritual and material existence.

The African calendar embodies the intangible heritage of African people
that cannot and will not be understood without African history and
languages. Sir Seretse Khama, the first president of Botswana and the
paramount chief of Bamangwato, emphasised the importance of reclaiming our
cultural heritage in emphatic terms:

   We were taught sometimes in a very positive way to despise ourselves and
   our ways of life. We were made to believe that we had no past to speak
   of, no history to boast of. It seemed we were in for a definite period of
   foreign tutelage without any hope of our ever again becoming our own
   masters. The end result of all this was that our self-pride and our self-
   confidence were badly undermined.


Sir Seretse Khama challenged us to:

   ... try to retrieve what we can of our past. We should write our own
   history books to prove that we did have a past that was just as worth
   writing and learning about as any other. We must do this for the simple
   reason that a nation without a past is a lost nation, and a people
   without a past is a people without a soul.
[Applause.]

The African soul is embedded in its intangible heritage that calls for our
attention today.

Western philosophers and scholars succeeded in convincing us and the world
that we have no history and heritage by cutting us off from the ancient
Ethiopian and Egyptian past and by attributing the achievements of
Mapungubwe, Great Zimbabwe, and Meroë and Aksum in Ethiopia to foreigners.
It is for this reason that Cheikh Anta Diop said that the history of Africa
would not be complete until it was connected to that of Egypt. Pixley ka
Isaka Seme connected it in his public lecture titled, “The Regeneration of
Africa in 1905”. To these ancient monuments, Nelson Mandela added Carthage,
Mapungubwe and Great Zimbabwe. Near home, we have Lwandali in Tshiendeulu
and Thulamela.

The most decisive affinity between the ancient Egyptian, tangible and
intangible heritage and our own can be found in the languages, religions,
astral sciences and indigenous knowledge systems.

There is “ntu” in ubuntu, punt(u) and bunntu or BNNT. In Africa, south of
the Sahara, there are about 400 languages and 2 000 dialects - belonging to
the Bantu family of languages from which the ancient Egyptian language was
derived. By neglecting our indigenous languages, we lose our soul, our past
and our intangible heritage.
Language and religion are also motive forces for nation-building and social
cohesion. We can preserve indigenous African languages by making it
compulsory that every person studying for a degree and every person who
wants to enter the public service has to learn one indigenous African
language. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr A LOTRIET: Agb Voorsitter, as ons kyk na wat ons tasbare en ontasbare
kulturele erfenis insluit, kan ons inderdaad daarop trots wees dat ons met
so ’n verskeidenheid geseën is. Ons het ’n ryk erfenis met uiteenlopende
kulture, gebruike, tradisies, geskiedenisse en tale. Erfenisdag is die
viering van hier die kleurryke verskeidenheid.

Die viering van ons erfenis gaan egter nie net oor die eie kulture van
afsonderlike groepe nie, maar veelal ook oor uitreiking oor verskillende
kultuurgrense heen. Elemente van nasionale eenheid, nasiebou en sosiale
kohesie staan sentraal tot hierdie viering.

In die tema van vandag, val die fokus op die viering van ons tasbare en
ontasbare erfenis om sosiale kohesie te bevorder.

Ten einde te besin oor die rol van erfenis in die bevordering van sosiale
kohesie, moet daar ook gestel word dat erfenis veel meer as kommoditeite
is. Erfenis bring ook die identiteit en waardigheid van individue en
gemeenskappe tot uitdrukking. Dit is juis deur die ontasbare erfenis waar
daar inhoud en sin aan die tasbare erfenis gegee word.

Die ontasbare erfenis sluit meer in as die eng definisie wat verwys na
sang, dans, volksverhale, en orale vertellings. Dit verwys ook na sosiale
waardes en tradisies, gebruike en praktyke, estetiese en spirituele
oortuigings, artistieke uitdrukking, taal en ander aspekte van menslike
aktiwiteite. Die betekenis van fisiese artifakte kan teen die agtergrond
van sosio—ekonomiese, politiese, religieuse en filosofiese waardes van ’n
spesifieke groep mense vertolk word. Uiteraard is dit moeiliker om
ontasbare kulturele erfenis te bewaar as om fisiese voorwerpe te bewaar.

Dit is inderdaad ook so dat die waarde van kulturele erfenis tot ’n groot
mate onderskat word. Ontwikkeling word dikwels gesien as ’n suiwer
tegnologies en ekonomiese uitdaging met ’n onderbeklemtoning of totale
miskenning van die ekonomiese waarde van kultuur en die feit dat
waardevolle kennis opgesluit lê in die diverse kulturele erfenisse van
Suid—Afrika se mense.

Kulturele erfenis, beide tasbaar en ontasbaar, is ’n wonderlike hulpbron.
Dit kan mense bemagtig, en dit kan mense beheer oor hul lewens teruggee.
Dit kan mense se waardigheid herstel en het die moontlikheid om swaarkry en
armoede te verlig.

Dit is dus uiters prysenswaardig en selfs edel om ons kulturele erfenis in
diens van sosiale kohesie te stel. Maar as ons eerlik wil wees en werklik
ernstig wil wees oor die viering van ons tasbare en ontasbare kulturele
erfenis vir sosiale kohesie, dan is daar kritiese vrae wat beantwoord moet
word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr A LOTRIET: Hon Chairperson, when we look at what is included with
regard to our tangible and intangible cultural heritage, we can indeed be
proud that we have been blessed with such diversity. We have a rich
heritage with diverse cultures, practices, traditions, histories, and
languages. Heritage Day is a celebration of this colourful diversity.

Celebrating our heritage, however, is not only about embracing the inherent
cultures of distinct groups, but is, in fact, often about reaching out
across the different cultural boundaries as well. Elements of national
unity, nation-building, and social cohesion are central to this
celebration.

In line with today’s theme, the focus is on celebrating our tangible and
intangible heritage in order to promote social cohesion.

Reflecting on the role that heritage plays in the promotion of social
cohesion, it has to be stated that heritage includes more than just mere
commodities. Heritage is also an expression of the identity and dignity of
individuals and communities. It is precisely through intangible heritage
that substance and meaning is given to tangible heritage.

Intangible heritage includes more than the narrow definition with reference
to song, dance, folktales, and oral narratives. It also refers to social
values and traditions, customs and practices, aesthetic and spiritual
beliefs, artistic expression, language, and other aspects of human
activities. The meaning of physical artefacts can be interpreted in context
of the socio-economic, political, religious, and philosophical values of a
specific group of people. It stands to reason that it is harder to preserve
intangible cultural heritage than physical objects.

It is indeed a fact that the value of cultural heritage is to a large
extent also underestimated. Often, development is perceived as a purely
technological and economic challenge, underestimating or disregarding the
economic value of culture and the fact that there is valuable knowledge
inherent in the diverse cultural heritage of the people of South Africa.

Cultural heritage, both tangible and intangible, is a wonderful resource.
It can empower people, once again giving them control over their lives. It
can restore people’s dignity and has the potential to alleviate hardship
and poverty.

It is, therefore, highly commendable and even noble to employ our cultural
heritage to attain social cohesion. But, if we want to be honest and really
serious about celebrating our tangible and intangible cultural heritage to
bring about social cohesion, then there are critical questions that have to
be answered.]

Firstly, what is social cohesion? Do we all have the same sense of what it
means? Do we all attach the same value to it? Secondly, we have to look at
the scorecard. How successful has our cultural heritage been in promoting
social cohesion? Can we indeed talk of social cohesion in South Africa?

Let us first look at what social cohesion is. It is a concept that we often
encounter in many departmental documents such as policies and reports, as
well as speeches. I wonder, however, how many people have actually asked
what it is. Social cohesion can be seen as the glue that binds a society
together. It has to do with social relations, norms, values and identities.
Social cohesion is central to the social because it is impossible to have
interactive social beings, collective identities and the social world
without social cohesion. Social cohesion is reflected by the degree of
harmony, co-operation and mutual respect that exist within a society.

The question then is: To what extent has social cohesion been achieved by
means of celebrating our cultural heritage? In attempting to answer this
question, we have to look at what the indicators are for social cohesion
and how cultural heritage has or has not promoted it. The first indicator
is a sense of belonging. Can it in all honesty be proclaimed that every
citizen in this country experiences a sense of belonging - a sense, in the
individual, of this is my country and I am welcome here, regardless of my
race, my religion, my language, my own cultural heritage?

Is this sense of belonging fostered and nurtured by how elements of
heritage are promoted and protected? Belonging also refers to identity, and
part of one’s identity refers to one’s national identity. It is very easy
to say that we are all South Africans, but it rings hollow when we hear of
one’s South African identity being judged in terms of the political party
one belongs to. This was the case last week when a statement was made by a
member of the ANC that voting DA means you do not want to be a part of
South Africa and Africa. When your commitment to the country is judged on
the basis of your party affiliation, there can be no claim of social
cohesion. If there is no sense of belonging created by how we accommodate
all the different cultural elements and identities in our heritage, we are
not working towards belonging, but towards isolation and marginalisation.

Secondly, social cohesion requires inclusion. Inclusion concerns equal
opportunities of access as well as the sense of being included and being
represented in the cultural heritage. Does our cultural heritage reflect
the whole of our heritage - tangible and intangible - or is it selective on
the basis of what is acceptable to some? Heritage is about memory. And if
we are selective about what is considered to be acceptable, proper and
politically correct, we will have an artificially constructed heritage and
memory - made to fit a specific purpose but without the real soul of people
who have traversed many roads to reach a specific destination.

How can we tell the story of all the people of this country when we do not
include and add to our cultural heritage, but think it is wise to remove
and replace and even destroy? How is social cohesion promoted and attained
when photos, works of art, buildings and other elements of cultural
heritage are discarded and neglected because they do not fit the
politically driven construct of what our cultural heritage should be?

Thirdly, social cohesion requires recognition as opposed to rejection.
Recognition refers to respecting and tolerating differences in a country
where we have a variety of cultures, languages and heritage. Instead of
assimilating or obliterating variety and diversity, diversity must be
harnessed to showcase cultural richness. The diversity of our cultural
heritage should not be used to wall us into specific enclaves and
stereotypes of minorities and majorities, but should be used as bridges to
cross for new knowledge and experiences.

To answer the question whether social cohesion has thus far been achieved
through our cultural heritage, the answer is unfortunately no, not yet.
There are still too many instances of exclusion, marginalisation, disregard
and neglect. Working towards social cohesion requires an intricate balance
between the different elements of social cohesion. When we celebrate our
tangible and intangible cultural heritage, we should be mindful of this
balance between the individual cultural heritage and the national aim of
social cohesion, as well as the dangers of an inability or unwillingness to
fully embrace the totality of our heritage.

Ten slotte moet ons egter ook onthou dat dit nie realisties is en dat daar
ook nie aan die doelstelling van sosiale kohesie, deur middel van die
viering van ons kulturele erfenis, uitvoering gegee gaan word as dit tot
een dag beperk is nie.

Daar moet deurlopend en aktief daaraan gewerk word om aan almal in die land
'n gevoel te gee dat hulle behoort en dat een en elkeen se kulturele
erfenis belangrik is en gerespekteer word. Slegs so sal ons kulturele
erfenis ook ’n kulturele nalatenskap vir toekomstige geslagte wees wat
gesamentlik die toekoms in ’n oop geleentheid samelewing tegemoet kan gaan.
Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In conclusion, we should however also bear in mind that it is not
realistic and that we will not be able to achieve the objective of social
cohesion by celebrating our cultural heritage if it is limited to one day.

Continuous and active work is required so that everyone in this country has
a sense of belonging and that each and everyone’s cultural heritage is
important and respected. Only in this way will our cultural heritage also
be a cultural legacy for future generations who, together, would be able to
approach the future in an open opportunity society. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mrs H N NDUDE: House Chairperson, the Freedom Charter declared boldly that
South Africa belonged to all who live in it, black and white. Today we
still affirm the validity of that sentiment and belief. Therefore, as we
focus on Heritage Day 2009, we should pause and reflect on the power,
potency and potentiality of that statement. We all know to whom South
Africa belongs. On the other hand, do all people in South Africa believe
that they belong to South Africa?

Will Heritage Day be celebrated with equal favour by everyone? In our
Constitution, 11 languages are officially recognised and PanSALB is
enjoined to promote and ensure respect for a dozen other languages, such as
German, Greek and Gujarati, used by distinctive communities. This means
that in our country, we have more than 20 different languages and cultural
groups.

Each group has contributed significantly to enriching the tapestry that
constitutes South African life, but do all these groups come out on
Heritage Day in their unique dress, singing their unique songs, exhibiting
their unique art, sharing their unique literature and making presentations
of their unique cuisines? As I remember, there were people who merely
wanted to make this national day a frivolous braai day. Government has been
unable to get a buy-in from every community. This is a missed opportunity.
On Heritage Day, every cultural group should be affirming itself and South
Africa. The Swiss are all distinctly different people, but they display an
indivisible common national pride.

South Africa is rich in the richness of its diversity. South Africa is
unique in the way it affords each group the chance to develop its
uniqueness. South Africans have so much to share with one another, yet when
there is the time and opportunity to do so, there is no great sharing.

Government must assume the larger portion of blame for this. Government
arrogated to itself the right to be everything to everybody on Heritage
Day. It took centre stage instead of taking a back seat. It tried to
reflect itself instead of letting cultural groups demonstrate what they
were about.

It is certain that Heritage Day belongs to all heritage groups and
therefore it should be entrusted to them to plan for it with a great deal
of elbowroom. National, provincial and regional committees representing all
cultural groups should take charge henceforth in order that every cultural
group feels like seizing the opportunity to disclose its artistic and
cultural treasures.

Years ago, I witnessed how the 11 national groups that constituted the then
defunct Soviet Union participated in a national day in a way typically
characteristic of itself. Heritage Day should not be reserved for boring
speeches. It should be the most anticipated day on the calendar. Certainly,
one dance, one song and one meal will say more than a thousand words.
Celebrations should be just that. Speech-making should be reserved for
Parliament.

Heritage Day could also help to unfreeze relationships amongst our various
peoples. We all know that we occupy common space, but not any common
feeling or common allegiance. Our token response of acknowledging one
another across the various divides should be allowed to develop into a
genuine understanding and appreciation of one another. We are tied by
destiny to a journey into the future together.

We should therefore not delay the forging of our togetherness, because the
sooner we do it, the sooner we can claim a safer and more prosperous
future. Ethnicity should never be the reason for animosity; rather it
should be the reason for reciprocity.

We are not the only nation celebrating Heritage Day in September. Many
people in Europe are doing the same. In Sweden, for example, heritage day
has a theme. This year the theme is: Sweden and Finland share a history. It
will certainly be interesting to see what they do in exploring this theme
and what outcomes are achieved. There may be a lesson for us in their
experience.

As South Africans, we share one country but we have divided histories. When
are we going to look for fusion in history, fusion in food, fusion in
music? Fusion is the rage at the moment in the world, and we have vast
scope for it here. The United Kingdom also has their heritage day in
September. So what will our English counterparts be doing? For four days,
English property owners will open their doors, free of charge, to the
public. They will be saying that whatever is their legacy is also the
legacy of their nation. On these four days, everyone in England can enjoy
places of great historic heritage and architectural value.

If we in South Africa took a tiny little step to open our doors to our
neighbours, what a giant step that would be. For much more to happen in the
suburbs, the Minister of Police will have to walk his tough talk of
stopping criminals in their tracks. We have constraints, but our
opportunities to know and be known are greater in number.

Cope, as Comrade Smuts Ngonyama pointed out the other day, is promoting the
idea of an activist state. For us it is important to take another big step
forward from that which was taken in 1994. We cannot let our democracy
stagnate.

For us, the potential that exists in our country has to be harnessed. This
can only happen when the state comes down to the people, rather than asking
the people to come to the state and then asking them to go away and come
back again. We want the people of our country to be one and we want them to
demonstrate that whoever they are, they enjoy being South Africans. We want
them to put their destiny and that of their children in their own hands. I
thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, our
heritage and ideals, our moral code and standards, the values that we live
by and pass on to our children are magnified or diminished by how freely we
exchange our ideas and feelings.

On Heritage Day we sing freedom’s song. In the stirring words of Abraham
Lincoln, “Our defence is in the preservation of the spirit which prizes
liberty as a heritage of all men, in all lands, everywhere. Destroy this
spirit, and you have planted the seeds of despotism around your own doors.”


We, in this House, by common cause, are here because we believe that public
service is a force for change. We, as the people’s servants, hearken to the
voice of our heritage and ancestors. I rise to speak for my heritage.
Following the post-Anglo-Zulu War partition of the Zulu Kingdom and the
Land Act of 1913, which deprived the majority of the Zulus of their
ancestral land, my nation desperately needed change. But was this change to
be revolutionary or evolutionary? How was a young aspiring Zulu politician,
like me, to help transform the living conditions and restore national
dignity without eroding traditional values? I wished to see my nation
prosper and coexist peacefully with other peoples. This is my heritage!

At the same time, I did not wish to see the resentment of the colonial era
based on race transformed into envy fuelled by material advancement of the
few at the expense of the many. I viewed my people, the Zulus, as
individuals and members of strong self-reliant communities, not as
political troops in a class struggle. This is my heritage!

We are also mindful today that there is insufficient regard for South
Africa’s diverse linguistic and cultural heritage which traces its roots to
the Dutch and British immigrants - white Africans - who first graced the
shores of the Cape hundreds of years ago. The legacy of the Van der Merwes
and the Mulders is my heritage. The legacy of the 1820 settlers in this
province is also my heritage!

With this thought in mind, I would like to relate an anecdote of what
happened when I attended the national celebration of Women’s Day, in
Vryheid, in the Zululand District, last month. I was invited by the hon
Minister of Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities, the hon Ms
Noluthando Mayende-Sibiya, to join her and the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal,
the hon Dr Zweli Mkhize. The guest of honour and guest speaker was His
Excellency Mr J G Zuma, the President of the Republic of South Africa.

This event starkly confronted me with the question of whether we are truly
the Rainbow Nation that we market ourselves to be. I’m not going to raise
the argument about whether the notion of a Rainbow Nation is right or not.
I wish we were a Rainbow Nation, but my own view is that we are, rather, a
great nation because of our dazzling multiculturalness, one that is more
comparable to a delectable bowl of salad.

We are rich because we are all Africans in the sense which was so elegantly
stated from this podium by His Excellency, President Thabo Mbeki, in his
memorable evocation, “I am an African!” We are rich because of our diverse
cultures. We embrace all these cultures as our own, whether we are Africans
of different ethnic groups, or English or Afrikaans, coloured or Indian.

Yet, in all the past 15 years that I have attended all these functions - so-
called national events – I have been struck by the fact that not one of
them has been representative of all our people. Only Africans attended the
function in Vryheid, for example. Less than 10 whites were present. I saw
two Indians, who were officials. There was not a single coloured present.

So, I asked myself: “Where is the Rainbow Nation?” Is it our fault, the
African majority? Maybe we have not opened our arms wide enough to embrace
the other race groups, particularly minorities? I do not know. I’m groping.
I’m groping around in search for an answer. It could be that the minority
groups, so far, have not accepted that we are one nation. It could be that
they simply do not feel safe in the midst of the majority. We look in a
mirror dimly, but after 15 years, my dear brothers and sisters, we must
come face to face with this brutal question.

Must it only be in the soccer and rugby stadiums that we see all the black
and white faces? I boldly assert today the truth that the best way to build
a united South Africa is by cherishing and respecting all its constituent
parts.

Yes, South Africa is one country and it is building one nation, but its
future will only be secured if all its constituent traditions are
respected. One way to approach the process of building an authentic
national consensus is with an open mind and with honesty.

The case for freedom, the case for our constitutional principles and the
case for our heritage has to be made anew in each generation. The work of
freedom is never done. We are also mindful this week especially, that South
Africa should be free to recognise its diverse religious heritage, and
doing this is not the same as creating a government-sponsored religion.

Our diversity is also reflected in the glory of creation. It is written in
the narrative, too, of South Africa’s ecology. As we approach Copenhagen,
we are mindful as custodians of this fragile land that it is not just the
honour you take with you, but also the heritage you leave behind. I thank
you.

Hon Chairman, since I have not exhausted my time, I wonder if you could
allow Africans to clap. I want to sit down please. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, the ID believes that South Africa has a rich
cultural and natural heritage in which we can all take pride. Tragically,
the history of our country was such that our rich diversity was not
celebrated as a strength, but rather as a means to divide and oppress the
majority of our people.

We were taught to be suspicious and weary of each other’s cultures and we
engaged in a zero-sum game where one culture was promoted at the expense of
others.

As a nation, we need to unlearn this practice and we need to build a common
African heritage, which we can all celebrate as our own. To do this we need
to step out of our comfort zones and take the time to discover the humanity
that resides in the different cultural expressions of our country.

As the ID, we are committed to this vision and we will continue to
encourage all South Africans to bridge the divides of the past, which are
still tragically reflected in the poverty of the present. I thank you.

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Chairperson, hon members, I would like to use this
opportunity to speak about one of the least-considered consequences of the
crisis at the SA Broadcasting Corporation. The mandate of the SA
Broadcasting Corporation, as the public broadcaster, directly relates to
the protection and promotion of our diverse cultural heritage. To this end,
we pay television licences, and through this Parliament we have approved
additional taxpayer money to keep the SA Broadcasting Corporation afloat.

What has happened over the course of the past year is that the SA
Broadcasting Corporation has systematically failed to pay local production
companies for the content they have made. This alone has forced many of
these local producers to the brink of bankruptcy.

In the aftermath of the SA Broadcasting Corporation’s shenanigans earlier
this year, there has now been a radical reduction in the SA Broadcasting
Corporation’s expenditure on locally produced content. Not only does this
directly lead to a massive increase in foreign – often, poor quality -
content on the airwaves, but it also threatens to decimate the local
creative industries.

Many thousands of artists, performers, technical crew and businesspeople
will lose their income, and the country stands to lose a significant chunk
of the domestic industry that is truly committed to South African cultural
heritage. This is a tragedy and the equivalent of the cultural genocide ...
[Inaudible.] [Time expired.] [Laughter.]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Chairperson, in celebrating our tangible and intangible
cultural heritage for social cohesion, we have to start from a sound and
solid base. The hon Chief Whip of the ANC referred throughout his speech to
the African people, and I understand what he means, but I need to point out
to him that I am also an African. My family came to this continent in 1685,
that is 324 years ago, before most Americans went to the United States,
Canadians to Canada and Australians to Australia. I am an African!

When the hon Dr Buthelezi, at the end of his speech, asked the Chairperson
to allow Africans to give him a good hand, you would have seen that all
members in this House jointly gave him a good hand. We are all Africans.

We have to accept and understand that at this stage we do not have one
single united cultural heritage. We will only succeed with social cohesion
and national reconciliation if we follow the right recipe.

We will not succeed with nation-building and social cohesion by stumbling
from one sporting event to the next. We need the right recipe. Maybe, that
recipe we may find in the preamble to the Constitution, which I do not
think we often read, where it clearly says: “We, the people of South Africa
... believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
diversity.”

That is a reality of South Africa. We are a very diverse nation. Let us
respect our differences, then we can become united and succeed with social
cohesion and through nation-building, as Africans, all of us. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson and hon members, indeed it is
my pleasure to be part of this important debate of the Ministry of Arts and
Culture, when we celebrate Heritage Month with the people of South Africa.

As we all know, September marks the annual Heritage Month celebration in
our country. This month, we invite all South Africans, irrespective of
race, class or gender, to be part of the celebrations and to come out of
their cocoons, as the Freedom Charter states quite clearly that South
Africa belongs to all of us, black and white, and this government has
always welcomed people from all races in all its activities and programmes.
I agree with uBaba uShenge ukuthi nami ngangikhona eVryheid azange
ngibabone abanye abantu angazi ukuthi kwakwenzenjani ... [I agree with hon
Shenge that I was also present in Vryheid and I did not see other people, I
am not sure what was happening ...] and this happens year in and year out.

In recognition of the value created by the craft segment of our economy, we
have this year, as the Department of Arts and Culture, adopted the theme:
“Celebrating South African Craft, our Heritage” as the focus of the 2009
Heritage Month celebrations. This theme is an opportunity to highlight the
socioeconomic value of the craft industry, especially in our rural areas,
and it encourages further development of our communities. This theme
enables us to encourage not only further investment in the craft sector of
our economy, but also to contribute to nation-building and social cohesion.


The main Heritage Day celebrations will take place in Moroke, at the
Ntwampe stadium, in the Greater Tubatse Municipality in Limpopo. This event
will be addressed by our Deputy President, Kgalema Motlanthe, as it will be
an official national programme.

In this month, therefore, we recognise the importance of our heritage and
our diverse cultural expressions that together shape and build our national
culture. We also pay attention to the artefacts made by our ancestors
through the generations that have preceded us. We celebrate these men and
women of wisdom, whose accomplishments are testimony to the fact that great
works of art can come from a culture rooted in the realities of our people.

It is in this context, therefore, that yesterday we launched Heritage Month
at one of our World Heritage sites, the Mapungubwe National Park, which is
found at the meeting place between ourselves, South Africa, Botswana and
Zimbabwe where the Limpopo and Shashe Rivers meet.

This offered us an opportunity to admire the cultural and economic wealth
that came from the Mapungubwe people, whose architects built a royal
residence and whose blacksmiths built tools and artworks out of iron and
gold many hundreds of years ago. They were part of a thriving Indian Ocean
trade system. This is where the golden rhino and bowls, tools and pottery,
as well as glass beads and jewellery were found.

Through our knowledge of Mapungubwe and Thulamela, of the finds of the
Klasies River and Blombos Cave, and through archaeological studies of rock
art, we can say that South Africa has a rich heritage that is unique in the
evidence it provides of our earliest human beings.

We should be proud, therefore, that South Africa possesses such vast
natural beauty and heritage of outstanding universal value through our
eight World Heritage Sites, namely Mapungubwe, Robben Island, Vredefort
Dome, the Cradle of Humankind, the Cape Floral Region Protected Areas, the
Richtersveld, the Isimangaliso Wetland Park and the Ukhahlamba Drakensberg
Park. We also know that in our part of the world, humans have lived for
about 2 million years and history books tell us that between 200 000 and
100 000 years ago modern humans, the hunter-gatherers, also resided in
South Africa. Our heritage is universal.

South African heritage tells the story not only of our nation, but also of
our world. Through our liberation struggle, our cultural workers also
showed us the path to building a people’s culture. As the liberation
movement grew in strength, these artists created social awareness and
asserted our right to have our own history and develop our culture. Against
all odds, they triumphed against apartheid. They asserted what Amilcar
Cabral pointed out, which is that “National liberation is necessarily an
act of culture.”

They contributed in giving us an identity not rooted in oppression but in
liberation. Learning from these lessons of our struggle through telling and
retelling our stories and working with our cultural workers, we can do more
to strengthen and promote our culture and heritage. This is why we say
today that culture must be rooted in the realities of our people, in our
daily lives, in our struggles and victories.

In building our nation and taking forward the national democratic
revolution, our people must continue to be inspired by a culture that
addresses their needs and that helps them to build on the freedom won in
1994.

The National Heritage Council is initiating a national liberation heritage-
route project, as a story that will tell and depict the journey of
liberation through the struggles against colonialism and apartheid.

During Heritage Month, we reaffirm the rights of each and every one of us
to lead a rich and productive cultural life. It is in the context of
contributing to the world and building our country and our continent that
the creative industries are critical to us and to nation-building. They
create critical opportunities to uplift and empower our people
economically, especially our women, the youth and people with disabilities.

This year we focus on the role that crafts play in building our nation. Our
people, through their creativity, are constantly developing traditional
cultural expressions, such as the design and production of crafts, basket-
weaving and songs. These expressions make meaning and establish identity.
The works of art are made from clay, paper, cardboard, wire and plastic
bags, among other things. This collective creativity provides a basis for
social cohesion and sustainable development.

Studies indicate that 1,2 million people earn their living through crafts
and related trade areas. The key is to strengthen the sector and to create
enabling conditions for these areas to flourish. The Department of Trade
and Industry estimates that South Africa’s craft sector alone contributes
about R2 billion to South Africa’s Gross Domestic Product annually. Yet,
despite an abundance of individual and community artistic and
entrepreneurial skills, there is still exploitation, with primary producers
selling their goods through middlemen. This limits their earnings and
prevents their full and active participation in the industry.

The problems are compounded in that there is no recognised representative
body that promotes the rights of crafters, and most raw materials are
imported and are thus unaffordable for many of our people. Through our
Investing in Culture programme, we are addressing these and other concerns.
Since 2005, we have spent over R300 million on supporting craft projects so
that they can become self-sustaining small businesses.

We are equipping crafters with business skills through this programme to
enable them to compete and market their products. Working together with all
our stakeholders, we shall improve on these initiatives.

We believe that we should focus on women, especially rural women, as far as
craft and craft production are concerned. Sustainable craft development
also requires sustaining the participation of women in the crafts industry.
We are proud that the majority of projects funded since 2005 are projects
led and carried out by women. We acknowledge that more needs to be done in
this regard. We also believe that crafts can contribute meaningfully to the
government’s rural development objectives.

The focus on crafts therefore is part of our commitment to the development
and revitalisation of our rural economies. It is our belief that tangible
programmes and strong marketing campaigns in the craft sector will
contribute to rural development. This year, for the first time, we held the
National Craft Awards to showcase and encourage craft enterprises
throughout the country and to raise the profile of the craft industry, by
rewarding selected works that demonstrated great skill and innovation.

We need to acknowledge that South Africa is recognised today as a global
player in the arts, culture and heritage sector. This year’s Heritage Month
celebrations come at a time when South Africa is gaining ground in the
world’s arts, culture and heritage landscape. Let us consolidate the work
we are doing to showcase our arts, crafts and heritage for the 2010 Fifa
World Cup and, of course, we are ready for the World Cup.

From 21 September to 23 September 2009, we will host the Afrikaans-Dutch
festival conference called Roots, with the Minister of European Affairs
from the Netherlands and with Flemish co-operation. Mr Mulder, we do
recognise Afrikaans as an African language, and we will be having a
discussion with the Dutch to look at the roots of Afrikaans, which, of
course, were planted in South Africa on the African continent. This will
not only help to strengthen our cultural relations with the Dutch
government and people, but will also build on the solidarity that started
during the apartheid years.

Next week, we are also hosting the Fourth World Summit on Arts and Culture
for the first time on African soil. This will be held from 22 September to
25 September in Newtown, Johannesburg. All these platforms offer us the
opportunity to demonstrate the centrality of arts and culture in
development and in promoting opportunities for our artists to exchange
ideas with others and forge common projects across the globe. Our task,
therefore, is to strengthen further our sense of belonging to South Africa.
Through our crafts and through our arts and culture programmes we will
nurture a common value system that strengthens our unity as a nation. I do
believe, hon Lotriet, that this government has worked hard to ensure social
cohesion and unity in our nation.

Many of the museums and programmes that were started during colonialism and
apartheid times are still there. We still have the Voortrekker monument,
and nobody has messed with it. We only have the Albert Luthuli museum as
one of the new programmes that were started by this government. All we are
asking for is to open up these facilities and to welcome all our people,
even those that were marginalised before.

As we transform our country, we need to ensure that through heritage, arts
and culture we build cohesive, sustainable and caring communities. Only in
this way do we play our part in the common effort to expedite our national
development. Only in this way do we remain true to the Freedom Charter,
which directs us to discover, develop and encourage national talent for the
enhancement of our cultural life.

I take this opportunity therefore, Chairperson, to invite all of you to
participate in our National Heritage Day celebrations in Limpopo and also
in celebrations that will take place in all our provinces on 24 September
2009. I also hope that I will not be disappointed, as the hon Buthelezi
was, by many of our people, particularly the minorities, not participating
on that day. I want to wish all of you a happy Heritage Month and a happy
Heritage Day. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the country’s heritage could, in part, be described as
the conservation of the creativity of people past, which enriches the lives
of people present. Today that creativity has expanded to include not only
historic buildings, ancient bridges, etc, but all aspects of life, with
sport, recreational activities and tourism holding their own.

Tourists from around the world and residents alike have come to expect and
increasingly demand a more responsible tourism that supports the
conservation of the natural as well as the cultural environment. This, in
turn, has had the effect of creating a favourable development climate for
new heritage products, driven by market needs for innovation and
diversification. Today our culture can be experienced in many ways
including Robben Island pilgrimages, underground mine visiting, bungy
jumping, township dancing, cuisine, etc.

While conserving and promoting our cultural heritage, it is equally
important for us to have regard for expanding urbanisation, and the
establishment of rural growth points to promote a higher standard of living
and heritage for rural and marginalised people.
South Africa was singled out, before the granting of the venue of the 2010
World Cup, in the “Tourism 2020 Vision” as one of six countries predicted
to make great strides in the tourism industry in the years leading up to
2020. As the preparations for the Soccer World Cup escalate, capacity and
infrastructure are expanding to meet exacting international standards,
moving us closer each day to this vision. While 2010 offers South Africa
the opportunity of showcasing our country to people who might never
otherwise have visited our land, Madiba sees another advantage. The World
cup, he says, will help unify our nation.

Sport, recreational activities and tourism could be said to have deepened
democracy in their own way. They create and foster identity and, through
interaction between cultures, promote the social cohesion necessary to move
South Africa closer to being a peace-loving and prosperous nation, a
heritage worth the effort. Thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, first of all, South Africa must be complimented
on recognising and preserving its rich heritage. In KwaZulu-Natal we are
proud of the fact that the government is restoring the very rich heritage
the province has.

We must also remember that, in the heritage basket, we must not forget the
contributions made by the broad cross-cultural society.
In this province where Parliament is seated, we must never forget the
original inhabitants and the contribution made by the Malays, the Dutch,
the French, the Portuguese and the English.

Social cohesion is vital in preserving our rich heritage. I may add that,
when we visit other countries, the greatest tourist attractions are the
heritage sites.

The erstwhile Minister of Arts and Culture, Dr Jordan, emphasised on the
occasion of Heritage Day Celebrations that it was not only a day on which
all South Africans were given the opportunity to pause, reflect and look
back on all the good things that had been passed on to us by those who came
before us, but that it was also a day to celebrate and to relive the
heritage that was given to us by our ancestors.

The role of heritage in social cohesion is recognised internationally, and
hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup will indeed create a golden platform and
opportunity to market South Africa as a popular and desirable destination.

The MF strongly believes that heritage promotion offers South Africa the
opportunity to use culture, cultural expression and the country’s rich
heritage as a vehicle in improving the lives of millions of South African
role-players in the cultural industries.

Mahatma Gandhi once said that the greatest integrity in an individual is
his culture.

We come from different ethnic beliefs and diverse religious backgrounds,
but we are one nation. Indeed, we are one nation, proudly South African.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Hon Chair, as we reflect on the importance of South
Africa’s Heritage Day, we need to ponder on whether our collective national
effort enhances or detracts from the very foundational provision of our
supreme law, the Constitution, which stipulates that we need to –

   Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on
   democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights.

It is my contention that as we truly embrace the essence and spirit of this
provision, without negating the other constitutional injunctions, we can be
firmly rooted on the path towards a more fundamental and sustainable social
cohesion agenda.

Furthermore, a true observance of this injunction will have drastically
positive implications for both the tangible, i.e the institutions put in
place for our democratic agenda, and the intangible heritage, which
includes the collective national mindset in which a democratic culture of
tolerance not only thrives, but can also be bequeathed to future
generations.

A cursory look at our national political discourse suggests that we have
yet to fully embrace a culture in which we “Heal the divisions of the past
and establish a society based on democratic values, social justice and
fundamental human rights”. The sad consequence of this is that we, perhaps
inadvertently, are on a sure path towards social disintegration.

It is simply an exercise against the entrenchment of democratic values when
a leading figure of the ruling party, Mr Gwede Mantashe, finds it easy to
call members of our Constitutional Court - which is a critical institution
for the advancement of our democracy – “counter-revolutionaries”.

What is more worrisome is the conspicuous silence of many in the ruling
party in rejecting Mr Mantashe’s rather unfortunate assertion. What does
this say about the maturity of our democracy and, by implication, the
building of our democratic project?

In order for judges to exercise their duties without fear or favour, in
defence of our democratic values, they must be immune from politically
inflammatory statements such as the one from Mr Mantashe and his miniature
carbon copy, Malema. If time was permitting, I could have mentioned many
other examples.
Mature democratic values – which we must leave for our children – require
an acceptance that opposition parties are there to enhance our democracy.
We must respect all institutions which are created to safeguard our
democracy and not denigrate them for the momentary pleasure of scoring
political points.

The narrative that the building of democracy is the monopoly of the ruling
party must be rejected. Firstly, freedom was not won by the ANC alone; it
was the collective effort of all South Africans. We must ensure that this
mindset permeates all our political exercises and, by extension, our
heritage. Secondly, elevating the ANC to the role of a divine ruler is bad
for our democracy.

We must attend urgently to the troubles faced by our cultural institutions
such as the Robben Island Museum, the National Library and many of the
other museums we have. But, on the eve of Heritage Day, I must mention that
the very portfolio committee in this Parliament responsible for this task
is currently not holding any committee meetings. It only held meetings to
discuss the budget and its strategic plan; no other meeting took place
after that.

Tangible and intangible cultural heritages are symbiotic and we cannot have
one without the other if we wish to have successful, sustainable social
cohesion.

The DA believes that the heritage that we should indeed let the future
generation of South Africans inherit, is a country with an open-opportunity
society in which every person is free, secure and equal, in which everyone
has the opportunity to improve the quality of his or her life and pursue
his or her dreams, and in which every language and culture enjoys equal
respect and recognition.

This heritage is grounded on the defence, promotion and extension of the
following principles: the fundamental rights and freedoms of every person,
including the right to freedom of conscience, speech, association and
movement; the rejection of unfair discrimination on any grounds; the
supremacy of the South African Constitution and the rule of law; the
language, cultural and religious rights of individuals and the communities
they create through free association; equality before the law; the
separation of legislative, executive and judicial power; a judiciary that
is independent; elections that are regular, free and fair; a representative
and accountable government elected on the basis of universal adult
suffrage; the devolution of power to locate government as close as possible
to the people; a clear division between the ruling party and the state;
respect for the right of a vibrant civil society and a free media to
function independently; the rejection of violence and intimidation as a
political instrument; the right of all people to private ownership and to
participate freely in the market economy; the progressive realisation of
access to housing, health services and social security for all people who
are unable to help themselves; the protection and conservation of the
environment; the right of all people to protection by the state from crime
and violence; and the right of all people of access to education and
training.

Allow me to close with the 1946 Afrikaans translation by H A Fagan of Enoch
Sontonga’s Nkosi Sikelel, which he wrote and composed in 1897:

   Uit duisende monde word die lied gedra.
   Ek sluit my oë; soos ’n serafskoor
   val daar stemme strelend op my oor:
   Nkosi Sikelel i’Afrika —
   Ons vra U seën, O Heer, vir Afrika.
   Ek kyk, en sien die skare voor my staan:
   Zoeloe en Xhosa, Sotho en Sjangaan,
   en ek, ’n Blanke — vele volkre, ja —
   almal verenigd. Uit duisende monde word die lied gedra,
   om God’s seën te vra
   op net een tuiste, net een vaderland,
   want die Alwyse het ons saam geplant
   en saam laat wortel in Suid-Afrika:
   Nkosi sikelel I’Afrika —
   seën, Heer, die land wat vele volkre dra.

Ek dank u. [Applous.] [I thank you.] [Applause.]]
Nkk M D NXUMALO: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. Sihlalo, oNgqongqoshe ikakhulu
uNgqongqoshe WeZobuciko Namasiko neSekela lakhe. Amalungu ePhalamende
ahloniphekile noNgqongqoshe bonke namaSekela abo. Le nkulumompikiswano
yenzeka ngesikhathi esifanele ngenyanga yamagugu, inyanga kaMandulo. Lesi
isikhathi sokuqala kwekhalenda labantu bokudabuka kulelizwe. Kuye kube yiyo
inyanga yokuqala ukulima, kulandele nezinye izinto ezihambisana nezempilo
kwimpilo yabantu abamnyama yokulwa nobubha ngokuthi basebenze ngokulima
baphinde babelane ngokudla emva kwesivuno.

Sinezinyanga zonyaka ezisemthethweni njengesizwe esimnyama. Lokhu okubizwa
ngekhalenda. Leli khalenda libeka izikhathi zokulima nokuvuna zonyaka.
Linika ulwazi ngemithetho elandelayo kwezolimo nezokulapha okuyizinto
ezisetshenziswa ngokwesilungu futhi akuvezwa ukuthi zazivele nobani.
Imiphakathi yendabuko ayihlomuli kulezi zinto.

Ngenxa yokwehlukahlukana kwamasiko, kumele lisetshenziswe leli khalenda
lendabuko ukuze linikeze amasiko esizwe nesizwe ithuba lokuthuthukisa
amagugu aso.

Ukuze sikwazi ukwenza ngcono lolu lwazi lwendabuko, kumele siqale kabusha,
sisebenzise leli khalenda labantu lemiphakathi yendabuko ngoba amasiko ethu
avuselelwa kulo. Isigaba sokuqala saleli khalenda, siqala ngoMandulo,
okuyisiqalo sonyaka omusha njengoba sazi ukuthi isikhathi sokuqala ukulima.
Izimvula ziye zine ngenyanga kaMfumfu, kwenziwe nemigubho yokubonga
uNkulunkulu ngokuna kwemvula nokuvunda kwenhlabathi.

Ngenyanga kaLwezi, izimbali ziyaqhakaza nemvelo yonke iqhakaze kabusha,
kuthenwe izihlahla ezithelayo. Lesi isikhathi sokugubha ubuhle bemvelo
nokubaluleka kwayo. Ngenyanga kaZibandlela, kuba nomgubho wokweshwama.
Ngesikhathi sezithelo zokuqala, le migubho ihambisana nemithandazo kamoya
kubantu bendabuko. Isigaba sesibili saleli khalenda, siba phakathi
kukaMasingana nenyanga kaMbasa. Kuyavunwa amasimu kudliwe kube mnandi kube
njeya kudunyiswe noNkulunkulu ngesivuno esihle kwenziwe neminikelo.

SinguKhongolose sithi: Akuvuselelwe izinsika nezinkambiso eziqhakambisa
ziphinde zikhuthaze amasiko ethu. Uhulumeni oholwa uKhongolose uzibophezela
ekwakhiweni kwesizwe esibumbene esakhelwe phezu kwesisekelo
soMthethosisekelo wentando yeningi ohlonipha wonke amasiko abantu
abaseNingizimu Afrika ngokuhlukahlukana kwabo.

UMongameli wezwe, uMsholozi, uNxamalala waphonsa inselelo enkulumeni yakhe
yokuvula iPhalamende ngenyanga kaNhlangulana, ngiyamcaphuna:

   The ANC-led government has once again committed itself to create a united
   cohesive society out of our fragmented past. We are called to continue
   the mission of promoting unity in diversity and develop a shared value
   system, based on the spirit of community solidarity and a caring society.
   Our shared value system should encourage us to become active citizens in
   the renewal of our country in which we build a common national identity.

Okunye okufanele singakulibali malungu ahloniphekile ePhalamende, ukuthi
amasiko nezinkambiso zendabuko kuwumthombo wolwazi nakunoma yimuphi
umntwana okhulayo ukuze akhule ezazi ubuyena, eqonda kangcono izinto
ezamukelekile nezingamukelekanga emphakathini. Ukulima nje kukodwa
kufundisa abantwana usiko lokuzisebenzela into anayo nokwazi ukuthi kumele
ayisebenzele ngokuzikhandla ukuze aphumelele.

Lokhu kukodwa kuyisikhali sesizwe sokulwa nobugebengu obunjengobusela.
Umlando wethu ubhalwe emasikweni ethu khona ukuze kuqondwe kangconywana
ngemvelaphi yesizwe esithile,kubalulekile ukuthi wazi amasiko nezinkambiso
zaso.Lokho kukhuthaza nenhlonipho phakathi kwezizwe.

Lokhu kwenza kubelula ukuthandana nokubumbana nokukhuthaza ukungacwasani
phakathi kwabantu abaphila ndawonye. Thina bantu baseNingizimu Afrika
singabantu abahlukene ngokwamasiko nemvelaphi, ngakho-ke kuyadingeka ukuthi
sikhuthaze imigubho yezinto ezingamagugu namasiko ngokuhlukana.

Asibuye isithunzi sethu ngokuthi sizazi ukuthi singobani, sivelaphi nokuthi
sibhekaphi. Siyazi ukuthi ukuqi nelwa ngabezizwe, esikubiza phecelezi nge-
colonialism kwaba nomthelela ongalungile obumbanweni lwabantu baseNingizimu
Afrika.

Lokhu kwaphinda kwakhuthazwa nayimithetho yokugweva nendawo, okuyiyo eyenza
ukuthi abantu bokudabuka kuleli lizwe baphucwe amalungelo abo omhlaba,
baphelelwe usiko lokuzenzela umnotho ngokuhwebelana ngemfuyo nezidlo
ezitshalwayo. Abantu bakithi benziwa izigqila zokusebenzela amanye amadoda
bashiye phansi okwabo.

Inselelo isenkulu Sihlalo. Yiliphi ikhambi esizolisebenzisa ukuvuselela
nokulondoloza amasiko nemfundiso yendabuko?  Kunenkulumo eyabekwa ubaba
umhlonishwa owayenguMongameli uThabo Mbeki mhla zingama-24 kuMandulo ka-
2004, ngiyamcaphuna:

   The weavers of iHluzo and Isilulu, the baskets from Hlabisa woven with
   care by Reuben Ndwandwe and Beauty Ngcongo, the makers of Ntwana dolls,
   the Letsema of the Basotho women, the iNcwala the Reed dance are only
   some of the traditions that have survived the passage of time. We must
   confront this challenge every day and ensure that we bring to a halt the
   erosion and destruction of our traditions and beliefs. This is necessary
   because if, as Africans, we are to claim the 21st century for ourselves,
   we have a duty to preserve our tradition and heritage.

Le nselelo idinga mina nawe nabantwana bethu omhlophe nomnyama siyithathe
ukuze sakhe isizwe esibumbene ngokwempilo sihlukane ngamasiko; sibe
nokuhlonipheka okususelwe esisekelweni somkhombandlela woMqulu weNkululeko
othi:

   The doors of learning and culture shall be opened! The government shall
   discover, develop and encourage national talent for the enhancement of
   our cultural life. All the cultural treasures of mankind shall be open to
   all, by exchange of books, ideas and contact with other lands.

Kumele senze izimo zempilo zibe ngcono ukuze sikwazi ukwabelana ngolwazi
lwazo zonke izinto esizenzayo empilweni. Imiphakathi idinga ukuthuthukiswa
ngokuthi kwakhiwe izindlela zokulondoloza lezo zimfundiso zendabuko
nezindlela zokuphila zasemandulo. Angenze nje izibonelo
ezimbalwa,emkhakheni wezempilo, ezesayensi kanye nezolimo.

Ngesikhathi sangaphambili imiphakathi yabamnyama yayingayazi lento okuthiwa
ukuhlinzwa komuntu uma ebeletha. Kwakunezinto ezenziwayo uma ingane
ingavumi ukuguquka uma umama ebeletha.

Kwakungekho muntu ohlinzwayo. Kwakwaziwa ukuthi uma kunomoya ovunguza
ubheke endaweni ethile kusuke uchaza ukuthini. Kwezolimo abalimi bomdabu
babazi ukuthi uma izitshalo uma zishintsha umbala ngaphambi kokuzithelela
kusuke kudingeka ukuthi kushintshwe izitshalo kutshalwe enye into kuleyo
nsimu. Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms M D NXUMALO: Thank you Chairperson. Chairperson, Ministers, especially
the Minister of Arts and Culture and her deputy, hon Members of Parliament
and all the Deputy Ministers present here, this debate takes place at an
appropriate time which is during heritage month, September. This is the
beginning of the calendar of the indigenous people of this country. This is
the time to start ploughing, and other things, which pertain to the health
and livelihood of the black people, would then follow. And they devise ways
of fighting poverty by ploughing and sharing food among themselves after
the harvest.

We have our own official calendar as black people. And this calendar
stipulates the times for ploughing and harvesting. It also provides
knowledge about the rules that are followed with regard to agriculture and
medicine - there are things that are used in western medicine of which the
origins are never revealed. Indigenous communities do not benefit from
these things. And because of cultural diversity, this indigenous calendar
must be used so that it can provide each ethnic group an opportunity to
develop its culture.

In order for us to improve this indigenous knowledge, we need to start
afresh by using the calendar of the indigenous communities because our
traditions are revived through it. The first phase of this calendar starts
in September which is the beginning of the New Year, as that is the time to
start ploughing. Seasonal rains start falling in October and then the
celebrations for thanking God for the rain and the fertile soil are held.

And in November the flowers blossom and the whole of nature blossoms again;
fruit trees are also pruned. This is the time to celebrate the beauty of
nature and its importance. In December, there is the celebration of the
first fruits. And during this time of the first fruits, indigenous people
pray to their ancestors. The second phase of this calendar is between
January and April. During this phase fields are harvested, feasts and
celebrations are held and sacrifices are made in order to thank and praise
God for a good harvest.

As the ANC we are saying that we should strengthen the pillars and revive
the practices that distinguish and promote our cultures. The ANC-led
government is committing itself to nation-building, which is done on the
basis of constitutional democracy which respects all the different cultures
of the people of South Africa.

The President of the country, Msholozi, Nxamalala issued a challenge in his
state of the nation address in June, and I quote:

   ANC-led government has once again committed itself to create a united
   cohesive society out of our fragmented past. We are called to continue
   the mission of promoting unity in diversity and develop a shared value
   system, based on the spirit of community solidarity and a caring society.
   Our shared value system should encourage us to become active citizens in
   the renewal of our country in which we build a common national identity.


Another thing which we should not forget hon Members of Parliament is that,
culture and traditional practices are the source of knowledge to any
growing child in order for him/her to grow up knowing his/her origins, and
to have a better understanding of the norms which are acceptable and those
that are unacceptable in the community. Ploughing, on its own, teaches a
child to fend for him/herself and that in order for him/her to get
something, he/she needs to work very hard to achieve it.

This, alone, is a nation’s weapon to fight crimes like theft. Our history
is engraved in our traditions. In order to understand the origins of a
certain tribe better, it is important to understand its culture and its
ways of life. And that encourages respect among different ethnic groups.

This makes it easy for the different ethnic groups to adore one another,
and to be united. And it also discourages discrimination amongst people who
are living together. We, the people of South Africa have different
traditions and origins; therefore it is imperative that we encourage the
celebration of our heritage and traditions separately.

Let us bring back our dignity by knowing who we are, where we come from and
where we are going. We know that colonialism had a negative impact on the
unity of the African people.

This was also encouraged by the Land Act which resulted in the indigenous
people losing their rights to land ownership, subsequently forfeiting their
rights to creating wealth through trading with livestock and agricultural
produce. Our people were made slaves by working for other people leaving
behind what was theirs.

The challenge is still big, Chairperson. Which remedy are we going to use
to revive and preserve our traditions and indigenous teachings? There is a
speech that was made by the former hon President Thabo Mbeki on 24
September 2004, and I quote:

   The weavers of iHluzo and Isilulu, the baskets from Hlabisa woven with
   care by Reuben Ndwandwe and Beauty Ngcongo, the makers of Ntwana dolls,
   the Letsema of the Basotho women, the iNcwala the Reed dance are only
   some of the traditions that have survived the passage of time. We must
   confront this challenge every day and ensure that we bring to a halt the
   erosion and destruction of our traditions and beliefs. This is necessary
   because if, as Africans, we are to claim the 21st century for ourselves,
   we have a duty to preserve our tradition and heritage.

This challenge needs you and me and our children both black and white to
use it in building a nation that is united in life but diversified in its
traditions; to be respectable through the values that are entrenched in the
guidelines of the Freedom Charter, that states that:

   The doors of learning and culture shall be opened! The government shall
   discover, develop and encourage national talent for the enhancement of
   our cultural life. All the cultural treasures of mankind shall be open to
   all, by exchange of books, ideas and contact with other lands.

We need to make the living conditions better so that we are able to share
all the knowledge of the things that we do in life. The communities need to
be developed by creating ways to preserve those indigenous teachings and
the traditional ways of life. Let me just mention a few examples with
regard to health, science and agriculture. In the olden days black
communities were not familiar with giving birth by Caesarean section. There
were things that were done if the baby could not come out head first. They
never gave birth by Caesarean section.

Indigenous people knew what it meant when the wind was blowing from a
certain direction. And in agriculture, indigenous farmers knew that if
plants changed colour before they could be watered, it meant that they
should remove those plants and plant something else in that plot. Thank
you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, hon member. That
concludes the debate. Hon members, I have been informed that the Second
Order of the Day will stand over, so the Secretary will read the Third
Order.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION -
 ENGAGEMENT WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF BASIC EDUCATION IN PRETORIA ON 11 AND 12
                                 AUGUST 2009

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I now call the hon chairperson of
the Portfolio Committee on Education, Ms Chohan.

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, hon members, it isn’t possible for me, in the
five minutes allowed to me, to deal very comprehensively with the report
that we are tabling in the House today, suffice to note a few things. The
first is that it is rare to find a situation such as the one that prevails
currently with regard to the department in the sense that, technically and
legally speaking, the Department of Basic Education does not exist. So,
this report should actually be the report of the Portfolio Committee on
Basic Education on its visit to and engagement with the Department of
Education.
This is just a legal technicality and, practically speaking, for all
intents and purposes, there is of course work that is being done on behalf
of the Department of Basic Education.

Very briefly, one of the chief concerns, as always, is the issue of the
delivery of quality education in our schools. I hesitate to say this simply
because I have such a little time. But it is incorrect to paint all schools
with the same brush. We have some really excellent schools.

Overall, I think that there is a huge concern that the legacy of apartheid
has left us with an enormous burden as far as quality education is
concerned. There are many and varied factors pertaining to this, all of
which ... [Interjections.] I am not sure what you are disagreeing about.
All of the factors are critically important to address.

We certainly, from our side, are aware that, overall, our schools, when
compared to other schools in other countries, do perform badly. It is of
great concern that they perform badly when compared to other countries on
the African continent, particularly countries poorer than South Africa.
This, clearly, is a big issue. Happily, we found a department that is very
focused on this issue and is particularly driven to deliver an upgrade on
this matter. We are particularly pleased that the Minister of Basic
Education stated upfront that for her and for her department it was a
singular priority to deliver on the curriculum, and all efforts would be
made to ensure that the department does indeed not lose this focus.

Unfortunately, we know that this is not just a simple matter of leaving it
to the national department alone to reverse the legacy of apartheid in our
education system. Indeed, every single one of us has to play a role. We
need to be more committed to the culture of learning – and we have been
talking about the issue of culture today.

I do think that one of the things that need the specific attention of all
South Africans, is the culture of learning and teaching. Certainly, from
our side, as the portfolio committee, we hope to be quite instrumental in
leading a campaign that will resuscitate this particular and very vital
issue.

To illustrate the point that I am making about the department not being
able to deliver on its own some of the very commendable targets that it
presented to us, we were very fortunate to be there when they presented the
manual for the Foundations for Learning Campaign. This is really a manual
aimed at being a teaching aid for teachers in the foundation phase - Grades
1 to 3 - to guide them, amongst other things, through their day. So this is
really a very comprehensive, really good quality manual that should be on
the desk of every teacher in every school.

However, some portfolio committee members phoned the schools in some of
their constituencies and found that some schools had the manuals while
others did not. This was not, interestingly, the schools in the far-flung
outer reaches of our country. but very much those in the urban areas.

So it is these issues that we need to highlight and assist in rectifying.
One of the biggest challenges for the department is going to be actually
getting those efficiencies in order, and we certainly will be keeping tabs
on this, amongst other things. Thank you very much for your time.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS -
            FOURTH QUARTER EXPENDITURE REPORT AS AT 30 MARCH 2009

  (Consideration of Report of Standing Committee on Appropriations thereon)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I now call the hon the chairperson
of the Standing Committee on Appropriations, Mr Sogoni.

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, the executive, colleagues and members of the
Standing Committee on Appropriations, the democratic government has since
1999 adopted the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, the MTEF, a three-year
tool of budgeting that allows for proper planning, certainty and
predictability. That means that every department knows more or less how
much they will receive the next financial year or two years later.

The Division of Revenue in 2008 enjoined every department to start planning
their infrastructure projects for the following year by June to avoid any
kind of delay in implementation. Many departments heeded the call, although
some struggled to comply.

On the occasion of the opening of Parliament, the President made a clarion
call on all departments. He said: “Government will have to act prudently -
no wastage, no rollovers of funds - every cent must be spent wisely and
fruitfully.”

However, the analysis of the expenditure of the fourth quarter report of
2008-09 reveals that the former Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,
as it was called then, underspent by R505 million – that is 7,7% of their
budget. Of that amount, R250 million had already been rolled over twice,
thus being in contravention of section 6(4)(3) of the Treasury regulations
which prohibits that practice. In other words, they can only do this on the
basis of approval by National Treasury. We did not see that that was done.

We also noted that the Department of Labour underspent by R73 million owing
to a number of vacant inspector posts, inspectors who are critical to the
work that the department does in monitoring all kinds of compliance by
employers. The reason for these vacancies was attributed to low salaries
paid by the department.

The Standing Committee on Appropriations feels that the department cannot
afford to do without labour inspectors. They are central in protecting
vulnerable workers who are not unionised.

We also noted that Home Affairs did not spend the R110 million that was
mentioned earlier. However, the Deputy Minister did respond to this.

However, the standing committee is of the view that it will, in
collaboration with the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, invite the
State Information Technology Agency, Sita, in order to resolve this matter.
Another instance of underspending was by the Department of Health as a
result of the withholding of funds, because the Western Cape delayed the
issuing of the tender for the building of the hospital in Khayelitsha, thus
depriving the people of Khayelitsha access to health care.

Also, the Department of Agriculture could not spend R60 million on a
project called Ilima, because they had not finalised service level
agreements with the Development Bank of Southern Africa that was identified
to carry out the project. This project was meant to promote security for
the poorest of the poor. So, the poor were, again, deprived as a result of
the inefficiency of officials. Clearly, Parliament can protect the poor
through tighter oversight and accountability.

The Department of Transport experienced overspending in a programme dealing
with bus subsidies, because they did not have sufficient funds. The
committee was informed that this matter was being resolved or discussed
with the department and National Treasury by clarifying policies on
subsidies.

All these matters need to be resolved sooner rather than later because the
poor are always the victims. Parliament has thus a duty to protect the
poor.

We will not create the 500 000 jobs unless the departments charged with
their responsibility to do capital expenditure, start spending
appropriately. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

      THE CHALLENGES POSED BY THE CURRENT GLOBAL ECONOMIC CRISIS ON THE
                             DEVELOPMENTAL STATE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Ms J L FUBBS: Chairperson, comrades, colleagues, hon members of this House,
indeed this is not simply a challenge in the title, but for all of us here
and even internationally highly topical.
About a year ago we heard about the collapse of Lehman Brothers and that
signalled a global economic crisis that has reverberated around the world,
encouraging many states to run and call for protectionist cover. Exports
from developing countries were knocked down, leading to the closure of
factories and retrenchment of workers. Retrenched workers joined their
unemployed brothers and sisters. The most vulnerable members of our society
have become victims of unbridled greed.

We may well ask ourselves: How can South Africa combat the challenges of
the current global economic crises? However, we have already learnt this
year, in this term of Parliament, that we have indeed been more fortunate
than a number of countries in Africa and in the South and, in fact, in the
West itself. There is absolutely no doubt that the financial fundamentals
that we have developed over the past 15 years have stood us in good stead,
for example, the National Credit Act and the Extended Public Works
Programme, and more recently the infrastructural programme around Fifa. We
have, even prior to the stimulus package, taken a decision to actually
allocate more than R7 billion to infrastructural investment and
construction and development.

What is interesting, however, when we talk about how we as a developmental
state overcome these challenges, is that we will often think of the
experiences of the Asian Tigers, that mythical miracle that collapsed about
20 years ago. We may ask ourselves whether that wasn’t touted as a
developmental state, and indeed that was, but that’s about all it was. It
certainly understood about state intervention but it relied upon government
by decree. It was an authoritarian regime which pursued its development to
become an industrialised state that would rival that of the major powers of
the West but at the expense of workers and civil liberties.

Indeed we know that that is not what our people fought for. Of course
people fought against apartheid, but we seem to forget that they also
fought for human rights. We had a Reconstruction and Development Programme,
RDP  and a Freedom Charter before. That all came together in our own
Constitution with the Bill of Rights.

Certainly, our idea of a developmental state is more along the lines of, as
Gandhi put it, “the cornerstone of the developmental state is one where
there is constant dialogue and listening to the voice of the people.” Which
is why we find in this fourth term of Parliament that in one sense we are
returning to our roots, as we move around among our communities more
earnestly and stop talking but rather start listening to what people are
saying and include that in the way in which we are managing government, and
in this Parliament the way in which we are exercising our oversight.

Indeed, a developmental state, as we understand it in an ANC government, is
one that is people-driven and one that directs the pace and nature of the
economy in pursuit of transformation. It also requires, as other members of
the ANC team will put to the House, a radically different public service
mindset. In the executive we also have a reconfigured Cabinet to capture
this new approach. In the Presidency itself evidence of this is in the
National Planning Commission and in the Performance Monitoring and
Evaluation as well as Administration.

What you now have is a clear understanding that a developmental state is
not just going to be about policy and it not just going to be about rights.
It is about responsibilities, performance, planning for that and about
actually monitoring and evaluating it and reviewing it if necessary and not
trying to run postmortems five years later. It is also one in which you
find that the ANC government’s commitment to fighting poverty and arresting
jobless growth is absolutely key in a developmental state and is not simply
an economic question.

There is absolutely no doubt that, unlike that which was launched in the
Asian Tigers and indeed in Japan itself, we actually understand that a
developmental state will collapse unless it is directly linked to social
and economic development.

In this way we cannot have jobless growth. We have also put a stop to
deindustrialisation and we are funding companies in distress,
reinvigorating the agricultural sector and rural development. Rural
development is not simply digging in a field, it will have industrial
development alongside it and it will venture forth through new systems of
transport and with field workers who will actually work within a South
African and African system and not try to impose something that will not
work in our country.
We recognise that, as President Zuma has said over and over again, the silo
concept of implementation cannot work in a developmental state. To combat
the current global crisis we will need an integrated co-ordinated approach
to planning and policy implementation. It requires a collaborative effort
from all stakeholders, not only the public and private sector working
together, but both working together with the unions and civil society.

The core of all of this in the productive sector itself is our workers, and
we will recognise that the biggest and most sustainable investment we can
make is to invest in employment and not to simply see the cost of
employment as paying out wages all the time, but as also contributing
directly to increasing the productivity base of South Africa.

In conclusion, it is important to clarify that the kind of work that we are
looking at is decent, quality work, retraining and upgrading the skills and
recognising and developing the potential of the people in our developmental
state. That is the basic of combating the economic global challenges facing
us today. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Hon Chairman, hon members, what South Africa needs is a
viable economic policy that encourages the creation of sustainable jobs.
The ANC’s response to the present job crisis - after having listened to the
hon Fubbs - is to implement the so-called “developmental state”. But this
is not clear because there is no consensus within the ANC on what a
developmental state entails.

South Africa is going through a severe economic recession. The question
that every South African must ask is whether this particular policy that
relates to a developmental state will lead to sustainable growth and
sustainable jobs, or if a developmental state is just another experiment
for short-term political gain. The fact remains that thousands of members
of pension funds and South Africans from all walks of life have become
poorer during this present recession.

This particular economic model, namely the developmental state, was used -
as the hon Fubbs said - in a number of Asian economies to industrialise and
attain economic growth, with varying degrees of success. At the same time,
the obsession with centralisation in these countries impeded the evolution
of democracy. Whether we believe it or not, the key to sustained economic
growth is also economic freedom. I think the hon Fubbs quoted Japan, but
there are a number of other countries such as Korea and Taiwan. One of the
outstanding characteristics of these particular developmental states was a
very efficient public service that was able to deliver. The question we
have to ask ourselves is how our present Public Service will fulfil the
requirements and needs of a developmental state.

What we need is less debate around redesigning South Africa’s entire
economic growth model, and more time spent on addressing fundamental
economic deficiencies within our particular system. First and foremost, the
inefficiency of the public sector is untenable. Regulatory issues that
impede South Africa’s global competitiveness must be taken into account.

The skills mismatch with an educational system, which is not responding to
the needs of the South African economy, is also of grave importance. Our
university enrolment rate is only 15%, and I am quoting this from the
latest edition of the Global Competitive Index. Somebody must take
responsibility for this particular state of affairs.

Another factor which impedes economic growth in our country is our onerous
labour regime. Parastatals such as Eskom and others are poorly managed and
fail to provide adequate power for economic growth. Something else that
impedes growth is the poor security situation and the cost of crime and
violence. The question that is often asked by members of the public is
whether the police are able to provide adequate protection.

During this economic recession, it is of vital importance that we keep our
economy competitive. Therefore, the appropriate reciprocal relationship
between the private and public sectors must exist. In fact, we must
strengthen this particular relationship.
Die ANC is reeds vir meer as 15 jaar aan bewind. Word die ontwikkelingstaat
nie deur Luthuli-huis as ’n model gebruik om meer beheer oor die ekonomie
te verkry nie? Waarom moet beplanning en beheer sentraal geskied? Dit is ’n
vraag wat nie net in Suid-Afrika gevra word nie. Dit word regoor die wêreld
gevra. Die staat speel wel ’n sleutelrol in ekonomiese ontwikkeling. Sy
kernfunksie is dié van reguleerder, maar die privaatsektor is ook
belangrik. Tewens, as ons byvoorbeeld kyk na die private gesondheidsektor,
sien ons dat die private gesondheidsektor die openbare gesondheidsektor
nodig het. Daar moet ’n simbiotiese verhouding geskied en vice versa. Ons
kan nie van die ekonomiese werklikhede wegkom nie.

As dit by ekonomiese ontwikkeling kom, gaan dit oor meer as net woorde. In
die 15 jaar van die ANC-bewind, is daar etlike gonswoorde deur die ANC
gebruik soos Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa,
Asgisa; Reconstruction and Development Programme, RDP; Growth, Employment
and Redistribution, Gear, en andere. Die DA sê, in wese gaan dit oor die
uitbou van ’n ope geleentheidsgedrewe samelewing wat spesiale klem plaas op
die ontwikkeling en bemagtiging van al die mense in Suid-Afrika, nie net ’n
klein minderheids- of elite groep wat noue politieke en ekonomiese bande
met ’n politieke party, naamlik die ANC, het nie. Ek is bevrees dit is die
toedrag van sake, of ons dit nou wil glo of nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC has been in power for more than 15 years already. Is Luthuli House
not using the developmental state as a model to get more control over the
economy? Why should planning and control be centralised? This question has
not only been asked in South Africa. It has been asked throughout the
world.

The state is indeed playing a key role in economic development. Its core
function is that of regulator, but the private sector is also important.
Besides, when we consider the private health sector, for example, we find
that the private health sector needs the public health sector. There has to
be a symbiotic relationship, and vice versa. We cannot escape the economic
realities.

When it comes to economic development, paying lip-service is not enough. In
the 15 years of ANC rule, a number of buzzwords were used by the ANC, for
instance, Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa,
Asgisa; Reconstruction and Development Programme, RDP; Growth, Employment
and Redistribution, Gear, and some other buzzwords. The DA is saying that
it is in essence about the development of an open opportunity society with
special emphasis on the development and empowerment of all the people of
South Africa, not only a small minority or elite group who has close
political and economic ties with a political party, namely the ANC. I am
afraid this is the state of affairs, whether or not we want to believe it.]

One of the positive outcomes of the Asian developmental state was that the
small business sector in Japan and Taiwan grew at a phenomenal pace because
an entrepreneurial culture was cultivated. It is tragic that South Africa
does not have an entrepreneurial culture and that the ANC government’s
actions do not promote this. In fact, they run counter to it. Government
makes it more difficult for entrepreneurs and small businesses to operate
and save due to excessive red tape and a regulatory framework that is not
favourable to business creation and sustainable job creation. We can look
at the facts.

Instead of building an Asian tiger, the government is creating an African
ostrich. I use this metaphor of the African ostrich because it is of vital
importance that we face the real economic challenges that pose a threat to
our economic wellbeing in a courageous, bold manner and not hide behind a
controversial economic model which was used in the 70s and 80s in Asia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Chair, Cope agrees that this is a big question that
has to be interrogated soberly by all South Africans. Within this context,
Cope notes that our country in the post-apartheid period, in spite of
progress made, still has vast pockets of unemployment, poverty, skills
deficits and inequalities. Even though the world has opened up to a
democratic South Africa, we have not developed our people adequately and we
have not developed sufficiently as an export-driven economy.

We are still too reliant on our mineral resources. How will our economy
survive if demand for gold, platinum, steel and coal were to decline
sharply? This is not idle speculation. Even as I speak, the demand for
manganese, ferrotungsten, ferroalloys and ferrochrome has been severely
depressed for many months now. Our challenge, clearly, is not to be solely
and entirely dependent on mining for our export income. This would be a
huge mistake. We need to invest in manufacturing.

It is alarming to note that it is the domestic demand that is driving two
thirds of the real growth of our domestic production. We in South Africa
have not learnt lessons from the Asians who fostered domestic savings to
fund their industrial growth. We in South Africa have negligible savings,
and this stifles credit creation and investment in new projects.

In our country, growth is more dependent on consumption than it is on
investment. According to the World Bank, investments cannot contribute only
25% to the growth of GDP, believe it or not. This is alarming as it is
unsustainable. We urge that government address this glaring failure
urgently. We urge that government take steps to support vigorously the
creation of a culture of savings on the part of our citizens. The previous
Minister of Finance was persistent in urging people to save. We most
certainly need some extraordinary measures in this regard. Despite all the
above challenges, we have to save as South Africans. We have to save.

While we are on the topic of the Asian tigers, as espoused by the hon
Fubbs, we also need to make the point that our trade needs to focus on Bric
countries for expansion and growth – that is Brazil, Russia, India and
China. This would be in line with what Doreen Massey terms “Power
Geometry”. Yes, we need to reconfigure our trading patterns.

Another enormous challenge is that of price—fixing. Cartels continue to
operate in our country, keeping prices artificially high through collusion.
Cartels have operated in the food industry, in bakeries, in energy, in the
construction industry, with regard to plastic pipes and in many other
areas. As a result of cartels, price-fixing is endemic. Price-fixing is a
major challenge to our economy and a major inhibitor of economic growth.

This is a challenge that has to be met head-on, and the government has
actually failed us in this regard. It has to be met on every front. It must
be defeated because it locks out or marginalises smaller businesses.
Producers of steel in South Africa, for example, have been charging import
parity prices to South African companies for the last seven years. This is
so utterly wrong. Iron ore is locally mined and our country is a net
exporter of steel. Yet, manufacturing is constrained through such
collusion. As a result, we import stainless pots from Korea and elsewhere
rather than making them here. In essence, we are exporting jobs. This is
what we are doing, and we cannot tolerate this. We have to change it. The
South African government has to uproot this practice.

The next challenge to our economy and our government is that of labour
productivity. We don’t fare very well internationally in this regard. Lack
of skills, long journeys to and from work for workers, inadequate nutrition
and limitations in education and training have all taken their toll on
productivity. If we were internationally competitive in this regard, our
GDP, according to the World Bank, could have grown by at least 3%. That
would be a staggering growth increase.

Another very obvious challenge comes from the cost of capital. An
industrialist in the UK or in the USA could probably borrow money for
investment at four times less the price than what it is in our country. In
this regard, we suggest that government make available approximately
R10 billion to the banking sector at approximately 2% for lending to
investors and farmers at half the market rate. Stringent conditions will
apply to ensure that funds are used for purposes of new investment and
nothing else. It is better to use taxpayer money to help out than to bail
out companies. Viable companies and small, medium and micro enterprises –
SMMEs - should have the propensity to borrow, and banks should have the
propensity to lend. By ring-fencing a special pool of investment capital at
half the market cost, investments will be stimulated. Economic analysis has
shown that borrowing for investment purposes is sensitive to real interest
rates. We are therefore proposing a two-tiered lending approach.

Finally, we need to meet the great challenge of our political and economic
role in Africa. We face what is called the “hegemon’s dilemma”: small
though we are in the world, we are very big on the continent. We must seek
integration and multilateral co-operation and not domination on the
continent. What we need is the fostering of a national consensus through
partnerships and solidarity. We need a new way and a new agenda for change.
I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Hon Chairperson, firstly, I would like to thank hon Fubbs for
the motion. I think this is a very interesting debate, one that we have had
before in the third Parliament but one in terms of which the issues cannot
be overemphasised. I am also glad that the hon Fubbs emphasised social
development and not only pie-in-the-sky things that one normally talks -
Asia, Japan and the rest of the world.

However, I want to submit that the challenges that are posed by the global
economic crisis and the developmental state are challenges that we accept.
We know what happened globally; we know what happened in the US; and we
know that that has had an impact on the South African economy, to a lesser
extent because we had a very good banking system.

However, what I want to submit to the hon Fubbs through you, Chair, is that
it is not only external factors that are going to cause us not to meet this
“Manna from Heaven” developmental state that we want, but also internal
factors and internal weaknesses in the way government implements a number
of programmes that are put on paper. I will refer to this a little later
on. The situation in South Africa is no different to that in any other part
of the world.

As I said, while we might not have felt the adverse effects of this crisis
as harshly as other countries did, there is no doubt that it has impacted
negatively on us. Hundreds of thousands of jobs have been lost, while
hardly any are being created; people are losing their houses and assets;
and more people will be pushed into poverty.

However, we have just had the hon Sogoni present his report of the Standing
Committee on Appropriations which this House accepted, and we saw how
departments were not spending money. It has been reported by Treasury that
Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal have already blown their budgets to the tune of
R5,8 billion – R5,8 billion! They have run up R260 million a year on
cellphone calls, travel and accommodation bills, costing our taxpayers
money. Regarding education, Dr Brown from the Treasury said that South
Africa spends a lot on education, but the outcomes don’t reflect it.

Closer monitoring would allow for early interventions to deal with these
challenges. We are also told that overspending worries the Treasury. It
hits the provinces’ bank balances and can slow down service delivery for
years ahead, especially as the slowdown on the economy, owing to the global
financial crisis, has put pressure on the provincial income. When looking
at investment, what South Africans need is a return on their investments.
Taxpayer money of R767 billion needs to be spent wisely. All of us in this
house, in government and in the executive have to ask ourselves if we are
doing enough to enough value for money. The simple answer to that is no.

We welcome the monitoring and the evaluation, but until and unless we sort
out internal weaknesses in the way in which our government operates, we are
not going to have this developmental state we talk about. However, I think
we need to look for a seed of a hidden opportunity in every instance of
adversity. And that seed for us is to sharpen our pencils and be alive to
the global economic crisis ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs E M COLEMAN: Hon Chairperson, Deputy Minister and colleagues, let me
start by dedicating this speech to my mother who is turning 76 years old
today. [Applause.] I want to say to her, Mom, I thank you. I really thank
God for giving me a mom of your calibre, and may God bless you with many
more years to come.

Thank you very much, hon Chairperson, for the opportunity afforded me to
discuss this very important topic. The ANC sees a successful developmental
state as that which has a strong planning capacity and the capacity to
intervene in strategic areas, meaning that it is a state that acts as an
effective system of continual co-ordination, monitoring and evaluation of
the implementation of government programmes and projects.

The ANC further understands that in order to achieve this, we need to have
a public service that has the capacity to execute the tasks with which it
has been entrusted and that does so through placing the right personnel in
the correct positions. I think we are the first people, hon Singh, to
acknowledge that we need the right personnel in the right positions and,
where this is not the case, corrective measures need to be implemented
through training and redeployment.

Yes, this is a problem, but it is important not to find fault, and rather,
as a good citizen, to say that these are challenges – as you have been
saying - and this is where we think we will be able to go. This particular
topic is very important, because we have created a platform in terms of
which people can assist in responding to the very same challenges we are
facing today.
You have that opportunity then to assist because, as the current
government, we understand that we are servants of the people and we open
our ears, not just to listen, but with the understanding that you are here
to contribute. Whatever you are contributing is very important, especially
if that contribution is towards reshaping our country, because nobody has
the remedy for the challenges that we have.

The global economic crisis has increased the demand on the state to speed
up its pace of delivery, while, at the same time, posing the challenge of
increasing the pace of our response to the economic crisis. To me, it
challenges us to transform our attitudes on how we do our business, meaning
that we have to apply a professional ethos and values, while not running
the risk of moving towards stagnation and chaos.

Previous speakers mentioned how countries like China have succeeded, but
they also cautioned that when we do transformation or put reform systems in
place, we must guard against being very hasty, because if we are too hasty,
we may face chaos in the process. But, if we are too slow, we may face
stagnation.

Good governance demands a very alert public service that is responsive to
the needs of our people, especially the rural poor. The public service
needs to respond in an equitable and transparent manner.
One should remember that the state must be able to intervene as and when
needed. For it to respond, it needs a quality, professional, committed and
responsive public service. What is also important is for there to be a well-
designed set of institutions and systems for budget formulation and
execution. I agree with Mr Singh there, because that will help to define
how public funds are raised, allocated and managed. To me these are quite
serious prerequisites for financial prudency.

I want to join the speakers who always argue that our challenge lies in an
incapacity to co-ordinate, co-operate, monitor and evaluate our brilliant
and responsive programmes, policies and legislation that are already in
place. If we are to see more of an impact, we have to refocus our energies
towards results-based budgeting and performance budgeting which the Public
Finance Management Act was geared up to achieve.

The only problem with the Act is that it is too compliance-based and it
also promotes budgeting that directs planning rather than vice versa.
Although it promotes transparency and timeous reporting, it lacks the
mechanisms to foster this. Moreover, the authority to budget and spend lies
with the accounting officer, who is an official and is not forced to
consult, even though he could consult an executing authority regarding
allocations to priority programmes and projects.

We also need to remember that timelines are not entirely flexible within
the Public Finance Management Act regulations. If executing authorities are
not vigilant, they find themselves rubber-stamping what officials have
already concluded. This then concretises the criticism that planning
follows budgeting. We have to turn the situation around in a speedy manner
in order to avoid the repetitive cycle so that we can avoid the same
occurrences in the future, especially starting from the next financial
year.

I want to put forward a case study that was done in Mpumalanga around early
childhood development, which we all know is a national priority - and we
all know that many people refer to the lack of early childhood development
as an impediment to development in our rural areas.

This illustrates the dangers related to the lack of co-ordination and
synergy within our programmes. In Mpumalanga, for instance, we have a
population of more than 3,6 million people and, of that population, 7% are
children between the ages of 0 and 4. About 20% of those children are
orphans.

Based on statistics from 2006, more than 2% live in abject poverty, more
than 3 000 are in pre-Grade R, and 27% are in Grade R. They are served by
268 early childhood development centres, of which 220 are community based.
They are subsidised at R4,40 per child in the rural and previously
disadvantaged areas, while the private ones are subsidised at R11,00 per
learner, per month. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, this global economic crisis has brutally
exposed the shallowness of our economy. We have clearly failed over the
past 15 years to diversify sufficiently our industrial base from that of a
minerals–energy complex.

We have also undergone a period of deindustrialisation in which we have
become overly reliant on our commodity exports, and have in turn imported
most of our manufactured goods. This has led to our entering into this
economic crisis with the vulnerable position of a current account deficit.
It is now time for us to be bold in our development planning and put
measures in place that can truly build up an industrial base that caters
both to local needs and positions us as a leader in the emerging fields,
particularly those related to the green economy. I thank you.

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Chairperson, the global economic crisis is one year old -
if one measures from the time it became public when several major American
financial institutions were on the brink of collapse owing to dubious
credit practices. Since that time the effects triggered by that financial
crisis have reverberated around the world and have even been felt in
countries, like our own, where stringent financial and credit regulations
are in place.

We do not dispute that the global economy has had an effect on us, but we
should not lose sight of two important factors. Firstly, we knew about this
crisis from the outset and that government was in a position to devise
adequate responses.

Secondly, external pressures do not negate the constitutional obligations
of government, nor do they nullify the promises upon which the ruling party
won its electoral mandate. It is exactly this context that should have made
the government use each cent wisely and stop turning government functions
into extravagant and costly pageants that are barely disguised political
rallies for the ruling party. Thank you.

Mr N E GCWABAZA: Hon Chairperson, hon members, the conception of a
developmental state can be traced back to the Freedom Charter, to the
Reconstruction and Development Programme and to the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa – and, most recently, to the ANC’s 52nd conference
resolutions and the ANC 2009 election manifesto.
Therefore, there is an explicit commitment by the ANC government to the
creation of a democratic developmental state. This is based on the belief
in the ANC that government cannot overcome the current challenges facing
our country outside of the developmental state. These challenges, worsened
by the global economic crisis, are fighting poverty, fighting inequality
and fighting unemployment, as well as delivering services to our people.

We firmly believe that it is through direct state intervention that the
economy will become globally competitive, that it will increase
investments, that it will achieve high growth rates and create decent
employment.

Eminyakeni eyishumi nanhlanu yombuso wentandoyeningi, kunobufakazi
obungephikiswe bokuthi uhulumeni kaKhongolose uqale ngempumelelo ukwakha
iNingizimu Afrika ethuthukayo. Lokhu kubonakala ngezibalo zenhlolovo ezithi
phakathi konyaka ka-1995 nonyaka ka-2002 umnotho wakha imisebenzi eyisigidi
eziyi-1,7 kanti phakathi kuka-2002 ukuya ku-2006 kwakhiwe imisebenzi
eyisigidi-eziyi-1,2 ngaphezu kwalokhu sikhuluma nje bevile ezigidini
eziyishumi nambili abantu abathola izibonelelo. Ngisho phela impesheni
yobudala,yokugula kanye nemali yokondla izingane.

Kanti okunye okuyizinkomba zentuthuko kuhulumeni zalo hulumeni kaKhongolose
ukuthi zevile ezigidini ezintathu izindlu asezakhelwe abantu bakithi kanti
nezibalo zezingane ezifundayo zenyuke kakhulu kuleminyaka eyishumi nanhlanu
yombuso wentandoyeningi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[In the fifteen years of democracy there is undeniable evidence that the
ANC government started with great success in building a developing South
Africa. This is proved by the statistics of a survey which shows that
between 1995 and 2002 the economy created 1,7 million jobs, whereas between
2002 and 2006, 1,2 million jobs were created, over and above the fact that
there are more than 12 million people who receive grants. By this I mean
pension for the elderly people, the disability grant and the child support
grant.

Notwithstanding that some of the indicators that the ANC government has
built are that there are more than 3 million houses that were built for our
people, and that the number of children attending schools has increased
tremendously in the 15 years of democracy.]

Recent studies show that relative successes of the democratic developmental
state have brought about a significant improvement in the quality of life
of most South Africans. Using the lower poverty line of R174 per person per
month and the upper poverty line of R322 per person per month, both
relative and absolute poverty on both the upper and lower poverty lines
declined by between 5% and 8% between 1995 and 2008.

Abasebenzi abangaphezulu kwezinkulungwane ezingamashumi amane
sebelahlekelwe yimisebenzi lokhu kwaqala loluhlevane lokwehla komnotho
emhlabeni jikelele.

Amazinga okukhiqiza nokudayisa kwezimpahla emazweni angaphandle ngokunjalo
kwehlile kakhulu. Kunezibalo ezikhishwe ngonyaka odlule ezikhomba ukuthi
abantu baseNingizimu Afrika banezikweletu ezibalelwa ezigidigidini
eziphindwe kathathu eziyi-1,4 zamarandi kodwa uma sisonke thina
esisebenzayo sihola izigidigidi eziphindwe kathathu eziyi-1,1 zamarandi.
Lokho kukhomba ukuthi akuqalanga namhlanje ukuthi thina bantu baseNingizimu
Afrika sizwele lesi simo esikhona njengabo bonke abantu emhlabeni wonke
jikelele.

Yingakho ke uhulumeni kaKhongolose oholwa nguNxamalala, uMongameli uJacob
Zuma ufake uhlelo lwentuthuko oluzodla izigidigidi eziyi-787.
Okuthokozisayo ukuthi phezu kobunzima izwe elibhekene nabo lokwehla
kwezinga lokuqoqwa kwezimali zentela ngezigidigidi ezingama-80 zamarandi.
Uhulumeni kaKhongolose usazibophezele kuloluhlelo lwentuthuko.

Ukwakhiwa kwemigwaqo, amabhuloho, izikole, ukwakhiwa nokuthuthukisa
kwamachweba izikhumulo zezindiza kanye nojantshi bezitimela sekwakhe
amathuba amaningi emisebenzi futhi kuzokhuthaza ukuthuthuka komkhiqizo,
ukutshalwa kwezimali ezimbonini nokwakhiwa kwezimboni ezintsha. Sekuzoba
lula nokuthuthwa komkhiqizo ngaphakathi ezweni kanye nokuthuthwa
kwezimpahla ezidayiswayo emazweni angaphandle. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Since the recession started, over 40 000 workers have lost their jobs.

The levels of producing and exporting goods have also dropped tremendously.
Statistics published last year show that the people of South Africa have
debt which amounts to approximately 1.4 trillion rand, but all the workers
are collectively paid R1, 1 trillion. This is a clear indication that we as
South Africans, didn’t start now to feel the crunch as compared to other
people around the world.

That is why the ANC government, led by President Jacob Zuma, uNxamalala,
launched a programme that will cost R787 billion. The good news though is
that despite the difficulty we are facing with regard to a deficit in tax
collection amounting to R80 billion, the ANC government is still committed
to this development programme.

The building of roads, bridges, schools, harbours, airports and railway
lines has led to the creation of many job opportunities and it will also
stimulate the improvement of products, investment in the industries and the
building of new industries. It will be easy to transport products around
the country as well as the transportation of exports.]

The 2010 Fifa World Cup could not have come at a better time. The
construction of football stadiums has created job opportunities that go
beyond the 2010 World Cup. For instance, the Moses Mabhida Stadium in
Ethekwini is going to generate economic, sports and recreational activities
well beyond 2010.

It has been suggested that the agricultural industry employs about 70% of
the active labour force. There is therefore also a need to focus our
attention on the agricultural sector, including the development of the agro-
processing industry. Indeed, the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries confirms that there is serious work in progress in this regard.
Special attention must be given to the emerging black farmers as well.

The ANC government is committed to the mobilisation of small businesses and
co-operatives in order to bring the majority of our people into the
mainstream economy. We will ensure that there is financial support,
mentoring and monitoring of small businesses and co-operatives. We will
also ensure that those co-operatives with the potential to grow and venture
into large business operations are exposed to the export market. This is
where the Department of Trade and Industry agencies such as Khula, the
National Empowerment Fund, the Industrial Development Corporation, the SA
Microfinance Apex Fund, the Small Enterprise Development Agency, the
Enterprise Organisation and others must play a decisive role. Where there
are weaknesses, Parliament will intervene effectively.

We must pursue the transformation of informal economic activities and
integrate these into the formal economy. The development of the Warwick
Avenue in Ethekwini is a case in point.

Economists have been suggesting that the world should recover from the
current recession in the next 18 months. We must be ready to take full
advantage of that. The democratic developmental state must be ready and
determined to intervene and influence the direction and pace of economic
development, instead of abandoning this task to the market forces whose god
is profit and their church the market. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the global financial crisis continues to have an
impact on economies around the world. Budget deficits have soared to
unprecedented heights as tax revenue has fallen sharply. Employment, as we
know, is falling in almost every country, with South Africa not being an
exception. Clearly, this crisis presents a huge challenge to the
developmental state, requiring government intervention as far as possible.

In this regard, the ACDP supports the framework agreement between
government, labour and business and the measures that were announced
recently. It must be borne in mind that such co-operation was the essence
of the success of the Asian tigers. So, we look forward to further co-
operation in this regard.

We can also appreciate the counter-cyclical approach adopted by government,
as well as the foresight of having the R787 billion infrastructure
programme that was announced way before this crisis hit us.

Clearly, the most urgent challenge relates to protecting jobs. Yesterday
the Minister of Labour provided details of the R2,45 billion training lay-
off scheme. We would like to see that implemented far quicker.
It is interesting to note that Brazil has created almost 500 000 jobs in
this climate whilst it has come out of recession in a six-month period. We
know that this is a target that we are also looking at. So, it might help
to look. And, whilst we appreciate that their economy is much stronger than
ours, we could learn lessons there as well.

The best weapon that government has is the budget surplus that we built up
in the boom years, which now allows for our deficit to be financed and for
government spending to continue. However, the real challenge will be to
spend the limited funds better, to do more and better without additional
resources.

For us to emerge stronger from the recession, we need to focus on
microeconomic issues, such as providing cheaper bandwidth, reliable
electricity and uncongested ports. We also agree that we need to address
inefficiency in the public sector, regulatory issues that impede our global
competitiveness, the skills shortage and - let us not forget - business
collusion. This is how the challenges posed by the current global economic
crisis can be met. Thank you very much for this debate, Ms Fubbs.

Mrs D R TSOTETSI: Hon Chairperson, hon members and our distinguished
guests, it is important for us to acknowledge the fact that the economic
crisis is not only experienced by South Africa, but by the world at large.
This situation is a call on the nation to exercise a high level of
patriotism and to reconsider our expectations.

It is equally important to state the causal factors of the situation. There
are many factors. A few factors include insufficient capacity and resources
to deal with the imbalances or inequalities of the past. What makes this
global challenge more difficult to address is the nonrepentance of the
majority of the perpetrators.

A developmental state is people-centred and includes other partners such as
trade unions, organised labour and business. The word “people” is inclusive
of women. This is a factor denied by the ruling party in the Western Cape
legislature. This is an example of perpetrators who resist development and
the recognition of potential. The ruling party excluded women, but it was
men and women who put them in power. The message is that it is only the
premier who has the potential. Such an attitude is a hindrance towards a
developmental state.

The developmental state, under the leadership of the ANC, is open to
criticism, both positive and destructive, hence the institutionalisation of
public participation. The Green Paper titled National Strategic Planning of
September 2009 talks about gaps in our system. This is self-criticism,
acknowledging weaknesses and seeking ways to improve.
Our government still faces serious challenges in intergovernmental co-
ordination, even though there have been significant advances over the past
decade. Interdepartmental and intergovernmental co-ordination and
integration should be prioritised in the system of accountability of the
executive, the administration and the legislatures. It means that people
cannot be held accountable if there is no monitoring and evaluation. We
need an agency that authoritatively and forcefully can drive planning,
monitoring and evaluation and that can make institutional improvements. We
say we need an agency and not consultants. We need a clear mechanism for
weighing up options and for making hard and unpopular choices where there
are fiscal limitations and policies are contested.

The Green Paper further cites some international experience. This is
information we gathered through research and international study tours.
Government does this in order to copy best practices and improve on the
cost of doing business. Monitoring the short- and long-term plans on a
daily basis will automatically identify danger zones on time, thus
preventing irreparable damage.

The level of corruption the country is experiencing threatens good
governance. The abuse of state resources is also a challenge and a threat
to development. Very often we talk about the lack of capacity in
government, but the capacity to steal taxpayers’ money is amazing. Nothing
beats good planning and monitoring. Remember that you cannot monitor what
you cannot measure. Therefore, our plans must be realistic and prudent.

Plans are implemented by people, and implementation cannot be effective if
employees are in acting positions for a long time - especially in senior
positions. An acting position for a long time creates uncertainty and
affects one’s performance. It also results in premature and uninformed
resignations. The global world we are competing with needs consistency not
for people to die in positions, but at least a reasonable time of five
years in office. It is also not a sin to be in office for more than five
years, as long as government does not keep deadwood as it is detrimental to
the developmental state. Let us reduce the import of labour and rely on our
own capacity. This can only happen if people are trained in skills relevant
to the economy.

Some people lament that the ANC has been in government for 15 years and
should have responded to all the ills of the past. How does government
deliver optimally when it has to clean the mess that was created over 40
years? For instance, social grants must close the gap resulting from
discrimination on the basis of race and gender, with the objective being
the eradication of poverty. Some information I gathered from the library
indicates that the budget for social pensions in 1980 was as follows. I
will read exactly what the Minister in 1980 said with pride:

   I am glad that I am able once again to announce meaningful concessions to
   pensioners and other social beneficiaries. Full participants of the
   proposed concessions are set out in a document which I shall lay upon the
   table this afternoon. The concessions include an increase in social
   pensions of R12 per month in the case of whites, which means the pension
   will increase to R109 per month for whites. The increase for coloureds
   and Indians amounts to R8 per month and for blacks R5,50 per month.

I can quote more. This happened some time ago, but its impact is still felt
as it is still perpetuated, albeit subtly.

However, let us ensure that the developmental state is as inclusive as
possible. Let us follow the footsteps of our President and not correct a
wrong with a wrong. The ANC government says: “each according to need”. We
are also consistent with the Freedom Charter - that is, South Africa
belongs to all who live in it, black and white. We therefore have an
obligation to develop South Africa so as to sustain jobs and all other
achievements.

Modulasetulo ka bokgutshwanyane re a tseba hore ke kgomo ya moshate, o a e
hapa, o molato, o a e tlohela, o molato. Nka etsa mohlala ka botlokotsebe
bona boo re llang ka bona kamehla le matsatsi, ebile re tshosetswa hore ha
e le 2010 re keke ra bona ketsahalo ya teng. Empa ha letona Commissioner a
re ya bolayang ka tjhaka o tla bolawa ka tjhaka, e le ha a lwantsha
dikebekwa tse hlaselang batho ba se nang molato ba sa kgoneng ho ka
itshireletsa, ke mona moo ho thweng o tswile taolong, o hloka boikarabelo.
Ha a sa etse jwalo le teng ho thwe ke moetapele ya se nang boikarabelo.

Ke yona kgomo ya moshate, empa rona re re ha re bontsheng boetapele. Re
lwanetse Afrika Borwa, mme ba sa ntsaneng ba na le boipelaetso hore ha re
pusong, re tla ba bontsha. Re tla tswela pele le ka dikgetho tse tlang, re
nne re buse ka tsela e jwalo. Mme re re ho ba ileng ba bona boetapele
Afrika Borwa, pele-a-pele. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, in short, we know that we are faced with a huge dilemma,
where we are damned if we do and we are damned if we don’t. I can make an
example with crime.  We complain about it every day, sometimes we are even
threatened that we will not be able to see the 2010 event because of crime.
But when the Commissioner says that the police must shoot to kill when
fighting criminals who attack innocent people who cannot protect
themselves, he is regarded as being out of control and irresponsible. If he
does not do that he is also regarded as an irresponsible leader.

This is the dilemma I am talking about. But we are saying that we have to
show leadership. We fought for South Africa, and those who still doubt that
we are in government; we will show them. We will prove them wrong by
winning the upcoming elections and continue to govern. To those who have
been in leadership in South Africa, well done.]

Prof B TUROK: Chair, it is rather strange that this kind of debate about
the role of the state is now being internationally recognised. In the
Financial Times of a week ago, the Prime Minister of France had the
following to say:

  The crisis has modified Europe’s ideological landscape ... even the
  British government, once firm proponents of liberal, free-market economic
  policies, had accepted that opening up markets was not sufficient and
  that more state intervention and investment was now needed.

You can see from that comment that it is not only in South Africa that our
government ... [Interjections.] Somebody here is “Baracking” me. I will
come back to you. Just a little louder, please. So, what we are saying is
this: while the DA and the hecklers seem to think that the ANC has embarked
on some reckless procedure, reckless policy ... [Interjections.] Did you
hear that? That’s what they think. But you see, the Prime Minister of
France doesn’t think that. [Interjections.] On the contrary, he thinks that
the model that you espouse - let me read it again: “... free-market
economic policies and the opening up of markets is not sufficient and that
more state intervention and investment was now needed”. More state
intervention is needed. [Interjections.] Chair, I will need more time if
these fellows are going to waste my time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, hon members, please! Could
you let the hon member continue.

Prof B TUROK: Could you please fix the clock, Chair, because this is
wasting my time. [Laughter.] Nevertheless, I am quite entertained.
[Interjections.]

Furthermore, the commentator in the Financial Times says that strategic
partnerships between government and big business in Europe are now being
blamed by many economists for stifling growth, and for stifling small and
medium-sized enterprises. In South Africa, we have huge conglomerates and
monopolised industry, and what the DA wants us to do, precisely, is to
create a partnership between government and big business, which will stifle
the possibility of small growth and small enterprises. [Interjections.]

So the point is ... Yes, okay. Fine. Now I hear you. I think that this
debate has shown quite considerable consensus in the House around state
intervention, around the important role of the state. I’ve heard the
debate. I have listened to all you guys and I can see that there is a
certain amount of agreement that in South Africa we need a state which is
going to intervene and which must exercise a considerable amount of
influence on the economy.
But what I haven’t seen is a clear focus on where we are going. Now my own
view - and I’m trying very hard to get to the heart of the matter – is the
fact that in South Africa a large part of our population is not engaged in
productive work. You can talk about capital and savings and investment,
about technology, about skills - all those things are important. But,
really, the heart of the matter - and I think this debate is intended to
get to the heart of the matter; let us not engage in frivolous side issues
- is that in this country of ours, a large proportion of the population is
not engaged in productive work. And if you make comparisons ...

An HON MEMBER: Why?

Prof B TUROK: Okay, I’ll come to the why. You know the why; you were
members of all sorts of funny parties, which were responsible for the why.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] So, we know. We know. So, it’s okay. I’ll
shout if you want me to. [Interjections.] But that is the heart of the
matter: that a large proportion of our population is not engaged in
production work, and if people are not engaged in productive work – I’ll
have to yell - there are all kinds of social consequences. You will find
that there is inequality ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, please! Order! Order,
please!

Prof B TUROK: Chair, I will have to sit down if these guys continue like
this.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, we would really appreciate it if Mr Turok sat
down. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: You know, the way to dodge debate ... You know, these people
always say we must debate, that “the ANC does not want to debate”, but when
we debate, they heckle, they yell. I really will withdraw if you wish me
to. But, you see, if I withdraw, I will go on the SABC tonight and I will
say exactly what I want to say now. [Interjections.] All right. The key
problem ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, please! Order!

Prof B TUROK: Chair, I have to cut my speech short. Could you give me some
more time?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Turok, just continue.

Prof B TUROK: So that’s the central issue. The central issue, whatever
party you belong to, is that a large number of our people are not engaged
in productive work and we need a developmental state to cure that, because
your private sector will not do it. You see, they have realised in Europe
that you cannot depend on the private sector to remedy the kind of
structural problem that we have, and so we need a developmental state.

People have been talking about South Korea, Taiwan, Japan and so on. I was
very fortunate a year or two ago to interview Prof Ha-Joon Chang, who is a
South Korean economist at Cambridge University. I asked him, what exactly
happened in South Korea? We get the wrong impression by reading newspapers
and so on about what happened in South Korea, and it is highly irrelevant
to us. He said the key to South Korea’s success was the development of
productive capabilities by investment in machines, education,
infrastructure, research and development. That was the key. He said that as
far as we are concerned - now listen carefully – we must build more
domestic linkages internally. We must ensure that there were tens of
thousands of subcontractors, people who work in small enterprises, people
who grow their enterprises by relying on procurement from large firms –
which is what they did in South Korea - small enterprises that depend on
procurement from the large firms and from the state, and that we must
constantly raise the proportion of parts and components that are bought
from local producers and not imported.

Indeed, in South Korea there were rules and laws which said that a company,
including a multinational company, could not be allowed to operate and
import goods which could be manufactured locally. So the emphasis in South
Korea was not just on the big chaebols [conglomerates] and the big motorcar
manufacturers by foreign firms. The emphasis was actually on building small
capacity by small people - in this country, that would mean black people in
the main - in order to ensure that you built the economy from below.

So the key to South Africa’s problem of the large number of people who are
not in productive work is not welfare; it is not your view about the state
not intervening and so on.

On the contrary, what the state must do in South Africa, increasingly, is
to raise the capabilities of domestic firms by training, by promoting
opportunities, by ensuring that state agencies buy South African and not
overseas goods, and that the private sector too is regulated in that what
it uses are primarily South African resources, produced by South Africans
that are trained in South Africa - and that there is not export-oriented
growth, which, I’m afraid, we have been following for some time.

Let me end by saying this: South Africa is a very rich country. It is rich
in resources; it has huge amounts of mineral resources and natural
resources of all kinds; and huge human potential resources. Those human
potential resources have not been put to work and that is why I return to
the main point of this debate.

The main point is not about big states, small states, the private sector or
not the private sector, but it is about the large proportion of South
African people that are not engaged in productive work. And your policies
will never make it happen, but we will, because we are the ANC. [Applause.]

Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson, this debate is the manifestation of the ANC
fantasising about the idea of a developmental state as a rescue formula for
the failure in living up to the promises made, and for dealing with the
global economic challenges.

In following up on my colleague’s statement, this fantasising personifies
the African ostrich with its head in the sand and purposefully ignoring the
realities, in contrast to that of the Asian Tigers that represent the
classic example of the successful Asian developmental state models. One of
the reasons why the Asian developmental state models were successful was
the support of especially the United States of America as a major export
destination of manufactured goods. America offered these countries
preferential access to its markets on favourable terms without expecting
much in return.

From all evidence documented, it is clear that a classic developmental
state is focused on one cohesive objective, which is to achieve the highest
economic growth rate with all other elements as less important.

The concept of a developmental state is much more than just the involvement
of the state in economic development. It certainly implies a specific
institutional dispensation in which the role of society, in particular the
private sector, and the rule of law should be non-negotiable. Furthermore,
this implies a national consensus on the economic objectives, which must
include the willingness to make substantial sacrifices in achieving these
objectives.

How can this be related to South Africa’s realities and the challenges for
real economic development? Since 1994, we have heard of political jargon
and super-rescue strategies like RDP, Gear and Asgisa. There was no real
benefit for the millions of marginalised citizens. These, quite evidently,
were failures. Are the new buzzwords replacing these outdated and failed
concepts now called the “developmental state”? Without real developmental
characteristics, this is more an ideology than a serious economic
development policy.  Is this not a method of increased centralisation of
power, influence and control? We need less dependency on the state, more
real and sustainable jobs, and less trade restrictions as basic
requirements for a real economic development revolution where more can
share in the wealth on offer in South Africa. We also need to support and
encourage an education regime that can deliver globally competitive
knowledge and skills.

Die vraag moet gevra word of Suid-Afrika ’n ontwikkelingstaat is en kan
wees, gegrond op die erkende modelle of variasies daarvan. Suid-Afrika het
sekerlik ’n paar voorbeelde van sulke elemente, byvoorbeeld die
ontwikkelingsprogram in die motorbedryf, die strewe na die verryking van
minerale, die druk op die finansiële sektor om meer risiko’s te neem en die
poging om ’n nywerheidsbeleid te implementeer. Dit alleen kan nie van Suid-
Afrika ’n ontwikkelingstaat maak nie.

Een van die noodsaaklike elemente, volgens die ekonoom Jac Loubser, waaraan
Suid-Afrika moet voldoen, sluit in ’n klein, maar elite meritokratiese
burokrasie wat die staat se nywerheidsbeleid moet formuleer en uitvoer,
waarvoor die beste talent in die land gewerf moet word. Oral is kundigheid
en vaardigheid ’n voorvereiste vir volhoubare ekonomiese ontwikkeling. Wat
nodig is, is ’n politieke bestel wat aan die burokrasie genoeg ruimte
verskaf om effektief op te tree met die behoud van die noodsaaklike
vereistes van die regstaat.

Wat nie nodig is nie, is die regering se gereelde ingryping in die
markprosesse deur regulasies, eerder as regstreekse deelname en steun aan
die privaatsektor, wat die indruk laat dat daar nie ’n simbiotiese
verhouding bestaan tussen die staat en die privaatsektor nie. Die regering
se rol moet ondersteunend aan markkragte en kompetisie wees en nie ter
markvervanging nie. Met ander woorde, die regering moenie die markkragte en
–tendense probeer manipuleer nie, maar dit eerder navolg.

Noodsaaklik is ’n leidinggewende organisasie wat so ’n beleid moet dryf,
soortgelyk aan die Japannese MITI. Twyfel bestaan of die Departement van
Handel en Nywerheid in sy huidige formaat strategies geposisioneer en
toegerus is om so ’n rol effektief te kan vervul.

In die globale handelsomgewing van die Wêreld-handelsorganisasie sal dit
onwaarskynlik wees dat ons regering beskerming teen buitelandse mededinging
sal kan bied, asook dat ons uitvoersubsidies sal kan gebruik om ’n
uitvoerbedryf te hervestig. In die huidige ekonomiese klimaat kan dit in
elk geval nie deur die fiskus bekostig word nie, en is dit bekend dat Suid-
Afrika ’n ernstige tekort aan vaardighede en kundighede het. Die vrye
beweging van kapitaal oor landsgrense en ons afhanklikheid van buitelandse
beleggings beperk ook die beweegruimte van ons beleidmakers.

Soos ons weet, het Suid-Afrika nie ’n natuurlike afsetgebied vir sy
vervaardigde goedere nie. Vir baie lande en organisasies is Suid-Afrika ook
nie meer die alleenpoort tot Afrika nie, en ook is ons nie meer die Big
Brother en redder vir baie Afrikalande nie. Die huidige dilemma en
verleentheid met die ekonomiese vennootskapsooreenkomste wat die bestaan
van die Suider-Afrikaanse Doeane-unie bedreig, is maar een so ’n simptoom
wat ons verlies aan kompeterende voordele in die globale markomgewing
verteenwoordig.
Suid-Afrika het eerder ’n herverdelende staat geword met die fokus op sy
definisie van die transformasie van die ekonomie in die samelewing en die
oorregulering van die handelsomgewing om spesifieke uitkomste te
bewerkstellig. Met die huidige resessie het ons sterk beleid- en
aksieplanne nodig wat ’n nywerheidsrevolusie kan ontketen om buitelandse
investerings te lok, om volhoubare permanente werk- en kompeterende
uitvoergeleenthede te skep. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The question should be posed whether South Africa is or can be a
developmental state, based on recognised models or variations thereof.
South Africa certainly displays a few examples of such elements, for
example the developmental programme for the motor industry, mineral
enrichment endeavours, the pressure on the financial sector to take more
risks, and the attempt to implement an industrial policy. This alone cannot
make South Africa a developmental state.

According to the economist Jac Loubser, one of the essential elements to
which South Africa needs to conform is a small but elite meritocratic
bureaucracy that should formulate and implement the state’s industrial
policy, which requires the recruitment of the best talent in the country.
Everywhere expertise and skill are prerequisites for sustainable economic
development. What is required is a political system that leaves the
bureaucracy enough room to operate effectively whilst maintaining the
essential requirements of the constitutional state.

What is not required is government’s constant intervention in market
processes by means of regulations, rather than direct participation and
support to the private sector, which creates the impression that there is
no symbiotic relationship between the state and the private sector.
Government’s role should be supportive of market forces and competition and
should not be to replace the market. In other words, the government should
not try to manipulate market forces and market tendencies but should rather
pursue it.

What is essential is an organisation that is able to lead and drive such a
policy, similar to the Japanese MITI. It is doubtful whether the Department
of Trade and Industry, in its present format, is strategically positioned
and equipped to fulfil such a role effectively.

In the global trade environment of the World Trade Organisation, our
government will probably not be able to offer protection against foreign
competition, and it is unlikely that we will be able to use export
subsidies to re-establish the export business. In any case, in the present
economic climate it is something that the fiscus cannot afford, and it is
known that South Africa has a serious shortage of skills and expertise. The
free movement of capital across borders and our dependency on foreign
investments curtail our policy makers’ room to manoeuvre.

As we know, South Africa does not have a natural outlet for its
manufactured products. For many countries and organisations South Africa is
also no longer the sole gateway to Africa, and we are also no longer the
Big Brother and saviour of many African countries. The current dilemma and
embarrassment regarding the economic partnership agreements that threaten
the existence of the Southern African Customs Union, is but one such
symptom illustrating our loss of benefits to compete globally in the market
environment.

Instead, South Africa has become a state of redistribution, focusing on its
definition of economic transformation in the society, and the
overregulation of the trade environment to attain specific outcomes.
Regarding the current recession, we require strong policy and action plans
which can unleash an industrial revolution in order to attract foreign
investments, and to create sustainable permanent job and competitive export
opportunities.]

It would thus be misleading to refer to South Africa as a developmental
state. Government should rather question the role they are to play in
support of our economy and its unique circumstances to weather the global
economic storm without ideological prejudice and with lots of pragmatism.
The answer for the African ostrich is to pull its head out of the sand and
to transform it into a goal-orientated, strong and courageous African eagle
which embraces the principles of an open-opportunity society for all. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Speaker, I must say I never thought the day would come
when I would agree with the International Monetary Fund, the IMF, or the
World Bank, but the day has come. I was quite alarmed to hear that the hon
Marais – and I have the greatest respect for him in the committee and so on
- thought the Asian Tigers had made a great success of things as
developmental states, and I don’t know what else.

In fact, the IMF, the World Bank and the rest of them said that the reason
why the Asian Tigers had the financial collapse was precisely because three
critical things were lacking among many others. These three things were: a
sound financial management system; good governance, which is entirely
absent and dependent upon an elite bureaucracy which actually wrote their
policies; and a democracy which had no relationship whatsoever with its
civil society other than, of course, trampling them underfoot.

This is not me talking. Read the IMF reports of the time; read the World
Bank; read any respected journal outside this country. [Applause.]

I want to tell you that right now you must read the papers, the press, the
media. Listen. They are saying that the freedoms and rights the developed
states removed from the people and gave to the markets have been seen as an
error of judgment. And now in countries like Britain, America and the
United States, they are busy desperately trying to reclaim these freedoms
from an irresponsible market economy.

For once in my life I have agreed with the IMF – I don’t know when it will
be again, but I understand they are also undergoing a democratic change.
But I do want to say one thing: there have been a number of valuable
inputs. Even in the hon Marais’ own input, one could say there were some
gems here and there. [Laughter.] So, let us not throw everything out. I am
sorry the hon Narend Singh is not here, because a lot of what he had to say
one had to agree with. It’s just a pity it became a little parochial in the
end.

I want to end off by mentioning one thing. It is something, perhaps, that I
didn’t make very clear – and, of course, I should have realised this. It is
that so much is seen as buzzwords, this, that and the next thing. Indeed,
you are quite right. But, I don’t think anyone in this House would say
“RDP” is a buzzword. Maybe we should stop saying “RDP” and call it by its
proper name. We all agree with the principles and concepts of the Freedom
Charter.

I was looking into Gandhi when I looked into this. He said that politicians
should be aware, from wherever they are sitting in this House, of their own
integrity and ensure that it doesn’t get destroyed in their own ideological
fervour.

But to come back to this issue: those two words – RDP and our own
Constitution - can hardly be called buzzwords. They are the basis of a
developmental state. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:40.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 17 September
         2009:


          a) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2009] (National Assembly
             – sec 77).


          b) Taxation  Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Amendment Bill [B
             12 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75)

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

       1) The following members have been appointed to the Ad Hoc Committee
          to consider and report on the Green Paper on National Strategic
          Planning – September 2009:

          African National Congress


          Mufamadi, Mr T A
          Rasool, Mr E
          Mataboge, Mr D K
          Suka, Mr L
          Nhlengethwa, Ms D G
          Mashishi, Ms A C
          Tlake, Ms M R
          Mushwana, Mrs F F


          Democratic Alliance


          Davidson, Mr I O
          Trollip, Mr R A P


          Congress of the People


          Shilowa, Mr M S


          Inkatha Freedom Party


          Singh, Mr N


          ACDP


          Swart, Mr S N


          Independent Democrats

          Maynier, Mr D J (Alt)



       2) Mr T A Mufamadi was elected Chairperson of the Ad Hoc Committee to
          consider and report on the Green Paper on National Strategic
          Planning – September 2009 on 17 September 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
        the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the
        People’s Republic of China concerning  Mutual  Legal  Assistance  in
        Criminal  Matters,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(2)  of   the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government
       of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Hong  Kong
       Special Administrative Region of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China
       concerning Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters

    c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
       the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the
       People’s Republic of China concerning Surrender of Fugitive
       Offenders, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
       1996.


    d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
       the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Hong Kong
       Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China
       concerning Surrender of Fugitive Offenders.

    e) Report on the upliftment of the provisional suspension of a
       magistrate: Ms A Bacharam, an additional magistrate at Scottburgh.

    f) Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mrs N E
       Ndamase, an additional magistrate at Pretoria in terms of section
       13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

    g) Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr C M Dumani,
       a magistrate at Graaff Reinet in terms of section 13(3)(c) of the
       Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

    h) Proclamation No R.50 published in Government Gazette No 32494 dated
       14 August 2009: Commencement of sections 8 to 10 of the Judicial
       Matters Second Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 55 of 2003).


    i) Government Notice No R.841 published in Government Gazette No 32494
       dated 14 August 2009: Scale of fees payable in respect of matters
       referred to in section 80 of the Attorneys Act, 1979 (Act No 53 of
       1079).


2.    The Minister of Human Settlements

    (a)      Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Servcon   Housing
        Solutions (Proprietary) Limited for 2008-2009, including the Report
        of the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial  *Statements  and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.

3.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Alexkor Limited for 2008-
        2009, including the Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.


4.    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of Land
        Affairs for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 27
        for 2008-2009.


5.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Electronic
        Media Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for  2008-2009,  including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
    a) Report of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority on proposed policies
       on Parliament’s Budget and Travel, dated 25 August 2009.


CREDA INSERT - T090917e-insert 1 – PAGES 858-872

CREDA INSERT - T090917e-insert 2 - PAGES 872-878

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.     Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on   Communications   on   the
   appointment of 12 non-executive members of the South African Broadcasting
   Corporation (SABC) Board, dated 17 September 2009:

   The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered and examined
   the matter of the appointment of 12 non-executive members of the Board of
   the South African Broadcasting Corporation, reports as follows:


   The Committee  invited  the  public  to  nominate  persons  by  means  of
   advertisements in the print and electronic media  for  consideration  and
   recommendation to the President for appointment to the  Board.  Responses
   were received from 230 individuals.


   On 01 September 2009, 32 candidates were shortlisted to  be  interviewed,
   namely:


   Ms Jane Barret, Adv Princess Nonkosi Cetywayo, Mr Sembie Danana,  Mr  Max
   du Preez, Mr Zola Luxolo Fihlani,  Mr  Cedric  Sabelo  Gina,  Mr  Desmond
   Khalid Golding, Ms Philippa Mary Green, Prof William  Mervin  Gumede,  Mr
   Peter John Harris, Mr Kenneth Herold, Mr Khotso Moses Khumalo,  Mr  David
   Harris Lewis, Mr Michael Louis, Mr  Magatho  Anthony  Mello,  Ms  Barbara
   Joyce Mosima Masekela, Prof Luka  David  Mosoma,  Mr  John  Matisonn,  Mr
   Andile Milton Mbeki, Prof Shiela Onkaetse Mmusi,  Mr  Haroun  Moolla,  Mr
   Nkomotane Clifford Motsepe, Dr Baldwin Sipho Ngubane, Mr  David  Clephane
   Niddrie, Ms Clare Frances O’Neil, Ms  Ntebo  Peri,  Ms  Felleng  Lorraine
   Sekha, Ms Sibongile Shongwe, Ms Tselane Tambo, Dr Danfred James Titus, Dr
   Frederick van zyl Slabbert and Ms Suzanne Christina Vos.


   Two candidates,  namely  Mr  Michael  Louis  and  Dr  Frederick  van  zyl
   Slabbert, withdrew from the process.


   After having interviewed the above candidates in Parliament on 08, 09 and
   10 September 2009, the Committee resolved that the House,  in  accordance
   with section 13 of the Broadcasting Act, (No 4 of  1999),  recommends  to
   the President that the following candidates be appointed as non-executive
   members to the SABC Board:


   Mr Cedric Sabelo Gina, Mr Desmond Khalid Golding, Ms Philippa Mary Green,
   Mr Peter John Harris,  Ms  Barbara  Joyce  Mosima  Masekela,  Mr  Magatho
   Anthony Mello, Mr Nkomotane Clifford  Motsepe,  Dr  Baldwin  Sipho  (Ben)
   Ngubane, Mr David Clephane Niddrie, Ms Clare Frances O’Neil,  Ms  Felleng
   Lorraine Sekha and Ms Suzanne Christina Vos.

Report to be considered.


