---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 27 October 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-10-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The House met at 15:03.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I have
been informed that the Whippery has agreed that we won’t have any motions.
We will now proceed with questions as printed on the Question Paper.

Before we start, may I please notify all hon members that there is a
special request that we first address questions directed to hon Shiceka
because he has to leave for Bloemfontein immediately.

The time allocated to reply to questions is 5 minutes, asking a
supplementary question is 2 minutes, replying to supplementary questions is
4 minutes, and only 4 supplementary questions are allowed per question.
QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                 GOVERNANCE
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

  Investigation into complaints of water disconnections in the Western Cape

42.   Mr M H Mokgobi (ANC) asked the Minister  for  Co-operative  Governance
     and Traditional Affairs:


     (1)    Whether his department has received public complaints of water
           disconnections by any municipalities in the Western Cape; if so,


     (2)    whether his department has made an investigation into any
           complaints or allegations of water disconnections by
           municipalities in the Western Cape; if not, why not; if so, what
           was the nature of the findings of the investigation;


     (3)    whether his department has put any measures in place in respect
           of dealing with such complaints or allegations if they are found
           to be accurate; if not, why not; if so, what measures; and


     (4)    whether his department has communicated the findings of the
           investigation to the Western Cape Provincial Government; if not,
           what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the
           relevant details?
           CO169E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, colleagues, members of the House, it is the first
time that I come and respond to questions. At the same time, I see that my
colleague Madam Ntwanambi has a fresh look in terms of her hair.
[Laughter.] Clearly, it tells me then that things are changing.

The question I am expected to respond to is the question of ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I correct one
mistake. We are starting with hon Mokgobi.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Yes,
thank you very much.

With regard to the issue of the Western Cape, I was informed by hon member
Marius Fransman about the issue of water cuts in this metro municipality.
Subsequent to that I went to speak in an interview that was held on
Parliament: A View from the House on SABC 2, where people raised the same
issue - that water had been cut.

After that I was invited by the community of Mitchells Plain. When I went
there, I found something that was shocking to my system. I discovered a
situation where water had been cut and was still being cut at that
particular time by the metro. I found that to be very strange because it is
unconstitutional and illegal for anybody not to provide water to the
citizens of this country.

From there I also went to the community of Site C in Khayelitsha, where
about 5 000 people in the centre of the City of Cape Town Metro
Municipality don’t have any sanitation. There are no toilets. When they
have to relieve themselves, they must go to the veld or to the N2 road.
This is happening in the City of Cape Town Municipality. I also found that
this community of 5 000 people has only four water taps.

We also went to another area called Lwandle, where people are living in new
houses. However, these are waterlogged houses, which basically means that
they are living in water in that area. People therefore experience a lot of
illnesses because of the conditions they live in. During rainy days water
from the gravesite flows into the houses of the people.

Subsequent to that I then established an intergovernmental task team, led
by Mr Jazz Mokoena, to look at the issues. The task team comprises the
provincial government and the metro municipality. I have seen propaganda in
the media where it is alleged that ANC members cut water before I arrived.
That is propaganda to us. The task team has been requesting people to come
forward and provide evidence regarding the water that has been cut so that
we can deal with the issues.

When I was there, I also saw excessively high water bills. We said that the
team from the national government, the provincial government and the
municipality must look at the matter. We told them to work together in
finding out where the problem is so that they can ask for solutions. As the
Ministry, we are not interested in petty political issues. We are rising
above those. Our task is to focus on service delivery. Our task is to
ensure that we improve the quality of the lives of our people.

However, people must understand that we won’t spare any effort against
anybody from any party, including the opposition. If there is any wrong
doing by the opposition, we will deal with them without fear, favour or
prejudice. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Sekela-sihlalo, ndiyabulela. Mphathiswa,
ingaba olo phando luzakuqhubekela nakwezinye iilokishi zomasipala ombaxa
ngoba asiyoKhayelitsha kunye ne-Mitchells Plain kuphela? Ukuba ungaya
eGugulethu, abantu abaninzi baphethe iileta ezipinki, baphethe amaphepha
okucinyelwa amanzi.

UMPHATHISWA WESEBE LENTSEBENZISWANO KULAWULO KUNYE NEMICIMBI YEMVELI:
Ndiyabulela kakhulu, Mbhexeshi oyiNtloko. Xa uthetha ngolo hlobo, uJazz
usemva kwakho ngoku sithethayo. Into eza kwenzeka ke ndiyacinga ukuba kuza
kufuneka sibize iimbizo zoluntu apho umntu nomntu akuthi eze ngaphambili
aze kuchaza ingxaki yakhe. Loo nto iyakwenza ukuba singakhawulelani nale
ngxaki yalapha ngokwamasuntswana koko sikhawulelane nayo ngokupheleleyo.

Kodwa into endifuna ukuyithetha yile yokuba kukho inkampani apha ekuthiwa
yi-Empowerdex ezibiza ngokuba ingumakhonya, ingungqoshishilizi, ejonga
ukusebenza kukamasipala. Ithi ke lo masipala umbaxa waseKapa usebenza
kakuhle. Andikayiboni loo nto. Into endiyivileyo mna enye endiza kubiza
kuyo bonke oomasipala abambaxa balapha eMzantsi Afrika sizokuthetha nabo
yile yokuba imali yalo masipala umbaxa iya kubantu abadla kusale, abantu
abadla izambane leponti. Abantu abahluphekileyo, iimpula zikalujaca
azifumani nto.

Loo nto ke ithetha ukuba siza kungena kulo masipala. Akekho umasipala esiza
kumyeka apha eMzantsi Afrika. Sifuna bonke oomasipala basebenze ngendlela
efanayo. Asiyonyani into yokuba kuthiwe iKapa lisebenza kakuhle, ndingatsho
mna. Izinto esele ndizibonile okwangoku zindixelela loo nto. Ngolo hlobo ke
bathi iTheku alisebenzi kakuhle. Asiyonyani loo nto. ITheku liqhuba
ngendlela entle ngokungummangaliso ukuba ulithelekisa nezinye iindawo.
Ndiyabulela Sekela-sihlalo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you Deputy Chair. I would like to
know, Minister, if this investigation will also be extended to other
townships of the City of Cape Town, because this problem does not only
occur in Khayelitsha and Mitchells Plain. You can go to Gugulethu and you
will find most people have pink letters. They are holding papers because
their water supply has been cut off.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Thank you
very much, Chief Whip. If you speak like that, then Jazz is right behind
you. We need to call the izimbizo so that every resident may come forward
with his or her problem. That will happen if we deal with this problem as a
whole instead of in drips and drabs.

There’s something I want to say about this self-glorifying company called
Empowerdex that oversees the performance of municipalities. It claims that
the City of Cape Town is doing quite well. I have not witnessed that. The
only thing I have heard, on which I still have to call all South African
metropolitan municipalities to a discussion, is that the budget of this
particular metropolitan municipality caters only for the middle-class
society, the bourgeoisie, leaving the poorest of the poor with absolutely
nothing.

That means we will make an intervention in this municipality. There is no
municipality here in South Africa that will be spared. We want uniformity
in all the municipalities. It is not true that the City of Cape Town is
doing well, and I do not concur with that. What I have seen so far confirms
that.

In the same breath, they say eThekwini Municipality is underperforming.
That is not true. EThekwini Municipality is doing very well compared to
other municipalities. Thank you, Deputy Chair.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! Hon Watson, what
is your point of order?

Mr A WATSON: It’s not a point of order; it’s a follow-up question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Follow-up?

Mr A WATSON: Yes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay, thanks.

Mr A WATSON: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to hear the response of the
hon Minister in the light of the following facts. Firstly, the City of Cape
Town has a clear policy forbidding officials from cutting off water to
residential properties; secondly, the City of Cape Town has the largest
free water allocation for the poor in the whole of South Africa; thirdly,
the City of Cape Town’s records show that it logged and responded to all 90
of the complaints of water failure it received over the past three months
from the Mitchells Plain area; and further, there is no hard evidence of
residents being deliberately left without water for extended periods.

What action has the Minister taken in response to the sworn affidavits by
Mitchells Plain residents? What action has the Minister taken regarding the
statements made by Mitchells Plain residents that are recorded in the paper
and interviews by the media that ANC activists actually asked them to shut
off their water at the stopcock ahead of the Minister’s visit to the area
in order to mislead him about water cuts? This was reported in the paper
and I want to ask the Minister to respond to that, please.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! Hon Watson,
before you respond, Minister, that’s a new question. When I allowed you to
speak it was supposed to be a follow-up question. So, really, you were out
of order. [Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: Follow-up question, Madam. [Interjections.] You can’t stymie
it by ruling it out of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson! I’m warning
you.

Mr A WATSON: I accept that warning. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson! I’m not
going to be involved in a dialogue with you, thank you very much.
[Interjections.]

Can you please check that one? Just check it.

Minister Shiceka, please respond.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson, let me respond to the hon Watty. Regarding the issue of the
allegations that are made by the leader of the DA that alleged ANC members
told people to cut water, I would request the DA as a party to bring
forward the people whom it alleges presented that information to the team
led by Mr Mokoena. We want to check the veracity and truthfulness of these
allegations. We want to get to the bottom of them. Therefore, we don’t want
to prejudge this from our side.

But when I went there personally, I saw things that were shocking to me. If
you are challenging the validity of what I saw, you are welcome. There is a
team that has been put in place, and it is investigating. Present evidence
in front of it. It’s not about papers; it’s about people who must present
evidence. On the basis of evidence, this team will be able to make
recommendations to me.

However, what we must be careful of, Watty, is to be involved in petty
politics on issues of service delivery. We must rise above those because we
have a responsibility to improve the quality of lives of our people. That’s
what I would say. You will know about the report once it is finalised. It
will be presented to you, and I think we will take it from there.

However, what has come across very clearly is the issue that the credit
control policy in South Africa is not in place in all municipalities. It’s
not only the credit control policy, but the policy on the indigent is also
not applicable. I say this because some of the people who had their water
supply cut are disabled; some of them rely on grants; and some of them are
old people who don’t have any income. Clearly, there are challenges in that
regard. Therefore, we are saying that this matter of Mitchells Plain has
exposed the fact that policy changes have to be effected. We must ensure
that South Africans get the best because they deserve the best. Thank you
very much.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! Hon Mokgobi was
supposed to be the first person. May he then have his turn?

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Deputy Chairperson, I had four questions which have already
been answered by the Minister. Thank you.

Mr Z MLENZANA: Deputy Chairperson, will the Minister be prepared to give us
the names of those houses he visited during his inspection?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, of course we will be able to reveal everything about this matter
after the investigation has been conducted. We don’t want anyone to pre-
empt the due process that has to be undertaken by going there. We must
allow that process to take place.

In that respect, therefore, I will give you the names with pleasure, but
only once the investigation has been conducted. This is because we are
accountable to Parliament. We believe that Parliament is the most important
body which will be able to do so. In fact, we will be calling upon the NCOP
as the body that will be charged with looking after the interests of South
Africans wherever they are. The NCOP should also enter the fray and go and
hear for itself what is being said on the ground. They will strengthen what
is being done by the executive. Thank you.

      Situation regarding municipal Integrated Development Plans (IDPs)

43.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister for Co-operative  Governance
      and Traditional Affairs:

      (1)   Whether since taking office his department has conducted and/or
           received any assessments, reviews or audits of the municipal
           Integrated Development Plans (IDPs) in each of the provinces; if
           not, what is the position in this regard; if so,


      (2)   whether he has identified or received any reports and/or
           complaints of (a) municipalities that do not (i) have IDPs and
           (ii) conduct IDP hearings, (b) disparities between municipal,
           provincial and national strategies, priorities and plans and (c)
           IDPs that are not informed by budgets and available resources;
           if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, how will his
           department address these issues; and


      (3)   whether his department will consider requesting such reports
          from all provinces and report to the National Council of
          Provinces on the state of the IDPs in the provinces on an annual
          basis; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                  CO170E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson, this is a question that has been raised by the Chief Whip.

On the issue of integrated development plans, IDPs, I can inform the House
that the department conducts assessments of IDPs on an annual basis. We
have done that from April to June and found that 85% of IDPs are credible.
This is an improvement over the previous year in which we found that the
level of credibility was 79,5%. This means that we are moving forward.

However, one could say that there are still challenges. One of the
challenges is the issue of the link between IDPs, provincial growth and
development strategies, as well as national priorities. There is also the
involvement of national departments, provincial departments and state-owned
enterprises in the IDPs. They do not participate. If they do participate at
all, they send junior officials. This is a situation we want to improve,
because we believe that IDPs are the cornerstone of any development. If it
is not in the IDPs, it cannot be implemented. We believe that IDPs must be
like the Torah to the Jews, the Qur’an to the Muslims and the Bible to the
Christians. It must be something that is followed by all. We are trying to
create that type of coherence.

We are also looking at a situation where even other government departments
can play their role in the same way that municipalities do in ensuring that
this process is taken care of. This is because there is a disjuncture
between IDPs within municipalities with regard to priorities and the budget
– how these are linked and implemented.

We will be working with the Minister in the Presidency: National Planning
Commission to ensure that these things are done so that in South Africa
there is one planning system and a framework that is followed by all
wherever they are, including state-owned enterprises and the private
sector.

In that respect, this process of IDPs is quite important. It is going to be
given credibility. We believe that if legislative amendments must be made
to strengthen it, we will come to the NCOP and to Parliament to assist in
that respect. Thank you very much.

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Madam Deputy Chairperson, I would like to ask the Minister
if he doesn’t think that the link between IDPs, the budget and the
implementation plan should also be a document which will actually be taken
seriously and be monitored by his department. As it stands now, you find
that municipalities only submit budgets and IDPs and not the budget and the
service implementation plan. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, what one can say is that this is an issue of concern, even to
us. IDPs are supposed to be plans of action. A plan of action is supposed
to be credible and should not become a wish list. It is supposed to be
something that is implementable. That is why we came up with a concept that
says we must have a service delivery budget implementation plan so that a
dynamic link can happen.

Of course, we find that people are still using consultants in some
municipalities. That is why you still find a situation where people are
protesting. This is because they feel that they are being excluded in the
way they are being governed; they want to partake. They feel marginalised
because only consultants are doing the work. But if people were included in
the development of plans and programmes for development, they would feel
part of it. We believe that we are coming with revolutionary ideas even on
issues of ward committees. These are ideas that are going to give power to
the people as we go forward, because we believe that governance must happen
at a ward level. This is the lowest level at which things are supposed to
happen. This means that the way in which things are being done is going to
change dramatically.

You would know that on 21 and 22 October last week we had a national indaba
on local government. A lot of serious changes that must be made in the
system emerged at that indaba. Those changes are going to be effected,
because we will be concluding a turnaround strategy by December this year.
We will be taking municipal draft turnaround strategies to each and every
municipality for engagement next year, from January to March. We are going
to have a situation wherein people will participate in the issue of IDPs at
ward level so that, by June, when budgets are being adopted, there would
have been involvement of the people of South Africa. Therefore, when the
budget is being implemented in July, people will know that it is the budget
they have participated in.

Members of Parliament all hail from municipalities. We are requesting them
to participate in the areas where they live. We can’t expect Members of
Parliament to complain as if they are ordinary citizens. You have a
responsibility and a duty to ensure that municipalities are functioning
better where you are. Sometimes even when you want things for selfish,
narrow interests as a citizen of a particular area — where you want to have
water, electricity and so on — you have a political responsibility to
ensure that all of the people in that area also benefit from those
interests.

In this respect, we request everybody to work together. We believe that
local government is everybody’s business. We can’t deal with it alone, as a
department. We require all South Africans to come and join the party. Thank
you.

         Details regarding the abolition of district municipalities

51.   Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Minister for Co-operative Governance and
      Traditional Affairs:
      (1)   Whether district municipalities are to be abolished; if so, (a)
           when is this envisaged to take place and (b) what are the
           further relevant details;


      (2)   whether the existing councillors from the district
           municipalities will be incorporated in the surrounding
           municipalities; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details;


      (3)   whether the functions and powers will be given to the local
           municipalities; if not; why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details; and


      (4)   what is the estimated savings expected in respect of abolishing
           district municipalities?                           CO179E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson, the issue raised by hon Worth is whether district
municipalities are going to disappear from the face of the earth. In
response I would say that the national government has been involved in a
process of reviewing the system of governance in South Africa. We call this
the macroreorganisation of government. Cabinet is still engaged in this
process of review. Therefore no decision has been taken by Cabinet on this
matter. Subsequent questions therefore fall away, because the first
question implied that we did not have any views on these matters.
We can promise you, as South Africans and as Members of Parliament, that
once Cabinet has pronounced on these matters, everybody will be taken on
board. We want to ensure that you participate in the reorganisation of
governance.

This is quite important, because it might require constitutional amendments
at certain times and legislative amendments at others. You must therefore
be party to this process. Thank you very much, Chairperson.

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chair, as a follow-up to the question, I would like to
ask the hon Minister whether he foresees this consultative process
regarding district municipalities taking place before the 2011 municipal
elections.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson, our point of view is that we don’t think that there will be
any reorganisation of the local government before the 2011 elections. The
reason for this is that we, at the Ministry, are required to devise a
formula to be used by MECs to determine the number of municipalities. That
formula is based on the current configuration. We did this in May. MECs
have already pronounced the number of councillors. This means that it is
“all systems go”. As we speak here today, nothing can actually be changed.
It therefore means that any changes that might happen will happen after
2011.

However, discussions are going to take place. South Africans are going to
participate and say what they think about the country’s system of
governance.

Once Cabinet has pronounced in this regard – and we hope this is going to
be done next year – we will then be able to allow South Africans to engage
in the process because we believe that they are important. Members of
Parliament will be the most important persons to engage with this process.
Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Deputy Chair, in view of what the Minister has just said
– that no restructuring will take place before 2011 – I would like to ask
him whether I can assume that the demarcation done by the Municipal
Demarcation Board for two municipalities in the Metsweding District
Municipality, Nokeng tsa Taemane and Kungwini – which, according to the
demarcation board’s present demarcation, have been included mostly into the
Tshwane Metropolitan area but also into Ekurhuleni – is an exception or
whether it will also be dealt with after the election. This is because if
one looks at the present demarcation, these municipalities will actually be
incorporated into Tshwane and Ekurhuleni before or by the date of the 2011
election, thereby diminishing the Metsweding District Municipality.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Hon
Watty, yes, the issues of Metsweding as a district in the east of Pretoria
– Tshwane is the new term, if you want to be politically correct – were
decided in 2006. The demarcation board at that time took the view and
decision that the municipality or district does not justify its existence
in terms of numbers or any other criteria. As we speak, the MEC in Gauteng
is considering intervening in one of the municipalities, Nokeng tsa
Taemane. The other municipality, Kungwini, has been investigated, and the
report has been released. The management of this municipality has actually
caused it to struggle and limp along. Therefore that decision was taken
some time ago. But the process of engagement is ongoing.

Another municipality that might incidentally be affected if anything
happens is a municipality in the Alfred Nzo district in the Eastern Cape.
There are only two municipalities in that district — the Umzimvubu Local
Municipality and the Matatiele Local Municipality. If the majority of the
people are of the view that they want to be incorporated into KwaZulu-
Natal, it means that there will be no justification for the existence of
that metropolitan municipality if it has one municipality; it will have to
be reconfigured in some way.

So, the two areas we have mentioned are exceptional cases. Generally the
system is in place and it is moving. We are looking forward to the
elections.

I want to conclude by saying that the Cabinet took a decision last week
around issues of preparations for local government elections and the system
which will be used. We want to share this with members of the NCOP, because
issues of delimitation of wards are at the centre of what they do. Members
of the NCOP are supposed to participate in these processes because, more
often than not, these processes become technical; they do not involve
Members of Parliament. Therefore, we want to call upon Members of
Parliament to participate in this process. We will make information
available so that you are able to contribute to the way wards are designed
in the area where you reside. Thank you very much, Chair.

 Measures to eliminate problems of municipal managers occupying positions in
   the majority party that are senior to Executive Mayors and Speakers of
                             Municipal Councils

52.   Mr A Watson (DA) asked the Minister for Co-operative Governance and
     Traditional Affairs:

     In light of the launch of Operation Clean Audit, what measures does he
     intend to introduce over the (a) short term and (b) long term to
     eliminate the problem of municipal managers occupying positions in the
     majority party structures that are senior to Executive Mayors and
     Speakers of Municipal
     Councils?
            CO181E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, I’ll be responding to hon Watty, where he raised an issue
around the leaders who are speakers, mayors and chief whips. You find that,
in terms of the rankings of the party, they are junior. Therefore, they are
instructed. This distorts the system of governance where you find that
officials begin to instruct their bosses in the council. The respect for
the institution gets undermined.

In this case, one would say that the matter, hon Watson, is something that
is applicable across parties. If you can go to KwaZulu-Natal under the IFP,
the same thing applies. If you can come to the Western Cape under the DA,
the same thing applies. It is even worse here because you have coalitions
that change from time to time. [Interjections.] People go to bed with
different partners at different times based on the coalition system of
governance. This also applies to areas where the ANC rules.

We are, in fact, developing what is called governance values. We want to
say that all South Africans, irrespective of political affiliation, must
live by these values and live according to these values. It means that even
the ruling party and other parties are going to be engaged on these values
so that we can follow them, be united behind them and rally behind them as
South Africans, in terms of what should be done.

But it is a matter of concern to us that the institution of local
government is being interfered with by political parties. At times they
give illegal, unconstitutional instructions. This is a matter we want to
take up with the parties so as to ensure that the institution remains
respected and enjoys legitimacy and accountability in the way things are
done. We will be engaging with the parties.

I have already indicated this to Mr Doman, who is a shadow Minister for Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, to Madam Wenger, who is a
shadow Deputy Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs,
and also to other parties that we will be engaging with on these matters. I
have even spoken to the IFP’s national chairperson and told her that we
will be taking up the issue.

I am saying that South Africans must rise above petty politics and know
that local government is something that affects everyone; it’s quite
important. So, let’s ensure that we do things in the right way, not for
ourselves but for our children and future generations. Thank you very much.


Mr A WATSON: Hon Chair, I would like to thank the Minister for a very frank
and honest answer to my question. But my question had two parts, hon
Minister — namely the long term and the short term. What you have given us
now is an exposition of your plans and interactions in the long term. But
in the short term, our findings are that particularly in municipalities
where strife and riots are the order of the day and of course where, in
terms of my question here that referred to Operation Clean Audit, there
have been no clean audits forthcoming for some time, this type of political
interference is taking place at this very moment.

You have a short-term plan to deal with instances like these in the
interim, whilst interventions are taking place by the MECs and whilst the
NCOP is conducting visits to ascertain whether interventions are acceptable
or not – whichever party it may be? Will it become clear that the strife
and bad governance in that municipality is because of officials interfering
with executive decisions because of their political superiority?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Thank you
very much, hon Watson. Of course, we have short-term measures. One of the
short-term measures is the fact that we are intervening decisively in areas
where we hear about this. I will tell you that we received a report where
in one province, that I am not going to mention, the municipal manager was
about to be suspended last week. This was because she refused to implement
a legal instruction. This was done by a junior official who is a senior
member of the party. We dispatched a team, led by the Deputy Minister and
other officials, to go to that place. They reversed the situation, and
everything is going well.
We want to be a responsive government. We must act if we hear anything; we
must be there on the ground and deal with the situation. To illustrate
that, hon Watty, the department is going to be divided into provinces. This
is because we believe that one cannot run 283 municipalities — working with
all nine of the provinces — while being in Tshwane. We don’t know what is
happening on the ground. We must therefore ensure that we are at the
provincial level.

I am saying that we are intervening. If you hear anything, you have the
right to communicate with us. My cellphone number has not changed; it
remains the same. We will be there on the ground, dealing with the issues.
We don’t want to allow a situation where the power, prestige and authority
of a municipality is undermined. If we allow this to happen, we will regret
what we have done over time. We must stop the rot before it gets worse.
Thank you very much.

   Action taken against municipal managers who have failed to comply with
                           performance agreements

53.   Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Minister for Co-operative Governance and
     Traditional Affairs:

      Whether any action has been taken against any municipal managers who
      have failed to comply with their performance agreements; if not, why
      not; if so, how many municipal managers have been dismissed and/or
      suspended in the (a) 2008-09 financial year and (b) from 1 April 2009
      up to the latest specified date for which information is available?
      CO182E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Chairperson, regarding the issue of municipal managers we have
conducted an assessment to check the vacancy rate relating to municipal
managers. We know as a matter of fact that about 78% of positions of
municipal managers have been filled. This is a marginal improvement on the
72% vacancies filled. Only 12% of vacancies have not been filled. This is
the situation even with regard to section 57 managers, who make up the 78%.
We have not carried out assessments of municipal managers according to
whether they are performing well in terms of performance agreements.

Secondly, we have not been able to look at municipal managers that have not
done their work. This is an ongoing process and something that we are
looking at on an ongoing basis. Once the information in this regard is
available, we’ll be able to present it to you. We have not checked to see
if there are any municipal managers that have not complied with their
performance agreements. However, again, this is an ongoing process. Thank
you very much.

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chair, I’d like to ask the Minister a follow-up
question. Firstly, there are many municipal managers that have signed
contracts and have certainly not complied with their performance contracts,
and yet they get paid or give themselves large bonuses. What is going to
happen in this regard?

Another follow-up question is: Are these contracts going to be
standardised, for example, for the metropolitan municipalities or according
to the grade of the municipality? What is the Minister’s opinion on that?
Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson, the issue of municipal managers who have not complied with
these contracts but have received bonuses is something we are dealing with
on an ongoing basis. At this point in time, we can’t say with authority and
confidence that we know for sure that this municipal manager in this
municipality has not complied with his or her performance contract. Once we
are through with the process, we’ll engage you on it.

However, amongst other things, we want to include in the performance
contracts of municipal managers the issue of management of resources, the
lack of which gives rise to adverse qualified opinions, including
disclaimers. If, as a municipal manager, you get these, you must not get
money as a bonus.

We are looking at the possibility of standardisation, so that we are able
to compare apples to apples. Of course, different situations prevail in
different municipalities. However, overall we want to look at the things
they have in common and the ways in which they differ. We don’t want to use
a one-size-fits-all solution to the problems.

This system, hon Worth, is evolving, and I think that all of us must be
patient and allow it to evolve fully so that it can suit the conditions
that obtain, subjectively and objectively, at a given time.

 Measures implemented to address poor service delivery by municipalities and
                  action taken to stop fraud and corruption

54.   Mr H B Groenewald (DA) asked the Minister for Co-operative Governance
     and Traditional Affairs:

     (1)    Whether the government has implemented any measures  to  address
          poor service delivery by municipalities; if not, why not; if  so,
          what are the relevant details;


     (2)    whether any action will be taken to stop fraud and corruption,
          including mismanagement in municipalities; if not, why not; if
          so, what are the relevant details? CO184E


The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Chairperson, the issue of service delivery is a serious challenge. In South
Africa we have conducted the state of municipalities. It has been the most
comprehensive process that has been conducted to date. This process of the
state of municipalities has revealed a lot of things. Amongst other things
it has revealed is an issue of the levels of backlogs in each and every
municipality and province in relation to water, sanitation, electricity and
refuse removal at a broader level. We have come to the conclusion that for
South Africa to reach the Millennium Development Goals on sanitation by
2014, we must provide over 600 000 facilities to each and every household
every year; for us to ensure that we have universal access to electricity,
we must deliver over 300 000 connections to each household every year so
that we can reach the 2014 goal; and for us to have access to water in
South Africa, we must deliver over 200 000 connections to each household.
Therefore, going forward, this requires a lot of resources, and it is
something we are engaging upon.

We are looking at these measures to ensure that we accelerate service
delivery. We are also looking at these matters in a way that takes us
forward. It is not only this; we are also looking at local economic
development. We have to broaden the cake because the tax base and revenue
of municipalities have declined over time. About 95% of municipalities were
told that they should raise their own revenue. This situation no longer
obtains. It is a challenge; it is something we are looking at, going
forward.

The issue of fraud and corruption is of serious concern to us. We believe
that all of us — without exception — from all sectors and structures of our
society and all classes, should come together against corruption. In fact,
if we had been speaking in another forum we would have been saying that
corruption is an antinational democratic revolution, because it benefits a
few at the expense of the majority. This is something that must be tackled
and dealt with.

We are developing mechanisms in the turnaround strategy to indicate that we
are dealing with this. We will be signing a contract and an agreement — a
memorandum of understanding — with the Special Investigation Unit led by
Willie Hofmeyr. We are interacting and interlocking with the Hawks under Mr
Dramat. Therefore, we are going in big time to ensure that we deal with
these things. In this respect, we are calling upon all parties to come to
the party. If we can manage to stop this rot, we will have also done so for
those coming after us. In fact, they will thank us for having been decisive
in dealing with these issues. I thank you.

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Deputy Chairperson, I am the one who asked this
question. I come from the North West province. In our province, 18 of 23
municipalities are in a bad condition. In your answer you spoke about what
is happening in South Africa at this stage and about the backlogs we’ve
had. But how are we going to address these backlogs? That is what I want to
know.

You also invited us to take part in the whole process regarding fraud and
mismanagement, and I really appreciate that. But how are we going to
address municipalities which have these backlogs? For example, I know that
the people of Tswaing wrote letters to you regarding what is happening in
their area. There’s a place named Iraq, where there is only one water tap.
A few minutes ago you laughed about the Western Cape, but there is only one
water tap. There are no toilets and roads, and a thousand people are
flocking together. There is nothing happening from government’s side. So, I
want to know what it is that we are going to do to help these people.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson, to say that nothing has happened is being a bit liberal with
the truth. I will tell you what happened. You know that the issue of water
is the responsibility of the district municipality. We found out that
R168 million was sitting in the bank of the district municipality called
Ngaka Modiri Molema. The mayor in that municipality didn’t have the
political will to act. We had to put the mayor aside so that service
delivery could take place. We now have an acting municipal manager who is
running the municipality as we speak. The acting municipal manager has
removed the chief executive officer in that district municipality so that
we can go to the municipality.

We have deployed engineers to that municipality and they are working with
us. There is a woman called Carrim, who has been very vocal. She even went
to the President to raise the issues of Tswaing. We are working with them
to solve the issues there. They withheld payment for services and put it in
trust accounts. We are discussing the issue of releasing these resources in
order to deal with these things. This is the specificity of the Tswaing
Municipality issue and the district you were talking about.

Let me come to the North West. North West is the first province to actually
open our eyes. From 6 March to 21 April we conducted a thorough
investigation, where I was personally involved. We came up with a very
seriously telling report, which we are using to turn things around in that
province. One of the most important things you must know is that generally
the North West does not have water. It is a water-scarce province. We are
looking at measures for ensuring that we are able to deal with this at a
specific level. But at a broader level I can assure you that the people of
the North West deserve better. Currently they are not getting what they
deserve.

We are moving in. You will hear about dramatic things, serious things and a
decisive leadership in the next few weeks, which is aimed at ensuring that
people in that province are getting what they deserve. Therefore, we are
telling you to fasten your seat belts for good things to come. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M C MAINE: Deputy Chairperson, the Minister spoke with passion on the
issue of service delivery and corruption. But I want to ask the Minister if
he and his team are prepared to make an intervention in the Saldanha Bay
Municipality, where a municipal manager refused to put a report in front of
the council in which 24 senior officers have been implicated in corrupt
practices in a tender process.

The other point is about Chatsworth, a cold place in Malmesbury, where
people are still using the bucket system. I want to make a plea to the
Minister to use his task team to fast-track service delivery in these two
places. He should also deal with issues of corrupt practices taking place
in the Saldanha Bay Municipality. I thank you. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Baba usho
entshweni. Khuluma thina siyashesha. [You have hit the nail on the head,
sir. Just say it and we will do it very quickly.]

We will be moving to Saldanha Bay, and you will get the report. We will
also move to Malmesbury in the area that you are talking about. MEC Bredell
in the Western Cape was once a mayor in that area, and he comes from there.
This is an area he is very proud of. We will go and look at the issues
there. For more details you can contact Mr Jazz Mokoena on the eleventh
floor on the opposite side of the road. You can go and see him. He is
available 24/7; you can go and talk to him. He will deal with these issues
together with his team.
In fact, we are doing what we can. You must come forward with information
and judge us on whether we are taking any action. We can promise you that
we will spare no effort; we will act. We are not just going to leave bad
things as they are. We are encouraging all other members to do the same and
follow your example. Even if you have a gripe with the area, it’s all
right. You must come with the information and we will act on it. I thank
you.

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, uNgqongqoshe uSokude asimbongele ukuthi cha,
uyashaya impela futhi ushaya khona. Baze basho bathi banele impela.
Ngqongqoshe Sokude ngifuna ukubuza lapha ukuthi uMnyango wakho ingabe
ukhona yini okwenzayo ukufundisa imiphakathi ngezindaba zokulethwa
kwezidingo? Nokuthi uyalibamba yini iqhaza kulokhu okufanele kwenziwe
nguMnyango — ngoba kukhona okunye kufanele kwenziwe umasipala wasekhaya
kuthi okunye kufanele kwenziwe umasipala wesifunda? Ikhona yini into
eyenziwayo ukufundisa umphakathi ngezindaba zokulethwa kwezidingo
nibambisene ninguhulumeni omkhulu, wesiFundazwe kanye nowaseKhaya na?
Ngiyabonga sihlalo.

UNGQONGQOSHE KAHULUMENI WOKUBAMBISANA KANYE NEZINDABA ZEZENDABUKO: Baba
Magadlela, engakusho ukuthi esikuthola eMnyangweni kunesakhiwo laphaya.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, let us be grateful for the hon Minister Sokude
because he is very impressive. People have even said that they are really
impressed. Hon Minister Sokude, I just want to hear from you whether there
is anything that your department does to educate communities about issues
of service delivery? And whether it plays a role in delivering services
which need its expertise – as there are some services which are the
responsibility of local government while others fall under the jurisdiction
of a district municipality? Are you doing anything to educate communities
about co-operation with regard to service delivery amongst yourselves as
national government, provincial government and local government? Thank you,
Chairperson.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Hon
Magadlela, what I said was that whatever we receive in the department has a
structure.]

There is an academy for local government. It is called the Local Government
Leadership Academy, Logola. That is a shell academy ...

... ngoba baba ayisebenzi leyanto leya. Sifuna ukuyivusa ke manje siyimise
ngezinyawo sizokwazi ukufundisa abantu ngezindaba zombuso, hhayi kuphela
baba ngentuthuko yomphakathi kodwa sifuna ukufundisa nje abantu bazi
ngezigaba ezahlukene zomasipala nang ezigaba ezahlukene zohulumeni abakhona
kuleli lizwe lakithi — uhulumeni omkhulu, owesiFundazwe kanye nabaseKhaya;
nokuthi ingabe basebenza kanjani. Ukuthi ini yenziwa ubani, kuphi ngoba uma
sibona abantu bebhikisha, babhikishela uhulumeni waseKhaya ngoba useduze
nabo.
Uthola ukuthi ngesinye isikhathi bafuna izidingo ezinganikezwa uhulumeni
wasekhaya — njengezindlu nje kanye nokunye okungaqondene nohulumeni
wasekhaya. Yingakho-ke ngithanda ukufundisa umphakathi ngalezi zigaba
zohulumeni, kanti futhi yinto ebesizitshele ukuthi sizoyenza leyo.

Abanye abantu okudingeka sibafundise ngamakhansela. Si kholwa wukuthi
amakhansela nawo adinga ukuqeqeshwa ngoba uthola ukuthi ubukade ungumuntu
nje womphakathi kuthi ngakusasa uzibone usuyimeya. Awunalwazi lokuthi
kufuneka wenzeni futhi kwesinye isikhathi ucabange ukuthi ukuba yimeya
wenza izinto ngendlela othanda ngayo kube sengathi uphethe isiphaza shop.
Siyitholile imibiko enjalo kwezinye izindawo — ukuthi uMeya uvele atshele
izisebenzi zikahulumeni ukuthi zenze ukuthi nokuthi ngoba efuna ukwenza i-
party lapha nenye laphaya. Akazi ukuthi kunento okudingeka yenziwe
ukulandela umthetho kuhulumeni basekhaya.

Futhi sifuna nokuqeqesha amakomidi amawadi akhona kanye nama-CTWU.
Ngikhuluma nawe nje baba Magadlela sizoqala uchungachunge lokuvakashela
izifundazwe sihamba nozakwethu umhlonishwa ubaba uBaloyi . Siyaqala
ngeSonto, sizoqala khona lapha eNtshonalnga Kapa, sizobakulendawo izinsuku
ezintathu, iSonto, u Msobuluko kanye noLwesibili. Sizobe sihamba noMphenyi
Mabhuku Omkhulu kusho ukuthi kuzobe kuyikalishi (Troika) ezobe ihamba
lendawo. Sizohlangana ne Khabinethi yesifundazwe sihlangane nama-CTWU
sihlangane namakomidi amawodi wonke, namakhosi uma ekhona. Kanti ngizwile
ukuthi ubaba uManuel naye kuthiwa yinkosi yamaKhoisan la ekhaya. Naye uzoba
yingxenye yaleli thimba simbizele ukuthi azoba yinkosi ekhona.

Sizobe sesihlangana futhi nawo wonke amakhansela akhona esiFundazweni ukuze
sixoxe nawo. Yikho esiyokwenza kulolu chungechunge — ukuthi yini abantu
abacabanga ukuthi yenziwe ukwenza ngcono ohulumeni basemakhaya. Ngaleyo
ndlela-ke Magadlela sithi: cha, baba isilingene, ingangathi ngakho-ke
siyobhekana nayo ngqo! Siyinkanka la inamandla ngakhona. Siyibamba
ngezimpondo lapho inamandla khona. Ngiyabonga baba. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[... because that thing is not working, sir. We now want to get it on its
feet so that we can educate people about governance and not only about
community development. We also want to educate people about the different
levels of municipalities as well as the different levels of government that
obtain in our country – national government, provincial government and
local government; and the way they function. We want to educate people in
respect of which sphere of government does what and where, because when we
see people protesting, they protest against the local government because it
is closer to them.

You find that sometimes they demand services that are not rendered by local
government – services like housing and others which are not the
municipalities’ responsibility. That is why I would like to educate the
communities about these levels of government, and that is what we have
planned to do.

Councillors also need training, because you find that today you are just an
ordinary community member and then the next day you are a mayor. You do not
have a clue about what is expected of you and sometimes you think that
being a mayor warrants you doing as you please as if you are running your
spaza shop. We received such reports from some areas – that a mayor just
instructed public servants to do this and that just because he wanted to
host a party here and another one somewhere else. He is not aware that
there are some processes and procedures that need to be followed in
accordance with the Local Government act.

We also want to train the existing ward committees and the CTWUs as well.
As I am speaking to you now, hon Magadlela, my colleague hon Baloyi and I
will be making a series of visits to the provinces. We will be starting on
Sunday, and we will start here in the Western Cape. We will be here for
three days, from Sunday to Tuesday. The Auditor-General will also be with
us and this means that this place will be visited by the troika. We will
meet the Cabinet of the provincial legislature, the CTWUs, all the ward
committees and Amakhosi if there are any here. And I heard that hon Manuel
is also an Inkosi of the Khoisan people here. He will also be a part of
this entourage – we asked him to be an existing Inkosi.

We will also meet with all the councillors from the province to discuss
some issues with them. That is what we are going to do during this series
of visits – to find out what people think must be done to improve the
standard of service delivery from local governments. In that way, hon
Magadlela, we are saying that: yes sir, we are equal to the task. We will,
therefore, tackle it head on! We attack its stronghold. Thank you, sir.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Deputy Chairperson, firstly I would like to congratulate
the Minister for the work done so far. But I am quite concerned about the
issue of empowering people. I was actually wondering if there is any
criterion for appointing a councillor or whether the department is working
on something like that. Is there any educational programme in place or are
we just pumping in money trying to rectify and better our lives? We can
pump in money, but if education is not there, it is fruitless.

In as far as ward committees are concerned, which are the grass roots of a
municipality, I would like to know from the hon Minister if there is
anything on the table or in the pipeline in this regard? We as Cope are
prepared to put something on the table. I would appreciate your response.
Thank you, Minister.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Hon
member, you have raised a question with two parts. Firstly, you asked about
whether councillors are capacitated. I think you would know that Ministers
work with what they have and that councillors are deployed by political
parties. This means that I must use whatever I have in institutions. As I
have already indicated earlier on in response to the hon Watty, we are
looking at governance values. We would like to ensure from the start that
we have a good product with good capacity and quality. Going forward we
will be discussing these governance values — how to ensure that things are
happening.

On the issue of ward committees I must say that the issue of training in
South Africa has been abused. Millions and millions have been spent, but if
you look at the outcomes, they are very weak. People are like a duck that
enters the water and comes out dry. That is why we want to centralise the
whole question of training so that we can look at its quality and ensure
that whatever money is spent, is worthwhile — that we get value for money.

Training will be done across the country. Earlier on we discussed that we
were going to intensify training. But we must do this in a way in which we
will get value for money, so that we can appreciate the product and be
proud of it. We are attending to this matter and we would like to ensure
that South Africa gets better. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! Hon members, I
think I am going to be a bit harsh. The two other Ministers that are
supposed to be answering to questions are running out of time. They also
have to leave just like Minister Shiceka. So, I hope nobody is going to say
I’m being impossible. Thank you.

Thanks very much, hon Minister Shiceka, for all you have said to us. I hope
everybody has been taking notes. You are now relieved of your duties.
[Applause.]

   Challenges facing municipalities and provinces in fostering integrated
                                  planning

44.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister in the Presidency: National
      Planning Commission:

      (1)   Whether his department has undertaken an assessment in respect
          of some of the challenges facing municipalities and provinces in
          fostering integrated planning between municipalities and
          provinces; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
          how is his department planning to address these challenges to
          ensure that policies, principles and programmes of municipalities
          and provinces are informed by national priorities;


      (2)   whether he will consider sending such assessment and/or report
          to the National Council of Provinces by 2010; if not, why not; if
          so, what are the relevant details? CO171E
   Interface of mandate of National Planning Commission regarding national
       planning and development of Integrated Development Plans (IDPs)

45.   Mr R J Tau (ANC) asked the Minister in the Presidency: National
      Planning Commission:

      Whether, since taking office, he had discussions with the Minister or
      the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs on
      the interface of the mandate of the Commission regarding issues of (a)
      national planning and (b) the development of Integrated Development
      Plans (IDPs) by municipalities; if not, (i) why not and (ii) how does
      he plan to link these two processes; if so, what are the relevant
      details?
            CO172E

     Current planning capacities and competencies of municipalities and
                  provinces and assessments in this regard

46.   Mr R J Tau (ANC) asked the Minister in the Presidency: National
      Planning Commission:

      (1)   Whether the Commission has  undertaken  any  assessment  of  the
           current planning capacities and competencies  of  municipalities
           and provinces;  if  so,  what  are  the  key  areas  of  concern
           regarding integrated national planning  that  will  improve  the
           delivery of services to the public regardless of their  location
           and historical background; if not,


      (2)   whether such an assessment will be undertaken; if not, what is
           the position in this regard; if so, (a) when and (b) what are
           the further relevant details?                      CO173E

   Development of line functions and responsibilities of National Planning
   Commission and how they relate to responsibilities of the Department of
                            Economic Development

56.   Mr T Harris (DA) asked the Minister in the Presidency: National
      Planning Commission:

      Whether the (a) line functions and (b) responsibilities of the
      National Planning Commission have been developed; if not, why not; if
      so, how do they relate to the (i) planning and (ii) policy development
      responsibilities of the Department of Economic Development?
                                        CO186


The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Deputy
Chair, let me first welcome all the new members. It’s my first time in this
House since the NCOP was formed after the elections.

I have a bit of difficulty with the questions, and let me explain why. Four
of the questions — one from the Chief Whip, the hon Ntwanambi, two
questions from the hon Tau and one question from the hon Harris - all
presume that the structures of the planning commission are already in
place, and they aren’t. The position right now is that a Green Paper was
published and it is being considered as we speak by an ad hoc committee of
the National Assembly. They will be holding hearings on it this week.
Initially Parliament had asked them to conclude their work by 22 October;
clearly they haven’t been able to do so. They have requested an extension,
and these matters will have to be resolved before Parliament rises.

In saying that the matters must be resolved, from here the work will
require us to receive the initial report from that ad hoc committee, which
clearly will deal with some of the issues about structure and operations of
the National Planning Commission. We will then go back and publish our
responses and thereafter it will be possible to start the work of
establishing the institution.

Chances are that we will only be able to advertise all these positions
early in the new year and then probably only get the institution up and
running by March next year. Until such time we receive the report from the
ad hoc committee, it would be, in my opinion, incorrect to presume what
will come from the committee. This is because if the submissions that I’ve
seen — and I’ve seen about 30 submissions that have gone to the committee —
are supported by detailed presentations from the institutions that have
made them, then it is almost inevitable that there will be some
recommendations that deal with structure and operations.

So, against that backdrop, it’s not that I’m reluctant to answer the
questions. I think that members will understand that it would be quite
incorrect to try and anticipate what the committee will deal with when in
fact the Green Paper, as it says on page 5, is a consultative document.
Consultations are now being done on behalf of the Presidency by the ad hoc
committee in the National Assembly, and we must allow that process to
continue rather than try to short-circuit it. I plead that members
understand the circumstances within which I take the position that I do. If
this is approved, then I can deal with the one remaining question. Thank
you.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Siyaxolisa Mpthathiswa. Mhlawumbi sicinga
ukuba singxame kakhulu, sifuna ukude sibone umohluko phakathi kwangoku nan
gokuya. Kodwa eyona nto ibalulekileyo njengokuba uthethile ngento yeGreen
Paper, kukuba ungayijonga na into yokuba laa Ndlu ingaphaya ayizi kuyishiya
le, ukuze le nkqubo ihambe ngokufanayo? Ndiyayiqonda into yokuba i-NCOP
ilandela emva, kodwa ingashiywa ngasemva, kananjalo. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Minister, we apologise. Perhaps we are in a
big hurry because we want to see the difference between now and then. But,
the most important thing is, as you have spoken about the Green Paper,
whether you can see to it that the other august House will concur with this
one, in order to have uniformity within this process?  I understand that
the NCOP is the second House, but that doesn’t mean it must necessarily be
left behind.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: The decision
has been taken, and I am concerned about it because it’s quite important
that Parliament be heard. The National Assembly ad hoc committee only deals
with a part of Parliament. But I think we have to resolve these issues. So,
I will talk to the hon Ntwanambi and you, Deputy Chair, later, and see how
we can take these issues forward. But we will try and resolve this. I think
that we must recognise that it’s a limping approach to Parliament;
Parliament is defined as both Houses in the Constitution. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chair, I’m very happy that the Minister has clarified
this issue. It’s very senior members of this House who have asked these
questions. The Minister is 100% correct that the structure is still in the
Green Paper. Thank you very much for that political schooling, Minister.
Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! Hon Bloem, what
is your question?

Mr D V BLOEM: Minister, my question is: Do you agree with me that this is
still in the process of a Green Paper? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: As a
democrat, I am compelled to answer a follow-up question. Yes, it is a Green
Paper.

If I have your permission and that of the House, Deputy Chair, may I ask
that the question by the hon Mokgoro remain and then I can deal with it
later.

I think it’s important that we allow the process to continue so that we can
understand how the National Planning Commission will work. Amongst the
outputs that we will have to deal with are those that the hon Shiceka
covered earlier. There must be an alignment between the national plan, the
provincial growth and development strategies and the integrated development
plans, IDPs. This becomes a fundamentally important task because I have a
sense that — and I’m sure that the hon Shiceka wouldn’t necessarily agree
with me — the IDPs are developed with the full participation of people.
They then get taken away by ward committees, where the people who have
participated don’t actually know which of their ideas have been accepted,
as there’s very little communication. When budgets are drawn up, they tend
not to look at the IDPs, and then the people think that the councillors
have done something wrong.

The way in which we engender participation with these matters is something
we must consider, because in the Constitution and certainly in the Local
Government: Municipal Systems Act, Act 44 of 2003, where participatory
democracy is defined, I think we have a lot of learning to do. But the
bigger challenge is getting alignment between these three sets of outputs;
that’s important going forward. For now we have to allow the institutions
to be developed as per the Green Paper and in terms of the recommendations
that will come from the ad hoc committee.

The one issue of concern — and the hon Mokgoro asks about provincial
planning commissions and so on — is that we will have a plethora of
planning committees and commissions everywhere that won’t talk to each
other. The President was, in fact, quite forthright when he said:

   We deliver the state of the nation address, and the premiers and the
   mayors come. Then they rush back to deliver the state of the province
   addresses and state of the village addresses, the speeches for which have
   already been drafted. So, it isn’t their part of the state of the nation,
   it’s just something that’s done.

We’ve lived through this. We’ve lived through RDP, where everybody had RDP
offices, and we have lived through other things where everybody had, for
example, HIV/Aids offices, gender offices, BEE offices and Asgisa offices.
I want to communicate through the hon Mokgoro that we should in fact try
and limit the enthusiasm with which we establish these bodies because we
don’t want to construct the Tower of Babel. We need a single set of
messages about a single plan. Our task is to align. The more offices there
are, the greater the risk of misalignment. This I think is something we
have to work on. It’s something that we are communicating to the premiers
as well, but I think we must all take the message forward because we all
have some constituency responsibilities and people ask us about this. Thank
you very much.

  Assessment of challenges facing people with disabilities in accessing the
      job market and in the workplace, particularly the Public Service

48.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked  the  Minister  of  Women,  Children  and
      People with Disabilities:

      Whether her department or the government has undertaken any assessment
      in respect of challenges facing people with disabilities in (a)
      accessing the job market and (b) the workplace, particularly in the
      Public Service; if not, why not; if so, (i) what are the relevant
      details and (ii) how does her department plan to intervene?
                             CO175E


The MINISTER OF WOMEN, YOUTH, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES:
Mhlalingaphambili, nam ndifuna ukubulela ithuba lokuqala lokuphendula
imibuzo ebuzwe ngamalungu ale ndlu. [Chairperson, I would also like to
express thanks for this first opportunity to respond to questions raised by
members of this august House.]

Can you hear me? [Interjections.] My apologies.

I am thanking the Chairperson for the opportunity given to me today to
respond to the questions that have been raised by members of the House.

As you would know, we are in the process of establishing a new department.
What I have done was to source information from the Public Service
Commission, which released a study on the assessment of disability equity
in the Public Service last year January, also reflecting on some of the
barriers that are experienced with respect to employing people with
disabilities. I would just like to highlight a few. They are as follows:
the lack of employment equity plans; inadequate recruitment and retention
strategies in the Public Service; links with organisations representing
persons with disabilities, which are not optimised; the rehabilitation of
public servants disabled as a result of injuries sustained; the allegation
that persons with disabilities do not apply for posts; the inability to
attract suitable, qualified and skilled persons with disabilities; the
reluctance of persons with disabilities to disclose their status; the
inadequate management of information on persons with disabilities;
management implications associated with employing persons with
disabilities; the marginalisation of persons with disabilities by
management; and so on. The list is long.

The second point I want to make today is that the Department of Public
Service and Administration has developed a Handbook on Reasonable
Accommodation for People with Disabilities in the Public Service. The
handbook is currently being used in the workplace to respond to issues
relating to reasonable accommodation and accessibility. But the question
that also arises is whether we are using this handbook to ensure that
people with disabilities are assisted to be able to do their work with the
support that they need in the workplace.

Furthermore, the department has also developed the Job Access Strategic
Framework on the Recruitment, Employment and Retention of Persons with
Disabilities in the Public Service, which became operational on 1 April
2009. This strategic framework is a Public Service initiative aimed at
accelerating the recruitment and employment of persons with disabilities in
the Public Service. It also seeks to ensure that issues pertaining to
disabilities are mentioned in the Public Service. So, the Department of
Public Service and Administration is currently embarking on the roll-out
workshops, both nationally and provincially.

Furthermore, when the organogram of the new department is approved, in
addition to heading the three branches that will look into issues of women,
children and persons with disabilities, we are going to have an additional
branch that will look across the public sector and the private sector for
compliance. We will create mechanisms of pushing departments to comply with
the targets that have been set by government on the employment of persons
with disabilities. So, this is still a concern. I think all of us must be
mobilised to appreciate the fact that we need to do more to ensure that
persons with disabilities participate in the mainstream economy, the Public
Service and the private sector.

I have tried my best to respond. The department is still new, and it is
still to be established. I am glad that the Minister who is driving the
process is here.

Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Deputy Chairperson, it is true that this department is
still new. However, in each and every department, there are people dealing
with persons with disabilities. Can the Minister tell us how many of these
people are there, for instance, in the Police? This question is about
assessment. I fully agree that it’s a new department, but the Minister
conducted her assessment at least in the past five months. Can the Minister
tell us what the assessment is in each and every department? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES:
Hon Deputy Chairperson, I think I have responded to the questions that have
been asked by the hon member Ntwanambi. I have also gone further to respond
on what the department will be able to do when it is established. I don’t
know now whether I must go into details of the processes we are undergoing
to establish the new department and its capacity. I think that would be
unfair on the programme of the House if I were to go into those details.
So, I think let’s stop there and then allow the department to be legally
established. Thank you.

Mr B NESI: Chair, my question is not really going to be a question because
the Minister is saying they are still in the process of establishing the
department. The question might be ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Can you speak into your microphone,
please! [Interjections.] Oh, is it far from him? Okay.

You may continue, hon member.

Mr B NESI: My one had a problem.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Okay.

Mr B NESI: Mine is just a comment because the department is still in the
process of being established. What is very important in the process of
establishing the department is to look at what other departments are doing
about disabled people — look at other departments except for the one that
is being established, especially those whose employees get injured at work
like in the Police Force and in many others.

The department can also do us a big favour in looking at people who have
been injured in the mines, especially those from areas in Transkei who find
themselves in very difficult situations today because there are no
hospitals to assist them in terms of spinal cord injuries. The workmen’s
compensation is nowhere to be found to assist these people. Can the
department also link with the workmen’s compensation in the process of
establishing itself and also link with hospitals that assist people with
disabilities, especially those with spinal cord injuries, so that they can
be assisted in the process? It is so frustrating to find that government
has put away money all over to assist these people, but then it becomes
very difficult for them to access it.

I will write other comments to the Minister so that they can be of
assistance to them in establishing the department. But the sooner the
department is on its feet, the better. Thank you. [Interjections.] [Time
expired.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! That was not a follow-up question but a
comment. So, I don’t expect the Minister to answer that. I’m sure she has
noted your concern and your inputs.

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo. Ngqongqoshe, uma kwenziwa lolo cwaningo, ingabe
umnyango wakho uzithinta ngqo yini izinhlaka kanye nezinhlangano zabantu
abaphila noku khubazeka njengokulandela isiqubulo sabo esithi: “Akukho
okuyokhulunywa ngathi ngaphandle kwethu”; ukuze kubonakale ukuthi lolo
cwaningo lwenzelwa bona laba bantu abaphila nokukhubazeka ngesimo
nangemsebenzi, kodwa alwenzelwa abantu abangakhubazekile? Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson. Hon Minister, when you conducted that
assessment, did your department directly consult with the structures as
well as the organisations which deal with people living with disabilities
in line with their slogan which says: “Nothing about us without us”; so
that it can be evident that this assessment is conducted specifically for
people who are living with disabilities and their work, and not for people
who are not living with disabilities? Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Chairperson,
I appreciate the comments that have been made, and they have been noted. We
must emphasise the fact that the critical role of this new department will
also be to oversee what other departments are doing in mainstreaming and
ensuring that issues of people living with disabilities are addressed. So,
that one is in the pipeline as we form the new department.

But, this is also linked to the question that has been asked in terms of
the assessment and so on. This is because if one looks at the last 15
years, for instance, as a country we set ourselves a target of 2% for the
employment of people with disabilities. What we have achieved thus far is
far less than what we sought to do, and it remains at 0,2%. Therefore, we
need to work on the kind of assessment that Mr Gumede is talking about so
that everybody can come to the party.

We also need to assess the kind of work the private sector is doing. We
need to find out how many people with disabilities there are in the private
sector, for instance, and what the plans are that they are putting into
place and so on. So,...

... ngiyavuma ukuthi lo msebenzi kudingeka ukuthi wenziwe. [... I agree
that this job must be done.]

I also wish to emphasise the point that this is not just the responsibility
of government, but it is also the responsibility of this House to ensure
that it plays its oversight role to ensure that the objectives we have set
to ensure that people with disabilities are given the space and the
capacity to play a role in the economy and the transformation of our
country are met. Thank you.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Minister, firstly, is there an audit available on
people with disabilities in all sectors or departments and not just an
assessment of the overall picture? Secondly, what is the position of your
department on advertisements so that different departments can include in
their advertisements that persons with disabilities can also apply?

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Chairperson,
I have alluded to the overall picture, even though I may not have gone into
detail. In terms of the audit, for instance, the overall picture is that we
are not doing well; you can go to any sector, including civil society. We
have not made headway with respect to people with disabilities. That’s my
response in brief to the question that has been raised by the hon member.
Thank you.

 Discussions with Setas in respect of training people with disabilities and
                 youth for employment in the Public Service

49.   Ms A N D Qikani (ANC)  asked  the  Minister  of  Women,  Children  and
      People with Disabilities:

      Whether since taking office she has had discussions with any Sector
      Education and Training Authorities (Setas) in respect of training
      people with disabilities and the youth to equip them for employment in
      the Public Service; if not, why not; if so, (a) what Setas are
      currently involved in such an initiative and (b) what is the total
      number of (i) people with disabilities and (ii) the youth who (aa) are
      currently identified for placement in the Public Service and (bb) were
      placed in the Public Service thus far?
      CO176E

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Chairperson,
the question is whether we have had any discussions with any sector
education and training authorities, Setas, with respect to training people
with disabilities and the youth to equip them for employment in the Public
Service. The reply to Ms Qikani’s question is that since taking office, I
have not yet engaged with any Setas. As the hon member is aware, we are
still in the process of establishing the department and consulting the
sectors under the Ministry. However, we managed to get figures on Setas
that provide relevant training for persons with disabilities. So far, the
Seta that is currently involved in such an initiative is the Wholesale and
Retail Seta, and the total number of people with disabilities that are
involved in training programmes is 276.

Furthermore, we are currently working towards a 100% placement of people
with disabilities by the Public Service Sector Seta. The number of people
with disabilities that have been placed in the Public Service thus far is
only 125. I would like you to note that the Seta ran two pilot programmes.
One was for people with physical disabilities and the other was for people
who are hearing impaired. Owing to the huge success rate of a 100%
placement of people with a hearing impediment, the Seta board has recently
approved two new projects for people living with disabilities, which they
are in the process of rolling out.

Regarding the Health and Welfare Seta, we’ve been informed that the board
has approved the plan to employ 10 persons with disabilities as interns at
the Health and Welfare Seta every six months. The interns will be trained
in administration. They will accompany representatives to conferences,
sector meetings, etc. Every effort will be made to place such interns in
permanent employment positions within the sector, various government
departments and the private sector. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, the Minister is right in saying that she has
only been in this position for five or six months. However, regarding the
figure that the Minister is quoting — 125 people with disabilities in the
sectors — it is a shame. My question is: When will the Minister be ready to
give answers to this House? I understand that hers is a new department, but
when will she be ready to give answers?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, that’s not a fair question. The Minister
has just given you an answer. What more do you want?

Mr D V BLOEM: I won’t go into a dialogue with you, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Okay.
    The number of people with disabilities employed in the Public Service

50.   Ms B P Mabe (ANC) asked the Minister of  Women,  Children  and  People
     with Disabilities:

     (1)    What is the total number of persons with disabilities who are
          employed in the Public Service, categorised as (a) deaf, (b)
          sight, (c) hearing and (d) physically disabled employed as
          Assistant Director, Deputy Director, Director, Chief Director,
          Deputy Director-General and Director-General;


     (2)    whether she considers such figures sufficient; if not, what
          measures is her department putting in place to address the
          situation; if so, what are the relevant details?    CO177E

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Chairperson,
the reply to the question is that the information we currently have at our
disposal reflects the representation of persons with disabilities as
reflected in Persal. The representation, for instance, on assistant
director and deputy director levels is not indicated in the table that I am
going to be reading. Attached here are Persal statistics as at 30 June 2009
of senior management levels. All other categories will only be available in
a little while.
I will start with the Eastern Cape in terms of provinces and national
departments. If you look at employees with disabilities at senior level in
this province, you will find that there are only three of them — one male
and two females. The Free State has one male and no females. Gauteng has
two males and no females. Limpopo has nine — eight males and one female.
Mpumalanga has two — two males and no females. North West has two — two
males and no females. The Northern Cape has two — two males and no females.
The Western Cape has two — one male and one female. KwaZulu-Natal has no
one at all. National departments have 28 — 18 males and 10 females. The
grand total is 51, with 37 males and 14 females.

The figures I have run through are certainly not sufficient. In order to
address this, firstly, the Department of Public Service and Administration
has developed the Job Access Strategic Framework, as I have said earlier,
which is a strategic framework for implementation across all departments in
the Public Service. There are various outcomes that are expected through
the implementation of the strategy. It is envisaged that these intended
outcomes will go a long way in addressing a lot of factors that have
contributed to the inability of the Public Service to meet its stipulated
employment equity targets with regard to people with disabilities. So,
these outcomes include, but are not necessarily limited to, the creation of
an understanding of the mandate and legal context of the strategic
framework that I have referred to. This will be achieved through training
on disability management in the Public Service for senior managers, human
resource practitioners and disability focal points.

Secondly, we need to ensure the creation of an enabling climate of
appropriate attitudes and sensitivities that are accommodative of people
with disabilities. This requires that all officials in the workplace attend
workshops so that they can understand issues better. This also means that
the mind-set in the country has to change so that all of us, without
exception, do something better to improve the participation of people with
disabilities in workplaces.

We also need to consider reasonable accommodation and accessibility which
must be given priority in all planning of departments. This will also
involve ensuring that a specific budget is made available for reasonable
needs of accommodation for people with disabilities, including assistive
devices. As an example, if a blind worker is employed and this person has
skills in the workplace, one needs to provide tools needed for this
person’s skills. These would include, of course, working with Braille. One
can also have someone in the workplace to assist with this person’s
movement. Another alternative is to have a guide dog to be with this person
in the workplace. This means that the workplace must be conducive to
different kinds of accommodative programmes or support processes so that
people with disabilities can feel comfortable in the workplace. This is not
just about creating job opportunities, but it is also about ensuring that
these people are assisted to give their best and that they are given the
tools to do so.

Departments should have disability focal persons who are adequately
capacitated. We also need to develop different measures of developing
skills and capacity among people with disabilities.

Lastly, we need to ensure accessibility to employment and upward mobility,
especially by increasing representation at senior management levels through
reasonable accommodation in the workplace, skills development, bursaries
and other measures. I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Minister, I gave you a bit of time to
finish answering your question. Normally, if a question involves numbers,
we allow Ministers time to table those numbers because it takes long to
respond to a question like that.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, can I ask the Minister to make sure
that we get this information in written form for it to be used by the
committee in doing its work.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Certainly,
Chairperson — as early as tomorrow.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, in her reply the Minister has — very briefly at the end
— also referred to the importance of ensuring accessibility in the
workplace. I want to ask her whether that also extends to Parliament and to
institutions like legislatures. This is because I sat in a committee
meeting this morning, where I observed how difficult it was for a member in
an electric chair to find parking in the committee room to be able to
participate fully in the meeting. I am referring to S12 next door.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Watson, you should be asking me that
question. I don’t know if the Minister is interested in answering this
question. The question must be referred to me. I am in charge of
Parliament. It is up to you, Minister, if you would like to respond to the
question. I will not forbid you to respond if you wish to do so, but the
question should actually be referred to presiding officers. I can respond
to your question if you want.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, if that is the case, then this also means that this
question should be directed to managers in any other workplace and not to
the Minister if what you are saying now is true.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! It is quite true.

Mr A WATSON: No.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! You may differ with me. I don’t want to
argue with you. But it should be like that in Parliament. If this is not
done, then we should do it. This is what the policy says.

 Action taken in response to reports from Public Protector, including action
  on recommendation by Public Protector to review Government tender process

55.   Mr T Harris (DA)  asked  the  Minister  for  the  Public  Service  and
      Administration:

      (1)   Whether he has received any reports from the Public Protector in
           the past twelve months; if so, what  was  the  nature  of  these
           reports;


      (2)   whether he has acted on any of these reports; if not,  why  not;
           if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether he or his department has taken any action on the recent
           recommendation by the Public Protector to review the Government
           tender process; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                                CO185E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, the
answer is certainly no. We have not yet received any report from the Public
Protector during the stated period.

After the question on issues related to the review of the tender processes
was posed, the Public Protector made a recommendation that we meet with
their office to make a follow-up on the matter even though the report was
not available at the time. We also took up this matter with the Minister of
Finance so that we could jointly respond to it because it’s a shared
responsibility. Therefore, as soon as the report is made available to us,
we will certainly share the information. Thank you.

       Steps taken to ensure public servants are issued with name tags

60.   Mr M W Makhubela (Cope) asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:

      Whether any steps are being taken to ensure that all public servants
      are issued with name tags; if not, what is the position in this
      regard; if so, (a) what steps and (b) how many public servants have
      already received their name tags? CO192E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, the
answer is yes.

At the moment, as the Department of Public Service and Administration, we
are working on consolidating statistics to determine the exact number of
public servants who comply with the requirement of wearing name tags. In
order to get the exact number of public servants who are wearing the name
tags, one needs to be in their areas. Therefore, we have requested the
leadership and the executive authorities to provide information about their
departments. We in the Department of Public Service and Administration have
almost 100% compliance rate on the issue of wearing name tags. We are
almost there because there are some newly recruited employees who do not
have name tags since the process of acquiring them takes time.

I have sent out a circular to all my colleagues — the executive authority —
to make sure that they provide information on compliance in this regard. As
soon as this is available we’ll then share it with you. Thank you very
much.

     Progress made with regard to support for policy implementation and
                    reviewing of policies where necessary

61.   Mr M W Makhubela (Cope) asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:

      Whether any progress has been made in respect of (a) support for
      policy implementation and (b) reviewing of policies where necessary;
      if not, why not; if so, (i) what progress and (ii) what are the
      further relevant details?                          CO193E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, the
answer is yes. We are making considerable progress with regard to support
for policy implementation in the Public Service. We do this through various
workshops which we hold every year to remind departments and executive
authorities about these policies. By way of example, we do this every year
through conferences on Batho Pele, where we reflect on what the policy is,
how compliance is supposed to be reached and the resources that are
necessary to be able to deal with that.

For issues around gender mainstreaming, we have conferences every year to
remind departments that this is a policy that has to be complied with. Even
when it comes to issues around the question that hon members were asking in
as far as the appointment of people with disabilities is concerned, we have
those engagements every year so that we can see ourselves moving
government’s current 0,2% actual performance rate to the 2% that is
required. So, we do remind government departments to deal with issues
related to policy implementation. Thank you very much.

  Training of employees as health and wellness practitioners with reference
             to Minister’s 2009-2012 Medium-Term Strategic Plan

62.   Mr M W Makhubela (Cope) asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:

      Whether, with reference to his 2009-2012 Medium Term Strategic Plan
      (details furnished), the training of the 400 employees as health and
      wellness practitioners has started; if not, why not; if so, what are
      the relevant details?                        CO194E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, the
answer is yes. The training started in 2008 and is still continuing. As
part of the response to the HIV and Aids pandemic, the Department for
Public Service and Administration made a commitment to regional bodies such
as SADC and the Southern African-Netherlands Chamber of Commerce, Sanec, to
train 400 managers and practitioners annually in HIV and Aids
mainstreaming.

The following is planned for 2009-10 to reach the target of 400 managers
and practitioners in the Public Service. HIV and Aids mainstreaming
training has taken place from August 2009 and is expected to be completed
by February 2010. One hundred and twenty practitioners and managers will be
trained during the last week of this month - the week of 26 to 30 October.

The target and period of training for 2011-12 will be determined soon
during the next strategic and operating planning sessions. So, that is the
position. We do train managers in as far as mainstreaming HIV and Aids at
the workplace as public servants is concerned. Thank you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 16:58.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          THURSDAY, 22 OCTOBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (1)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 19 October 2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for a service in
        fulfillment of the International Obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the Government of the Republic of Mozambique
        in support of the national elections on Mozambique:

        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR SERVICE
        IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF
        SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE GOVERNMENT OF MOZAMBIQUE IN SUPPORT OF THE
        NATIONAL ELECTIONS IN MOZAMBIQUE


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        employed the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel, for service in fulfilment of the international
        obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards the Government
        of the Republic of Mozambique, in support of the national elections
        in Mozambique.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        40 Members of the SANDF will be employed from 21 October 2009 until
        05 November 2009.
        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
        attention of the National Council of Provinces.


        Regards
        signed
        J G ZUMA

    (2)     Report of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority (POA)

Report of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority on proposed policy on
Parliament’s Budget, dated 25 August 2009
The Parliamentary Oversight Authority, after having considered and agreed
on the proposed policy on Parliament’s Budget, wished to report as follows:

1.    CONSTITUTIONAL MANDATE

The mandate of Parliament determines its reason for existence.  It is the
origin of the institution, and is based on the provisions of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, Act 108 of 1996, establishing
Parliament and setting out the functions it performs.

The Constitution sets a single, sovereign democratic state where governance
is effected through parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary.  In the
Republic the legislative authority is vested in Parliament, the executive
authority is vested in the President, and the judicial authority is vested
in the Courts.
Parliament’s role and ultimate outcome is to represent the people and
ensure government by the people under the Constitution, as well as
represent the provinces in the national sphere of government.

The Constitution provides that Members of Cabinet are accountable
collectively and individually to Parliament and must provide Parliament
with full and regular reports concerning matters under their control.
Parliament may pass national legislation to regulate the manner in which
executive proclamations, regulations and other instruments of subordinate
legislation must be tabled and approved in Parliament. Parliament must
maintain oversight over all security services.  Through national
legislation, Parliament must establish a treasury and prescribe measures to
ensure both transparency and expenditure control in each sphere of
government, including the remuneration of persons holding public office.
National legislation must also regulate the South African Reserve Bank, the
imposition of provincial taxes and establish structures to facilitate
intergovernmental relations and settlement of intergovernmental disputes.
Parliament must approve international agreements unless these are of a
technical, administrative or executive nature. International agreements
become law in South Africa only when enacted into law by national
legislation, except self-executing provisions of an agreement.

The Constitution requires the National Assembly to elect the President and
permits it to remove the President, by passing a motion of no confidence in
the President. It may also pass a motion of no confidence in the Cabinet.
If the President is unable to fulfill the duties of the office, and no
member of Cabinet is able to fulfill those duties, the Speaker of the
Assembly, until Assembly designate one of its other member, must act as
President. The President must remove a judge in respect of which the
Judicial Service Commission makes the necessary finding and the National
Assembly calls with the support of two thirds of its members for such
removal. The Assembly must recommend persons for appointment by the
President to the institutions supporting democracy and may resolve to
remove such persons from office.

The National Council of Provinces must approve and regularly review an
intervention by the national executive in provincial administration; and,
in certain instances, may set aside intervention by a provincial executive
in local government.

This mandate is achieved through the passing of legislation, overseeing
government action, the facilitation of public involvement, co-operative
government, and international participation.

As part of the mandate, Parliament is required to pass legislation that
makes it possible to amend money bills and therefore the budget of the
country.  Parliament must move with speed to capacitate itself in order to
manage the processes leading to amendment of money bills and actually pass
such legislation.

Section 31 of the Powers & Privileges of Parliament Act 91 of 1963, as
repealed by Section 31 of the Powers, Privileges and Immunities of
Parliament and Provincial Legislatures Act 4 of 2004 states that the
control of the expenditure and the appropriation of moneys for the services
of Parliament shall be vested in the Speaker of the National Assembly and
the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, and his/her
authorisation for such expenditure and appropriation of moneys, as well as
receipts issued by the accounting officer referred to in subsection (2) on
his/her behalf, with reference to all matters affecting those services
shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law but
subject to the provisions of this section, be taken to be in all respects
good, valid and effectual.

In respect of the budget of Parliament, the view is that the interaction
between the Executive and the Presiding Officers needs to be better
structured to reflect the status and role of Parliament as an institution
that exercises oversight over government actions.  In this regard, it is
believed that it can only be correct to accommodate Parliament’s needs as
part of the top-sliced portion of revenue as agreed by the Presiding
Officers and the Treasury Committee.

2.    MISSION OF PARLIAMENT

The mandate of Parliament provides direction to set the mission, indicating
the purpose of Parliament and describing its main business.  The mission
is:

      As the freely elected representatives of the people of South Africa,
      our mission is to represent, and act as a voice of the people, in
      fulfilling our constitutional functions of passing laws and overseeing
      executive action.

The mission indicates the core business of Parliament, also known as the
function of Parliament.

3.    CORE OBJECTIVES

The core objectives are:
         • To pass legislation (laws)
         • Scrutinise and oversee executive action (oversight)
               • Facilitate public participation and involvement in the
                 legislative and other processes
               • Participate in, promote and oversee co-operative government
               • To engage in, participate in, and oversee international
                 relations

The outputs for the core objectives include bills passed, questions put to
the executive, annual reports tabled and scrutinised, public participation
facilitated, participation in international forums and organisations,
approved international agreements, appointed public office bearers, and
discharged statutory functions.

In order to enable Members of Parliament to fulfill their Constitutional
functions, Parliament provides support and administrative services
clustered in Divisions.

The following services are provided:
      • The National Assembly Table Division provides Members of the
        National Assembly with procedural advice and guidance for
        proceedings (tablings, plenary sessions and House Rules) and
        related administration services.


      • The National Council of Provinces Table Divisions provides Members
        of the National council of Provinces with procedural and legal
        advice for proceedings (tablings, plenary sessions and House Rules)
        and related administration services.


      • The Legislation and Oversight Division provides services for the
        introduction of bills, the publication of order papers, ATC’s and
        House minutes, research and administrative support for committees,
        provision of interpretation and translation services, and the
        production and the official record of Parliament (Hansard)


      • The Institutional Support Division provides accommodation and
        housekeeping, catering services, artworks management, and
        documentation management.


         • The Human Resources and Corporate Services Divisions provide
           support for human resources and information technology
           respectively.


         • The Office of the Secretary to Parliament provides overall
           management and services for communication, international
           relations, members’ interests, legal affairs, finance
           management, and protection services.


4.    VISION OF PARLIAMENT

The vision is:

      To build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the
      needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a
      better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

5.    STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES

The strategic objectives are:

              1. Build a quality process of scrutinising and overseeing
                 government action, including the development of an
                 oversight model, best practice research, preparation of
                 legislation and procedure, and the implementation of
                 systems and human resource capacity for the functioning of
                 this process.
              2. Build a people’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs
                 of all the people of South Africa, including to provide
                 opportunities to deepen democracy, be responsive to
                 people’s needs, conduct programmes and projects furthering
                 education and information about Parliament, act as the
                 voice of the people, include people on the periphery,
                 provide access to Parliament, and set up parliamentary
                 democracy offices.

              3. Build an efficient and effective institution, including
                 improving institutional governance, implement systems and
                 technologies, improve human resource capacity, provide an
                 institutional culture and communication that enables
                 service delivery, and the provision of space, office
                 accommodation and facilities.
6.    CAPACITY BUILDING FOR MEMBERS

a) Members’ Capacity

Members are elected by their respective political parties as
representatives in Parliament.

S57(2)( c ) of the Constitution states:

‘financial and administrative assistance to each party represented in the
Assembly in proportion to its representation’

To this end, Parliament provides this financial and administrative support
to political parties directly based on the number of representatives in
Parliament and therefore this support is provided indirectly to members of
Parliament. This is funded via transfer payments as part of Associated
Services and includes Constituency Allowances, Administrative support
Allowance and Party Leadership Allowance.

The expenditure that may be incurred by the political party is governed by
the policy on political party allowances as was approved by the Presiding
Officers in July 2005 after a vigorous consultation process at various
fora.

Information at our disposal indicates that there is no effective
expenditure, that MPs are not getting the intended support for carrying out
their functions, and that the funds are used for political party support
rather than member support.


This poses another challenge in that the Auditor-General’s offfice has
indicated that it would be implementing a phased-in approach for
performance auditing. This would entail that it would evaluate whether
Parliament has achieved the targets set and if Parliament indicates that it
would expend a certain amount for this administrative support and the
financial statements of the political party indicates that it has been
expended contrary to the policy and the intended purpose, this could result
in an adverse audit opinion.


Another mechanism is needed to fund capacitation of members as transfers to
the political parties appear not to be yielding the desired result. One
option would be that Parliament directly appoints such staff (executive
secretaries) which would be subject to all recruitment requirements of the
institution. Consequently the political party allowance will be directed
towards addressing party needs and requirements.


Consequently support staff funding for Members will be managed by
Parliament based on the proportionate number of Members represented by
political parties.  It should be noted that this process will start from
the 1st April 2009.

      • Support staff for members  i.e. executive secretary


           Executive Secretary will be responsible for the following
           outputs:


  • Organising the office of the Member
  • Typing
  • Reception duties
  • Handling appointments
  • Administrative duties


    • Generic training in budget oversight

      We believe that every Member of Parliament must receive generic
      training in budget oversight as part of his or her basic training.
      This has to cut across all committees, be it Portfolio or Select
      Committees.


      In order to oversee the budget allocation it is necessary that an
      understanding of the basis of budget allocations be developed as this
      will impact on the quality of oversight.  This is not currently
      provided in the existing training curricula. Develop and implement
      training programmes for members and support staff in oversight related
      areas.

7.    MEMBERS’ FACILITIES

Members’ facilities currently seeks to provide the tools of trade and
logistical facilities that enable members to discharge their duties in an
efficient and effective manner. The existing facilities also provide for
members’ dependants and former members.

S219 of the Constitution appoints a committee that needs to advise the
President on the Remuneration of Political Office Bearers, read in
conjunction with the Remuneration of Political Office Bearers Act , which
determines that the Commission needs to advise the President on the
remuneration and resources needed for a Political Office Bearer to
discharge their duties. A legal opinion on this matter indicates that
resources would include tools of trade and would thus include members’
facilities.

It should further be noted that the members’ facilities policy is being
reviewed. However, some facilities result in a tax obligation for members.

As the Income Tax Act is a revenue law, Parliament will engage National
Treasury, as required by the Constitution, to consider possible amendments
to the Income Tax Law.

Hence any additional facilities required need to be considered as tools of
the trade and the resultant tax obligation it would impose on members.

  • As part of strengthening the link between public representatives and
    the electorate, it is proposed that Members of Parliament must have an
    additional facility that would be used to fly people from their
    Constituency to the Seat of Parliament in order to participate as
    observers in debates that impact on their areas and indeed to learn and
    understand the processes and workings of Parliament.  This facility
    would cater for ten members of an MP’s Constituency to be flown,
    accommodated and looked after for a reasonable period of time but not
    exceeding 36 hours once a year.


8.    POLITICAL PARTY NEEDS

S57(2)( c ) of the Constitution states:

‘financial and administrative assistance to each party represented in the
Assembly in proportion to its representation, to enable the party and its
leader to perform its functions in the Assembly effectively.’

    • Administrative Capacity
            This is funded through the transfer payments made to political
           parties in terms of the administrative support allowance.  The
           intention of this allowance is to provide for support staff and
           operational cost to the political party.


         • Research attached to each Political Party
            Parliament recognises the importance of this function and in
           this regard provides funding to the political parties to appoint
           researchers as they deem fit.


    • Constituency Work / Offices
           Constituency work is funded through the constituency allowance
           and this is paid as a total amount to the political party and
           not to individual members.  This system was introduced to enable
           political parties represented in Parliament to set up an
           infrastructure for the benefit of constituents.


           This allowance has grown significantly since the inception of
           the 3rd Parliament and the table below seeks to demonstrate this
           year on year growth. However, for 2008/09, the allowance
           remained unchanged.


[pic]

In addition to this, members are provided with a Political Office Bearers
Allowance.
9.    ADEQUATE SUPPORT TO COMMITTEES

It is important to note that Committees are organised both as Clusters and
Portfolio/Select Committees.

The current support services to the Committees of Parliament are inadequate
for their effective and efficient functioning, particularly regarding their
oversight work.
There is a lack of continuous highly skilled support due to staff turnover.


As part of the project to enhance support to Committees through re-
organisation, which resulted from the survey on the needs of committees
expressed by Committee Chairpersons, and phased-in implementation of the
oversight model, the following support will be provided to committees:

Portfolio-related training versus the cluster approach

Committees in Parliament are clustered according to thematic content.
Support services are presently grouped in clusters for administrative
purposes.  This means that the administrative clusters must be aligned to
the political clusters.

Parliament currently makes provision for individual training. However,
there is now an expressed need for Cluster-specific training, which could
be presented at individual level as an extension of existing curricula.

In addition to current support (Secretary to Chairperson, one Specialist
researcher, Senior Researcher) the following services would be provided to
committees, one or more committee secretary/ies per committee and a
committee assistant) the following services would be provided to
committees.

One Content Specialist per Committee:  –

 • formulate strategies to undertake effective oversight;
 • deal with and analyse reports;
 • analyse policy to inform the committee’s oversight agenda;
     • analyse and advise on international agreements (currently an area of
       weakness).

Twelve content advisors were recruited in 2008. However, further
recruitment has been halted due to funding shortfalls.

   One Subject Librarian per cluster of committees

The recruitment of subject librarians will depend on the availability of
funds. The following will be the functions of subject librarians, ie the
development of:

  • Subject databases;
  • Library collection;
  • Relevant journals;
  • Research networks;
  • Fact sheets,  and
  • Issue briefs on current topics

The subject specialist librarian contribution will include expertise in the
content and selection of the best available, print and electronic
information resources as well as linking the information user with the
right information source at the right time.
   Language services to committees is dealt with under languages services.

10.   SUPPORT FOR POLITICAL OFFICE BEARERS

Categories of Office Bearers:-

         • Presiding Officers
         • House Chairpersons
         • Chief Whips and Whips
         • Committee Chairpersons
         • Party Leaders

Political office bearers in Parliament are supported by the following:

         • Parliament’s budget makes direct provision for infrastructure,
           such as offices and personnel.


         • The Remuneration of Political Office Bearers Act, which is
           informed by the commission as set out in S219 of the
           Constitution, currently the Moseneke Commission.

To enhance the work of Parliament, the Chairperson of Caucus should be
given administrative support.  It is proposed that for Caucus Chairpersons
to qualify for such support and remuneration, the Caucus must at least
comprise ten or more members.


         • Existing policies shall be amended to accommodate administrative
           support for the Chairperson of Caucus.


         • The definition of a Committee Chair should include the
           Chairperson of Caucus subject to the limitation of leading ten
           or more members in a Caucus.

11.   ICT - PARLIAMENT 2009 AND BEYOND

Parliament has in the past five years seen a massive investment in
information technology of approximately R120m.  The emphasis was in the
order of importance, as described in the Master Systems Plan:

    • To replace obsolete and failing equipment

    • Upgrade existing infrastructure and systems, and

    • Introduce new systems and technology

The NCOP and the NA Chambers were revamped with modern sound and voting
system with computer based touch screen technology. The Chambers were
primed and wired for digital and video presentations and receiving TV
broadcast signals.

The following services will be provided to Members:

    • TV monitors with six internal broadcast channels
    • Access to desktop computer or a lap top
    • An e-mail address
    • Parliamentary content management system (PCMS) will support the
      oversight and legislation process
    • Video conferencing facilities
    • Unified communication system

Based on the achievement and existence of a modern technology base and
platform, the year 2008 was designated as a year to consolidate the IT base
and roll out tangible benefits to members of Parliament. This calls for
closer interaction between ICT and Members of Parliament. This must take
place at two levels, training and articulating needs and exploring
solutions.

A forum initiated by House Chairpersons responsible for ICT’s will be
crucial in mobilizing members’ support for unified communication, intranet,
the parliamentary website, call centre, and the content management system.
There are two dedicated computer training facilities and an option of a
dedicated one-on-one training for members of Parliament.

The outlook for 2009

         • Political parties can have their own online internal websites
           with information and events updated on a daily basis through the
           internet.
         • Groups and stakeholders can have direct access to parliamentary
           structures to facilitate public participation through the
           website and the video conferencing capability.
         • The streaming of parliamentary proceedings to PC, laptops and
           mobile devices to wherever members are will be possible via the
           intra-net.
         • Committees and Members can use online business planning and
           performance evaluation instruments to evaluate their work.
         • The collaboration between the Parliamentary Communication
           Services and ICT will make the creative packaging and impact of
           communicable instruments with the public more creative and
           innovative and far reaching


12.   INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATION
Parliament engages, participates, hosts and oversees international
relations in the following activities:
      • Multilateral institutions.
      • Bilateral relationships.
      • Inter-parliamentary conferences (regional and international).

This engagement happens at committee level, institution and
outgoing/incoming delegations.

Engagement and participation in multilateral institutions
Some of the multilateral institutions that Parliament engages with and
participates in are as follows:
      • Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU);
      • Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA);
      • Pan-African Parliament (PAP);
      • Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum (SADC-
        PF);
      • ACP-EU
      • Shoora Council.


The International Relations Section is in the process of developing and
restructuring itself into a content-based section in order to:


         • Provide a content based support to Parliament on issues of
           International Relations and the role of Parliament.
         • Recruit and employ more specialised personnel in the field of
           International Relations (multilateralism, bilateral engagement,
           issues of global governance, diplomacy, protocol and
           negotiation)
         • Establish processes and structures that enable members to be
           aware of, and engage in international issues.
         • Strengthen capacity and dedicated support for members, in
           content and logistics, to actively participate in international
           engagements and forums.
         • Enhance Parliament’s oversight role in the negotiation and
           development of international agreements.

13.   LANGUAGE SERVICES: HANSARD AND OTHER UNITS

Improvements to Hansard


    • Transcripts of members’ speeches are now available hours after
      delivery.  The transcripts need to be checked by qualified sub-editors
      and editors.  In 2006, 33 posts of senior Language Practitioner were
      created to address this deficiency.  The Senior Language Practitioners
      assumed duty in June 2007.  This intervention will make it possible
      for Members’ speeches to be available within 24 hours of delivery.

Hansard publications

The Language Section created and filled 10 new posts of translators to
build more capacity in respect of translation of debates.

Capacity to service committees


The section intends to recruit 60 interpreters in the current financial
year.

14.   PUBLIC PARTICIPATION PROGRAMMES

The Parliamentary Communication Services (PCS) facilitates the involvement
of the public in law-making and other parliamentary processes by nurturing
an understanding of Parliament and its work through educational and
information sharing activities.  It also provides a support service to
committees in the process of reaching out to communities throughout South
Africa as required by the Constitution.

Media Support

Provides general media support to Parliament’s public participation
programme.  The media coverage is related to the work of Committees, events
and activities of Parliament.

    • Radio Programme – The radio programme encourages the public to become
      active citizens, by developing awareness and an understanding of
      what’s happening in Parliament, the legislative and other
      parliamentary processes.
    • In addition to this, we also provide ad hoc radio coverage in support
      of Committees’ public hearings, and for the various key Parliamentary
      events.
    • View from the House
    • Shift
    • Rights and Recourse
    • Parliamentary Website
    • In-Session – Parliamentary Publication
         ➢ Aimed at keeping the public up to date with what’s happening in
           Parliament
         ➢ Upcoming public hearings, meetings and oversight visits
         ➢ Distributed nationally via commuter networks, GCIS’
           multipurpose community centers and mailing list.

Parliamentary Democracy Offices

In order to deepen democracy and to realise public participation objectives
of Parliament in line with its vision, the Presiding Officers approved a
Parliamentary Democracy Offices (PDO’s) pilot project in 2005. The
objective of the project is to establish PDO’s in all nine provinces.

         • To increase the points of contact where people can access
           Parliament and inform its work and processes;
         • To create an immediate parliamentary presence in the provinces;
           and
         • To ensure a greater level of efficiency in accessing communities
           and providing ground support for parliamentary programmes.

Currently there are three PDO’s established: Northwest, Limpopo & Northern
Cape.
15.   INSTITUTIONS SUPPORTING DEMOCRACY

Parliament is in the process of reviewing the report on the chapter 9
institutions with a view to identify immediate and long term support
requirements.  We need to build Capacity to monitor the work of these
institutions.  A unit on Chapter 9 institutions will be established in the
Speaker’s office.

16.   OVERSIGHT MODEL

The Task Team charged with the crafting of the Oversight Model has
completed its work.  Parliament is preparing itself for the implementation
of the Model.

17.   LEGAL SERVICES

The Legal Services Office is being restructured with a view to build
capacity, to handle both constitutional and legal matters.  A process that
is aimed at addressing our legal drafting skills and capabilities has been
put in place.

As part of this process, the Legislation & Proceedings Unit within the
Legislation & Oversight Division will be transferred to the newly created
Constitutional & Legal Services Office.  It is envisaged that such a move
will assist to create synergies and quality outputs.

CREDA INSERT - T091022e-insert2 – PAGES 1155-1160

                           FRIDAY, 23 OCTOBER 2009

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Inkomati  Catchment
       Management  Agency  for  2008-09,  including  the  Report   of   the
       Independent Auditors on the  Financial  Statements  and  Performance
       Information for 2008-09 [RP 147-2009].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Statement on allegations of fraud, corruption or any other
        serious malpractices within Thembisile Hani Local Municipality
        (Mpumalanga) in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local Government:
        Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


    (b)     Statement on allegations of mismanagement or any other serious
        irregularities within Koukamma  Local Municipality (Eastern Cape)
        in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local Government: Municipal
        Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


    (c)     Statement on allegations of mismanagement or any other serious
        irregularities within Alfred Nzo District Municipality (Eastern
        Cape) in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local Government:
        Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000) .


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


    (d)     Termination of Section 139 Intervention in Ditsobotla Local
        Municipality (North West).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.

                           MONDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1. Calling of Joint Sitting

   The Speaker and the Chairperson received a message, dated 21 October
   2009, from the President, requesting that a Joint Sitting of the National
   Assembly and the National Council of Provinces be convened:


   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT


   In terms of section 42(5) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
   Africa, read with Joint Rule 7(1)(b) of the Joint Rules of Parliament, I
   hereby call a joint sitting of the National Assembly and the National
   Council of Provinces on Wednesday, 11 November 2009 at 14h00, in order to
   bid farewell to the outgoing Chief Justice Pius Langa, and to welcome the
   incoming Chief Justice, Sandile Ngcobo.


   Yours sincerely
   Signed
   MR J G ZUMA
   PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

The following is the list of the membership of Select Committees.  All
previous lists are invalid:





1. Select Committee on Education and Recreation
 (Arts and Culture, Education, Science and Technology, Sport and Recreation)




|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Ms. D. Z. Rantho             |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Ms. M. L. Moshodi            |Free State      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. A. G. Matila             |Gauteng         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. D. B. Feldman            |Gauteng         |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. A. Mashamaite         |Limpopo         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. M. G. Boroto             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. M. W. Makgate            |North West      |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Ms. R. N. Rasmeni            |North West      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. W. F. Faber              |Northern Cape   |DA     |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. J. R. de Villiers     |Western Cape    |DA     |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Mr. S. H. Plaatjie           |North West      |COPE   |
|Hon. Mr. T. M. H. Mofokeng        |Free State      |ANC    |
|Hon. Ms. S. S. Chen               |Gauteng         |DA     |
|Hon. Mr. M. J. Mahlangu           |Limpopo         |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |





2. Select Committee on Social Services
 (Health, Social Development, Home Affairs)

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Ms. D. Z. Rantho             |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Ms. M. L. Moshodi            |Free State      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. A. G. Matila             |Gauteng         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. D. B. Feldman            |Gauteng         |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. A. Mashamaite         |Limpopo         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. M. G. Boroto             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. R. N. Rasmeni            |North West      |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Ms. M. W. Makgate            |North West      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. W. F. Faber              |Northern Cape   |DA     |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. J. R. de Villiers     |Western Cape    |DA     |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Mr. S. H. Plaatjie           |North West      |COPE   |
|Hon. Mr. T. M. H. Mofokeng        |Free State      |ANC    |
|Hon. Ms. S. S. Chen               |Gauteng         |DA     |
|Hon. Mr. M. J. Mahlangu           |Limpopo         |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |



3. Select Committee on Economic Development
 (Economic Development, Energy, Mining)

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Ms. E. C. van Lingen         |Eastern Cape    |DA     |                |
|Hon. Mr. B. A. Mnguni             |Free State      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. S. S. Chen               |Gauteng         |DA     |                |
|Hon. Mr. D. D. Gamede             |KwaZulu-Natal   |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. A. Lees                  |KwaZulu-Natal   |DA     |                |
|Hon. Ms. M. C. Dikgale            |Limpopo         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. A. J. Nyambi             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. C. Maine              |North West      |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |                |
|Hon. Mr. K. A. Sinclair           |Northern Cape   |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. F. Adams                 |Western Cape    |ANC    |Chairperson     |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Ms. A. N. D. Qikani          |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |
|Hon. Ms. M. L. Moshodi            |Free State      |ANC    |
|Hon. Ms. N. D. Ntwanambi          |Western Cape    |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. S. D. Montsitsi          |Gauteng         |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. O. De Beer               |Western Cape    |COPE   |



4. Select Committee on Trade and International Relations
 (Trade and Industry, Tourism and International Relations)

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Ms. E. C. van Lingen         |Eastern Cape    |DA     |                |
|Hon. Ms. B. A. Mnguni             |Free State      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. S. S. Chen               |Gauteng         |DA     |                |
|Hon. Mr. D. D. Gamede             |KwaZulu-Natal   |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Mr. A. Lees                  |KwaZulu-Natal   |DA     |                |
|Hon. Ms. M. C. Dikgale            |Limpopo         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. A. J. Nyambi             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. C. Maine              |North West      |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Mr. K. A. Sinclair           |Northern Cape   |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |                |
|Hon. Mr. F. Adams                 |Western Cape    |ANC    |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Ms. A. N. D. Qikani          |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |
|Hon. Ms. M. L. Moshodi            |Free State      |ANC    |
|Hon. Ms. N. D. Ntwanambi          |Western Cape    |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. S. D. Montsitsi          |Gauteng         |ANC    |
|Hon. Ms. M. G. Boroto             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |



5. Select Committee on Finance



 |Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Mr. S. S. Mazosiwe           |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Mr. D. V. Bloem              |Free State      |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. S. D. Montsitsi          |Gauteng         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. T. M. Memela             |KwaZulu-Natal   |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. W. Makhubela          |Limpopo         |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. B. L. Mashile            |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. E. Chaane             |North West      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. C. J.  De Beer           |Northern Cape   |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. D. Harris             |Western Cape    |DA     |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Mr. D. B. Feldman            |Gauteng         |COPE   |
|Hon. Mr. G. G. Mokgoro            |Northern Cape   |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. A. Lees                  |KwaZulu-Natal   |DA     |
|Hon. Ms. M. C. Dikgale            |Limpopo         |ANC    |
|Hon. Ms. M. G. Boroto             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |




6. Select Committee on Appropriations


    (Appropriations and National Planning)

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Mr. S. S. Mazosiwe           |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Mr. D. V. Bloem              |Free State      |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. S. D. Montsitsi          |Gauteng         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. T. M. Memela             |KwaZulu-Natal   |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. W. Makhubela          |Limpopo         |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. B. L. Mashile            |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. E. Chaane             |North West      |ANC    |Proposed        |
|                                  |                |       |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Mr. C. J.  De Beer           |Northern Cape   |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. D. Harris             |Western Cape    |DA     |                |



Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Mr. D. B. Feldman            |Gauteng         |COPE   |
|Hon. Mr. G. G. Mokgoro            |Northern Cape   |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. A. Lees                  |KwaZulu-Natal   |DA     |
|Hon. Ms. M. C. Dikgale            |Limpopo         |ANC    |
|Hon. Ms. M. G. Boroto             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |


7. Select Committee on Petitions and Members Legislative Proposals

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Mr. B. Nesi                  |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. D. V. Bloem              |Free State      |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. M. H. Mofokeng        |Free State      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. B. V. Mncube             |Gauteng         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. L. P. M. Nzimande        |KwaZulu-Natal   |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Mr. M. H. Mokgobi            |Limpopo         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. A. J. Nyambi             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Mr. A. Watson                |Mpumalanga      |DA     |                |
|Hon. Ms. R. N. Rasmeni            |North West      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |                |
|Hon. Mr. F. Adams                 |Western Cape    |ANC    |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Mr. A. G. Matila             |Gauteng         |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. B. L. Mashile            |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. S. H. Plaatjie           |North West      |COPE   |
|Hon. Mr. W. F. Faber              |Northern Cape   |DA     |
|Hon. Mr. T. E. Chaane             |North West      |ANC    |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |


8. Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development
 (Correctional Services, Defence and Military Veterans, Constitutional
 Development, Police)
|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Mr. B. Nesi                  |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. M. H. Mofokeng        |Free State      |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Ms. B. V. Mncube             |Gauteng         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. L. P. M. Nzimande        |KwaZulu-Natal   |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Mr. M. H. Mokgobi            |Limpopo         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. A. Watson                |Mpumalanga      |DA     |                |
|Hon. Mr. S. H. Plaatjie           |North West      |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |                |
|Hon. Mr. J. M. G. Bekker          |Western Cape    |DA     |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Mr. A. G. Matila             |Gauteng         |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. D. V. Bloem              |Free State      |COPE   |
|Hon. Mr. T. E. Chaane             |North West      |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. H. B. Groenewald         |North West      |DA     |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |



9. Select Committee on Corporative Governance and Traditional Affairs
 (Corporative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Public Service and
 Administration, Traditional Affairs)

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |                |
|Hon. Mr. B. Nesi                  |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. M. H. Mofokeng        |Free State      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. B. V. Mncube             |Gauteng         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. L. P. M. Nzimande        |KwaZulu-Natal   |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Mr. M. H. Mokgobi            |Limpopo         |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Mr. A. Watson                |Mpumalanga      |DA     |                |
|Hon. Mr. S. H. Plaatjie           |North West      |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |                |
|Hon. Mr. J. M. G. Bekker          |Western Cape    |DA     |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Mr. A. G. Matila             |Gauteng         |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. D. V. Bloem              |Free State      |COPE   |
|Hon. Mr. T. E. Chaane             |North West      |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. H. B. Groenewald         |North West      |DA     |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |




10. Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs
 (Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Rural Development and Land Reform,
 Water and Environmental Affairs)




|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Ms. A. N. D. Qikani          |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Mr. D. A. Worth              |Free State      |DA     |                |
|Hon. Ms. B. P. Mabe               |Gauteng         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. N. W. Magadla            |KwaZulu-Natal   |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |                |
|Hon. Ms. L. Mabija                |Limpopo         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. P. Sibande            |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. S. H. Plaatjie           |North West      |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. G. G. Mokgoro            |Northern Cape   |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Ms. N. D. Ntwanambi          |Western Cape    |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. O. De Beer               |Western Cape    |COPE   |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |
|Hon. Mr. Z. Mlenzana              |Eastern Cape    |COPE   |
|Hon. Mr. M. H. Mokgobi            |Limpopo         |ANC    |
|Hon. Mr. A. Watson                |Mpumalanga      |DA     |
|Hon. Ms E. Van Lingen             |Free State      |DA     |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |









11. Select Committee on Women, Children, and People with Disabilities

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Ms. A. N. D. Qikani          |Eastern Cape    |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. D. A. Worth              |Free State      |DA     |                |
|Hon. Ms. B. P. Mabe               |Gauteng         |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Ms. N. W. Magadla            |KwaZulu-Natal   |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |                |
|Hon. Mr. T. A. Mashamaite         |Limpopo         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. M. P. Themba             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Ms. M. W. Makgate            |North West      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. G. G. Mokgoro            |Northern Cape   |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Mr. J. J. Gunda              |Northern Cape   |ID     |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. J. R. de Villiers     |Western Cape    |DA     |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province       |Party   |
|Hon. Ms. D. Z. Rantho             |Eastern Cape   |ANC     |
|Hon. Mr. M. J. Mahlangu           |Limpopo        |ANC     |
|Hon. Mr. H. B. Groenewald         |North West     |DA      |
|Hon. Mr. D. D. Gamede             |KwaZulu-Natal  |ANC     |
|Hon. Ms. N. D. Ntwanambi          |Western Cape   |ANC     |



12. Select Committee on Public Services
 (Human Settlements, Public Works and Transport)

|Member                            |Province        |Party  |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Mr. Z. Mlenzana              |Eastern Cape    |COPE   |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. P. Jacobs             |Free State      |ANC    |Whip            |
|Hon. Mr. S. D. Montsitsi          |Gauteng         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal   |IFP    |                |
|Hon. Ms. L. Mabija                |Limpopo         |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. P. Sibande            |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Ms. M. P. Themba             |Mpumalanga      |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. H. B. Groenewald         |North West      |DA     |                |
|Hon. Mr. R. J. Tau                |Northern Cape   |ANC    |                |
|Hon. Mr. O. De Beer               |Western Cape    |COPE   |                |



Alternates:

|Member                            |Province       |Party   |
|Hon. Mr. D. B. Feldman            |Gauteng        |COPE    |
|Hon. Mr. T. D. Harris             |Western Cape   |DA      |
|Hon. Mr. A. J. Nyambi             |Mpumalanga     |ANC     |
|Hon. Ms. R. N. Rasmeni            |North West     |ANC     |
|Hon. Mr. K. A. Sinclair           |Northern Cape  |COPE    |


13. Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises

    (Communications, Labour, Public Enterprises)

|Member                            |Province       |Party   |Responsibility  |
|Hon. Mr. Z. Mlenzana              |Eastern Cape   |COPE    |                |
|Hon. Mr. M. P. Jacobs             |Free State     |ANC     |                |
|Hon. Mr. S. D. Montsitsi          |Gauteng        |ANC     |                |
|Hon. Prince M. M. M. Zulu         |KwaZulu-Natal  |IFP     |                |
|Hon. Ms. L. Mabija                |Limpopo        |ANC     |Whip            |
|Hon. Ms. M. P.  Themba            |Mpumalanga     |ANC     |Chairperson     |
|Hon. Mr. M. P. Sibande            |Mpumalanga     |ANC     |                |
|Hon. Mr. H. B. Groenewald         |North West     |DA      |                |
|Hon. Mr. R. J. Tau                |Northern Cape  |ANC     |                |
|Hon. Mr. O. De Beer               |Western Cape   |COPE    |                |


Alternates:

|Member                            |Province       |Party   |
|Hon. Mr. D. B. Feldman            |Gauteng        |COPE    |
|Hon. Mr. T. D. Harris             |Western Cape   |DA      |
|Hon. Mr. A. J. Nyambi             |Mpumalanga     |ANC     |
|Hon. Ms. R. N. Rasmeni            |North West     |ANC     |
|Hon. Mr. K. A. Sinclair           |Northern Cape  |COPE    |

                          TUESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Membership of committees

       1) The following members were appointed to the Joint Standing
          Committee on Intelligence on 22 October 2009 in terms of section 2
          of the Intelligence Services Oversight Act, 1994 (Act No 40 of
          1994):

          Dlodlo, A          (ANC)
          Montsitsi, S D          (ANC)

2.    Introduction of Bills


      1) The Minister of Finance


          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 77).


              Introduction and referral to the Standing Committee on
              Appropriations of the National Assembly, as well as referral
              to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in
              terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bills may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2009 [RP 246-2009].


        Referred to the Standing Committee on Finance for consideration and
        report in terms of section 6(3) of the Money Bills Amendment
        Procedure and Related Matters Act (Act No 9 of 2009) and to the
        Standing Committee on Appropriations for consideration and report
        in terms of section 6(8) of the Act, the committees to confer with
        their counterparts in the National Council of Provinces when
        necessary.


     b) Adjustments Appropriation Bill, 2009 [B13-2009].


        Referred to the Standing Committee on Appropriations for
        consideration and report.


     c) Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure 2009 [RP 247-2009],
        which includes:

       1. Vote No 1 – “The Presidency” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


       2. Vote No 2 – “Parliament” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


       3. Vote No 3 – “International Relations and Cooperation” –
          Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


       4. Vote No 4 – “Home Affairs” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


       5. Vote No 5 – “Public Works” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


       6. Vote No 6 – “Government Communications and Information System” –
          Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


       7. Vote No 7 – “National Treasury” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-
          2010;


       8. Vote No 8 – “Public Administration Leadership and Management
          Academy” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


       9. Vote No 9 – “Public Service and Administration” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2009-2010;


      10. Vote No 10 – “Public Service Commission” – Adjustments Estimates,
          2009-2010;


      11. Vote No 11 – “Statistics South Africa” – Adjustments Estimates,
          2009-2010;


      12. Vote No 12 – “Arts and Culture” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-
          2010;


      13. Vote No 13 – “Education” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


      14. Vote No 14 – “Health” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


      15. Vote No 15 – “Labour” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


      16. Vote No 16 – “Social Development” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-
          2010;


      17. Vote No 17 – “Sport and Recreation South Africa” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2009-2010;


      18. Vote No 18 – “Correctional Services” – Adjustments Estimates,
          2009-2010;


      19. Vote No 19 – “Defence and Military Veterans” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2009-2010;


      20. Vote No 20 – “Independent Complaints Directorate” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2009-2010;


      21. Vote No 21 – “Justice and Constitutional Development” –
          Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


      22. Vote No 22 – “Police” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


      23. Vote No 23 – “Agriculture” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


      24. Vote No 24 – “Communications” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


      25. Vote No 25 – “Environmental Affairs and Tourism” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2009-2010;


      26. Vote No 26 – “Human Settlements” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-
          2010;


      27. Vote No 27 – “Rural Development and Land Reform” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2009-2010;


      28. Vote No 28 – “Minerals and Energy” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-
          2010;


      29. Vote No 29 – “Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs” –
          Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


      30. Vote No 30 – “Public Enterprises” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-
          2010;


      31. Vote No 31 – “Science and Technology” – Adjustments Estimates,
          2009-2010;


      32. Vote No 32 – “Trade and Industry” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-
          2010;


      33. Vote No 33 – “Transport” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010;


      34. Vote No 34 – “Water Affairs and Forestry” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2009-2010;


      35. Vote No 35 – “Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2009-2010;


      36. Vote No 43 – “Water Affairs” – Adjustments Estimates, 2009-2010.

          Referred to the Standing Committee on Appropriations for
          consideration and report.

2.    The Minister of Police


    (a)     Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for July
       2008 to December 2008, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic
       Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

       a) Declaration of an amnesty in terms of section 139(2)(a) of the
          Firearms Control Act, 2000 (Act No 60 of 2000).
         Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
          Development for consideration and report.

