---
title: 'National Assembly - 28 January 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2009-01-28
---

WEDNESDAY, 28 JANUARY 2009
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

   REVIVAL OF LEGISLATIVE PROPOSAL TO AMEND REMUNERATION OF PUBLIC OFFICE
                                 BEARERS ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House revives the following item, which was on the Order Paper
  and that lapsed at the end of the 2008 annual session, for consideration
  by the National Assembly:


       Consideration of Report of Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
       Proposals and Special Petitions (Announcements, Tablings and
       Committee Reports, 20 June 2008, p 1330 – Legislative Proposal to
       amend Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Act (No 20 of 1998) (Mrs
       S A Seaton)).

Agreed to.

 DEADLINE EXTENDED FOR REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL LAW (FORENSIC
                          PROCEDURE) AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, on behalf of
the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move the draft resolution printed
in his name on the Order Paper, as follows:

  That the House –


  (1) notes that the ad hoc committee to consider the Criminal Law (Forensic
       Procedure) Amendment Bill was due to report on 23 January 2009;


  (2) further notes that the committee has not yet reported on its mandate;


  (3) notwithstanding Rule 214(6)(c), condones the continued existence of
       and the work conducted by the committee after its term had expired;
       and


  (4) resolves to extend the deadline by which the committee is to report to
       13 February 2009.


Agreed to.

                        NATIONAL LAND TRANSPORT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr B L MASHILE: Madam Speaker, the committee considered the National Land
Transport Bill of 2008 in August 2008. The completion of the consideration
of the Bill marked a major achievement in the conclusion of the national
land transport transitional regime in South Africa. The consideration of
this Bill saw a flurry of interested parties making input from different
sector perspectives. These included owners, users and authorities of
transportation systems.

Considerable time and energy were spent to analyse and incorporate the
appropriate and useful input in the legislation. There is consensus in the
committee that the maximum benefit has been derived from the variety of
presentations made. As the country is mandated to organise the 2010 Soccer
World Cup, the provision of transport in general is constantly under
scrutiny to ensure successful transportation of goods and the public during
the tournament.

The transformation of our public transport system, in the form of taxi
recapitalisation and general public transport integration, generates
constant consideration of some aspects of the new land transport regime.
The committee feels that these emergent new proposals cannot be
incorporated now, given the parliamentary legislative process. We therefore
strongly recommend that the Department of Transport, in its wisdom, collate
and consolidate these new proposals for consideration by the fourth
Parliament.

The difficulty of and intense work put into the crafting of this
legislation saw a lot of chopping and changing of a number of clauses and
text to the extent that the cleaning up of the body text was not concluded
satisfactorily. The majority, if not all, of the amendments are text
corrections and consequential amendments to align it to the letter and
spirit of the law.

As the Portfolio Committee on Transport we applaud the work done by the
Select Committee on Transport on this Bill by ensuring that the final draft
is clean of text mistakes. We are in agreement with the consequential
changes brought by the select committee.

The Portfolio Committee on Transport is certain that a progressive and
transformative piece of legislation is in place to govern the provision of
land transport in South Africa. We, therefore, as the portfolio committee,
request this honourable House to accept these amendments and
consequentially pass the National Land Transport Bill. I thank you.

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

  That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                BIBLE SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA ACT REPEAL BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

Mr P A GERBER: Madam Speaker, thank you for the privilege to report back to
this august House on this very sensitive and emotional Bill. The Bible
Society Repeal Act was adopted by the Portfolio Committee on Arts and
Culture and then sent to the NCOP’s Select Committee on Education and
Recreation, which adopted it with amendments after consultation with the
Bible Society and its lawyers. These amendments are just technical
amendments to soften the transition of the Bible Society from a statutory
entity to that of a section 21 company.

Many people, especially my colleagues, have asked me over the past 20
months how I got involved in the scrapping of these six old, redundant
religious Acts, and may I confess today that two people, miles and poles
apart, were indirectly and quite by coincidence responsible for my
discovering these old, redundant religious Acts.

The one person was Comrade Winnie Mandela. Without her, I would not have
discovered these old Acts. As a Member of Parliament, her office was E444,
just above where we are sitting now – not far from my office, E463. When
she retired from Parliament, the parliamentary cleaners threw all her old
books and reports into the passage, as they usually do. Amongst these was
an old set of statutes and, as I can’t stand any wastage, I took over the
ownership of these statutes which would otherwise have been turned into
toilet paper.

The second person was a frustrated sheep farmer from Fraserburg, a Mr Van
Schalkwyk, who I don’t think is related to Martinus, who asked me for
information about the Fencing Act of 1963. I had to look this up in Winnie
Mandela’s statutes which I had picked up in the passage. Going through the
alphabetical list of statutes, I discovered the Dutch Reformed Churches
Union Act of 1911. I then investigated all the statutes to see how many
other religious Acts were on the Statute Book. That is how the process of
repealing the outdated, redundant Acts started 20 months ago.

It has been the greatest honour for me, as a Member of Parliament, to have
experienced this, to have been enabled to draft, process and have both
Houses of Parliament adopt these four private member’s Bills of mine. After
all, we are legislators. These four private member’s Bills, as far as we
know, are the only four private member’s Bills that have been adopted since
1994, and I hope there will be many more in future.

I would like to thank all Members of Parliament, the parliamentary staff,
the parliamentary legal advisers, especially Adv Adhikari, the churches,
the NGOs and everybody for their support. It has been a learning exercise
and experience for all of us.

Special thanks go to the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Private
Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions, the hon Vytjie
Mentor, the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, the
NCOP’s select committee chairperson and acting chairperson, the Speaker’s
office, Mr Doidge’s office, while he was still in his previous capacity,
and Mr Mansura, who was very supportive all the way. Lastly, thanks go to
the ANC, who never doubted my intentions when I started with this process.
To end, the decision to repeal the Bible Society Act was a very difficult
decision for me, having grown up in a parsonage as a son of a “dominee”
[minister of religion]. But we had to take the state out of the business of
the Bible Society. We are actually liberating the Bible Society of South
Africa today. When I bought each of my four young daughters a big, proper
Bible for Christmas last year, it was good to know that the Bible lying on
the shelf of the bookshop was there without state protection or privilege.
May the Bible Society of South Africa continue to enjoy its growth and may
the gods bless the whole of South Africa, never mind which book we read.
With these words, I put this report to you. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move:

   That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND
 ADMINISTRATION - PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION’S FOURTH CONSOLIDATED MONITORING
                        AND EVALUATION REPORT OF 2007


    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND
            ADMINISTRATION - STATE OF PUBLIC SERVICE REPORT 2008


Ms M J J MATSOMELA: Hon Speaker, hon members, I would like to table these
two portfolio committee reports which are based on the reports of the
Public Service Commission.

The first report is on monitoring and evaluation. The Portfolio Committee
on Public Service and Administration received a briefing by the Public
Service Commission on its Fourth Consolidated Monitoring and Evaluation
Report on 11 June 2008. The focus of the fourth consolidated report was
service delivery. The Public Service Commission is perceived as an
ineffective structure due to its power to only make recommendations based
on its constitutional mandate, hence the portfolio committee’s decision to
table these reports so that the reports of the Public Service Commission
are adopted as reports of Parliament, so that we are enabled to enforce
them.

The Public Service Commission’s findings in the report reflect negatively
on the Public Service’s ability to deliver services and its embodiment of
the nine basic values, as outlined in section 195(1) of the Constitution.
There were, however, a few departments that scored above average and, in
some instances, scored 100% for specific performance indicators.

The Public Service Commission made many valuable recommendations in this
report, and overall the committee was pleased with the report. The
recommendations emanating from the report are the following. Firstly,
guidelines for public participation in policy-making should be developed by
the Department of the Public Service and Administration in conjunction with
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and the Public Service
Commission.

Secondly, departments mentioned in the Public Service Commission report
should put in place a strategy of prioritising skills development
activities. The Public Administration Leadership and Management Academy,
that we normally refer to as “Palama”, should be consulted by the relevant
departments.

Thirdly, departments should ensure that planned training is implemented,
and that the impact of the training on the enhancement of service delivery
is monitored. This, also, should be done in conjunction with the Public
Administration Leadership and Management Academy.

Fourthly, a review of the disciplinary codes and procedures should be done
with a view to tightening enforcement of disciplinary procedures,
specifically related to absenteeism. The Department of the Public Service
and Administration should report to Parliament by March 2009 on progress
made with the aforementioned recommendations.

The fifth recommendation is that the dispute resolution time periods, as
set out in the disciplinary codes and procedures, should be adhered to by
the departments mentioned in the report and unresolved disputes should be
resolved as a matter of urgency. Again, in this instance, we would like the
Public Service Commission to report before March 2009.

Members of the executive and directors-general of the departments sampled
in the Public Service Committee’s report should report to Parliament on
progress in the implementation of recommendations from the above-mentioned
report by the end of March 2009.

The Public Service Commission should report in writing to Parliament by the
end of March 2009 on progress made with departmental implementation of
recommendations from the Fourth Consolidated Monitoring and Evaluation
Report. So, we are expecting reports from the departments, from members of
the executive and directors-general and from the Public Service Commission
itself.

The Public Service Commission should consider, as part of its future
monitoring and evaluation reports, a section dedicated to departmental
implementation of previous reports. This will enable us to keep track of
the progress being made, to review the recommendations and to make the
necessary amendments from time to time.

The committee therefore recommends that the National Assembly adopt the
Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration’s Report on the
Public Service Commission’s Fourth Consolidated Monitoring and Evaluation
Report of 2007.

Regarding the State of the Public Service Report, the committee again
received a briefing by the Publication Service Commission on the State of
the Public Service Report of 14 May 2008.

The committee’s report focused on the findings and recommendations of the
State of the Public Service’s report per constitutional principle. The
basic values and principles governing public administration are set out in
the Constitution, Act 108 of 1996, under section 195(1), which states:

  Public administration must be governed by the democratic values and
  principles enshrined in the Constitution, including the following
  principles:


  (a) A high standard of professional ethics must be promoted and
       maintained.


  (b) Efficient, economic and effective use of resources must be promoted.


  (c) Public administration must be development-oriented.
  (d) Services must be provided impartially, fairly, equitably and without
        bias.

  (e) People’s needs must be responded to, and the public must be
        encouraged to participate in policy-making.


  (f) Public administration must be accountable.


  (g) Transparency must be fostered by providing the public with timely,
       accessible and accurate information.


  (h) Good human-resource management and career-development practices, to
       maximise human potential, must be cultivated.

  (i) Public administration must be broadly representative of the South
       African people, with employment and personnel management practices
       based on ability, objectivity, fairness and the need to redress the
       imbalances of the past to achieve broad representation.

The Public Service Commission found that, overall, good progress has been
made during the period under review. However, there should be an
appreciation of the fact that more needs to be done and that the quality
and pace of service delivery should be accelerated.

It was found that the Public Service has sufficient operational experience
in implementing new policies. It is important that effective monitoring of
performance continues and that action is taken where concerns are
identified.

The committee therefore made the following recommendations. Departments
identified in the Public Service Commission’s report should implement
recommendations made by the Public Service Commission in its State of
Public Service Report 2008. Progress on the implementation of these
recommendations should be reported to Parliament by June 2009. The Public
Service Commission should report to the committee the success of
departmental implementation of the recommendations made in the State of
Public Service Report in writing by June 2009.

The committee recommends that the National Assembly adopt the Portfolio
Committee on Public Service and Administration’s report on the Public
Service Commission’s State of Public Service Report 2008. I thank you.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

  That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration on
Public Service Commission’s Fourth Consolidated Monitoring and Evaluation
Report of 2007 accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration on State
of Public Service Report 2008 accordingly adopted.

 DEVELOPING AN IMPROVED HEALTH CARE SYSTEM CAPABLE OF DEALING WITH NATIONAL
                           AND REGIONAL CHALLENGES

                                  (Debate)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Deputy Speaker, events during the last couple
of months, from about mid-November, will convince us that health in South
Africa is not just a South African issue; it’s a regional issue.

With the advent of cholera, we have seen that what happens in our
neighbouring states affects us here in our country. And, as we have learnt,
no country is an island unto itself. So, health is a regional issue; it’s a
national issue; and it’s an issue for each and every one of us, everyone in
this country.

Before entering into this very important debate, I first of all want to pay
tribute to the thousands and thousands of health care workers who, as we
speak here today, are providing care and support to millions of people in
our country under difficult conditions, with limited resources and for very
long hours.

On a daily basis I get letters from people complaining about what happened
to them in this or that hospital. I have many MPs coming to me to tell me
what their experiences are in their constituencies. Yes, those are very,
very valid experiences, and this is what we have to deal with in health.
But, let us not forget those thousands of health care workers who are
valiantly working with much passion to help our people with their health
needs.

I am overwhelmed by the passion and devotion of people in the health care
profession. It is perhaps one of the few professions which is almost a
calling, in which health becomes a vocation, not just a job. Okay, I can
see the Minister of Education saying that teachers are the same. We are in
agreement, Minister. We have the same projects in mind. Teachers – and,
let’s add, policemen and policewomen - are people with passion. So, I want
to pay tribute to these people in our country who assist us.

But what do we need to do as government? What do we need to do as civil
society to assist these people to do their jobs, to assist our people to
receive good quality care? It is daunting when you look at what we are up
against. We inherited a system in which there was, and still is, vastly
inequitable access to health care. We have a public health sector that
services mainly the poor and we have a private health care sector that
services the middle class and the wealthy. Access to quality health care is
a constitutional right. It cannot be dependent upon how wealthy you are and
what kind of arrangements you can make to access care in the private health
care sector.

But let us not just say that health care is bad in the public health care
sector and good in the private health care sector. We have all had
experiences to know that there is good quality care in the public health
sector and, at times, bad quality care in the private health sector. Those
who are dependent on the private health care sector face escalating costs
because their medical aid schemes can no longer provide the insurance they
thought they would get when they accessed them.

Similarly, in the public health care sector, we face a number of huge
challenges. Let me start spelling out some of those challenges. I do not
want to give promises about how quickly and how fast these will be dealt
with. But, having spent time in the health care sector, we, as the ANC,
have outlined a number of initiatives which we believe are essential for
the transformation of the health care sector. Firstly, there are the issues
of governance, accountability and strategic leadership. It is very
difficult in the health care sector to deal with many, many levels of
decision-making. In other words, you have a national Department of Health,
you have provincial departments of health and you even have health care at
municipal level. There are many tiers of decision-making. In terms of what
goes from the equitable share to a province, a provincial Treasury makes
the decision as to how they will allocate to health care, social
development and so forth. So, it may be that the amount you thought would
go to health care in a province isn’t allocated. That decision is up to the
provincial Treasury. A provincial health department has the constitutional
right to decide how they will allocate resources.

So, how do we get a national project with national priorities going about
the reform of our health care system when we have this multiplicity – these
dreaded schedule 4 functions - which put us in difficult relationships with
each other? How do we understand accountability in that kind of
environment? Take, for example, the Ukhahlamba district and the failure of
the health care sector there. I had a very interesting question from an
opposition party member who asked: “Minister, what steps are you taking to
hold people to account?” I have pondered this time and time again. Who is
responsible? Is it the person in charge of that particular health care
facility? Is it the person in charge of the primary health care district?
Is it the MEC or the head of department of health in the province? Who is
it? Until we understand accountability and what that range of
accountability means, we cannot talk about an effective, functioning health
care system. I have commissioned legal opinion on this matter, on
accountability within our health care system, because that is an essential
part of the system.

We can’t just look at provinces as being particular fiefdoms and at the
national department as somehow just being the standard-setting department.
We have to look at leadership in the health care sector. We have a
provision in the Act for a body called the National Health Council. The
National Health Council consists of the provinces with their MECs and their
heads of department, and of the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the
director-general. This is the agency at which all policy decisions are
passed and at which all decisions related to health are taken. This is the
engine with which we need to start driving health care reforms and a
holistic approach to health care issues.

Finally, when we talk about leadership, we are also talking about a social
compact, those people in the health care industry who are represented by
unions. We need, more than ever before, a social compact with these unions.
There are encouraging signs that the unions themselves are coming to the
table in this regard.

Let me quickly go through the other issues. The first issue is that of
information systems. We are unable to dig down to get the information we
need. At times it is even difficult to know on a daily basis how many
people have highly drug-resistant TB. We can’t even get that. We have to
develop information systems so that we can manage health. We have initiated
a patient information system, but that is not enough. This will be a
central focus of this department in going forward.

The next issue is that of financial management. We know that we are
underresourced in terms of the baseline. We know that the cuts that were
effected in the health care sector from 1998 onwards have affected us
badly. But that does not mean that we abrogate our responsibility for good
financial management in the health care system. We need to be able to
present focused, good bids when we bid for budgets. This cannot be based on
inefficient spending.

The national Department of Health, with the agreement of MECs of health,
has already set up teams of people who will be going to the provinces to
assist provinces to analyse what the cost drivers in our health care system
are. We are experiencing massive overspending in our health care system in
all provinces at the moment. Some of it might be due to bad and inefficient
financial management. But there are cost drivers there that, I think, we
need to uncover and pin down. Because, unless we begin to understand what
those drivers are, we are not going to be able to fund our system
adequately.

We are also setting up a proper donor mobilisation unit in our national
Department of Health. There is a wide range of donors that include the US
President's Emergency Plan for Aids Relief, Pepfar, and the Global Fund
that are able to provide funding, and we need to get our act together in
that regard.

The management of our human resources is critical. At the moment, we do not
have a national human resource strategy which indicates specific targets
for the provision of health care workers even according to numbers of our
population. How can we plan ahead if we do not know what the basic package
of care should be? This package of care is going to be a very important
focus. We have to start specifying. I know treasuries don’t like it, don’t
want norms and standards, because then they are held to account in terms of
what the norms are going to cost. But we need to know because there are far
too many vacancies and far too many people who are inappropriately
allocated in our health systems for us to be able to take a good view of
how well we are delivering.

The reopening of our nursing colleges is very important. So, too, is the
placement of our academic hospitals. Are they at the right level, the
provincial level? Do they need to come to the national level? Do we need to
look at, as the ANC is saying, the decentralisation of management - not the
facilities, but management?

The management of our health facilities requires a lot. We established the
Office of Standards Compliance in April 2008 which will examine the quality
of care in each of our health facilities on a routine basis every three
years. They have already produced reports on 27 hospitals, and this is
going to provide us with an invaluable base for understanding what the
problems are with our quality of care.

It is not only the quality of health care, but what we call the “hotel
factors” - the queues, the lack of sanitation, poor quality food – the
kinds of things that our people constantly complain about when they go to
health care facilities. There are the difficulties of just standing in
queues and waiting and waiting and then having to go to another queue for
drugs. And so there is management of that. Interesting exercises are being
done at Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital, which are yielding very
interesting results on how we can better manage our health care facilities.
There, of course, the social compact with our partners is very important.

The issue of inequity of access is perhaps the primary policy engagement
that we have to have. We cannot have a well-funded private sector and a
poorly funded, underperforming public sector. That is why national health
insurance becomes an important policy initiative. I will not go into
details about this. But let me assure everybody that on this particular
initiative, we will be consulting broadly and very widely and with a wide
range of participants, because we have to get this right. We cannot afford
to get it wrong. We look forward to lively engagement on this issue,
particularly because it is addressed to dealing with inequality of care.
Let me say upfront that national health insurance will only succeed if we
bring the standards of care in the public health sector up to speed. We
cannot have national health insurance with a poorly functioning public
health care sector.

The revitalisation of the physical infrastructure of our health facilities
is extremely important and we have made good progress on that. More than
249 facilities out of more than 400 hospitals have undergone renovation
already. Eighteen new hospitals have been built, of which three are major
teaching hospitals. That’s a considerable achievement. But we need to then
look at how we are staffing these, how they are being maintained.

The accelerated implementation of HIV and Aids policies, the reduction of
mortality, and the care around TB and associated diseases are vital
ingredients in our health improvement plans. We live under a high disease
burden in this country, not only with HIV and Aids – an actual pandemic –
but with TB, malaria and cholera, which we are now experiencing.

Obviously, we are very, very blessed to have the National Strategic Plan on
HIV and Aids and TB. With all our partners, we have agreed to it in Sanac
and now it is up to us to get this plan implemented. We have now set in
motion getting a proper secretariat for Sanac. The resource mobilisation
committee is now busy with our Round 9 proposal to the Global Fund and,
hopefully, Sanac will now become an efficiently run organisation that will
assist us to drive the HIV and Aids prevention programmes and treatment
programmes.

Let me say with pride that with regard to those on antiretrovirals, we
wanted to add on, in terms of the National Strategic Plan, 180 000 extra
people this year. We have exceeded the target. We are on 216 000 this year,
which is a considerable achievement. I wish to congratulate everybody.

That means that there are over 700 000 people in our country at this moment
who are on antiretrovirals, who do not need to be in our hospitals, who
have the possibility of a good life ahead of them, who can care for their
loved ones. That is what we want to focus on, getting people onto those
antiretrovirals. But at the same time prevention is extremely important. We
will be driving the prevention of mother-to-child transmission programmes
with a great deal of energy and vigour.

We have identified 18 primary health care districts that are performing
poorly, not only in terms of PMTCT but also in terms of health delivery. We
have teams of people there at the moment who are isolating the problems and
preparing us for a massive uptake in the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission.

Let us not forget that these are not the only illnesses we have to deal
with. We have lifestyle diseases such as heart disease, stroke, diabetes,
hypertension. How many people in our townships alone at this moment are
suffering from hypertension? How many people in this room alone are
suffering from hypertension? [Interjections.] Yes, I’m sure the DA is
suffering from hypertension. [Laughter.] We need to have mass mobilisation
around healthy lifestyles.

We need to look at the position of our people who are disabled. Are they
getting the quality of care that they need?

Finally, there is our drug policy. There is a lot that we need to be doing
around our drug policy. Do we need our own home-based pharmaceutical
industry? What is our procurement policy? Are we doing things right?

I’m sure there are a lot of other things that we can speak about. But what
I do want to speak about is the necessity for us all to join hands around
improving our health care facilities in this country. I have been struck by
the activism of our opposition parties with the number of questions they
file to the department in Parliament. This actually makes for very
instructive reading and often alerts you to where some problems lie. I look
forward to an engagement – a constructive engagement – with our opposition
to see what it is that we can do better. Every MP here has a constituency
office. Every MP here has contact with health facilities in their area.
And, in future, we would want to be able to receive accounts from them
about what we should be doing to improve our health care facilities - and
then out there, in civil society, everybody must come on board. We want
everybody to be involved. We want everybody to know that they have a role
to play. And may we, in the years to come, thrive and prosper, with a
growing and improving health care delivery system in our country. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister and members, how
refreshing it is to hear the new Minister of Health speak compared to the
previous Minister of Health. The South African health environment is vastly
better today than it was six months ago. We now have a Minister of Health
who recognises that HIV/Aids is a real disease and who does not dismiss the
problems of our hospitals and clinics as the hysteria of opposition
parties. The doctors and nurses and other health professionals who work so
hard every day to provide the best service they can now know that they at
least have a Minister who is working with and not against them.

Many organisations and individuals have expressed their enormous relief at
this change and have made themselves available to help make our health
system work better, which the Minister has just appealed for. The DA shares
this relief and we too will do everything we can to help our system get
back on track. The DA intends to run, at least, the Western Cape after this
year’s elections. We have a range of policies which will make a substantial
difference to the quality of care in our public hospitals. But nothing
shows how far we still have to go than the cholera outbreak which the
Minister mentioned. This has, so far, killed more than 30 people in our
country and does not seem to be under control.

Cholera is an easily treatable disease from which no person should ever
die, but a basic rehydration mixture, costing only a few cents, is not
getting to people who are sick. We must remember that the rehydration
mixture is basically a primary health care responsibility, primary health
care that this government has been prioritising for over 10 years but which
still cannot ensure that clinics have simple medication.

It is a hard reality to absorb that the life expectancy in South Africa is
now 12 years lower than it was in 1996 and that our maternal mortality is
worse than Iraq’s. In fact, we are one of only 12 countries in the world
where the infant mortality rate is actually increasing.

So what can we do? I would like to highlight three of the DA’s priorities.
The first is to improve the management of hospitals and clinics. With all
the money in the world, no health facility can work without a capable,
qualified, committed and dedicated manager. There are many hospital CEOs
and clinic managers who do exceptional jobs. There are many others who have
benefited from the ANC’s closed, patronage approach.

I would like to give an example. The CEO of the East London hospital
complex is a previous ANC councillor with no qualifications in
administration and is responsible for a budget of over R170 million a year.
He is also responsible for the dilapidated state of affairs at Frere
Hospital, which the then Deputy Minister of Health and now Deputy Speaker
went to see for herself, and who said that nurses were playing God,
deciding which babies should live and which should die. In fact, in one
year 199 babies were stillborn in that hospital.

Replies to Questions the DA has asked about hospital CEOs from across the
province show that many others also lack the knowledge and skills required
to run a hospital properly. In any province the DA controls after this
year’s election, we will make it a priority to audit the qualifications of
all health facility managers to ensure that they have the skills that the
patients need. We also undertake to regularly evaluate the quality of
services that our hospitals and clinics provide, as the Minister has also
mentioned. We call on the national department to expand the evaluation of
services in the 27 hospitals already done.

Our second priority is human resources. I do not have to mention the
figures. We all know how dire it is and that many hospitals and clinics
face devastating shortages. In any province the DA takes over, we will
embark on a vigorous international recruitment drive to attract foreign
health professionals. We would like to see the Minister of Health taking
some of these steps.

For example, it is outrageous that the Health department restricts the
number of nurses that can be trained in the private sector. Along the same
lines, a policy decision that prohibits private medical schools is in
place. There are a couple of examples around the world where successful
public-private partnerships in developing countries can be looked at. It
would cost nothing for us to lift these prohibitions.

In addition, it would also cost us nothing to include medical professionals
on the Home Affairs database scarce skills list. What it would do is to
enable us to attract them and get them into the country a lot faster. I
know of some nurses who have waited over two years to be allowed to work in
the country.

The DA would also utilise the private sector to reduce the long queues at
hospitals by allowing patients to choose for themselves from which
pharmacies they would like to collect their repeat medication. Currently,
tens of thousands of people have to take a day’s leave in order to collect
their medication.

There is more hope for real improvement of our health system now than there
has ever been. The DA and its health MECs, after the election, look forward
to working with you to transform this hope into reality. I thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, around the globe health care
has similar challenges, and, whether it is Democrats under Obama or
socialists under Motlanthe, governments must opt for solutions that work.
Essentially, challenges relate to reducing health costs and corruption and
increasing access and quality of care.

More specific, issues of Aids, TB, malaria and cholera must be addressed
here. Our public sector is constantly under threat of collapse and the
private sector people are paying more, often for less. How to respond?

A healthy lifestyle is the cornerstone of preventive primary health care.
As in the East, let’s organise daily workouts in public spaces, switch off
TVs and mobile phones and switch on sports, music and art in schools and in
our homes. Let’s immediately ban trans fats as proposed in my private
member’s Bill and agreed to by the department and by the private members’
legislative committee. They are produced for commercial gain and contribute
to heart disease, diabetes, weight gain and cancer.

To ensure quality treatment, let’s register conventional doctors,
homeopaths, acupuncturists, chiropractors, naturopaths, Ayurvedic and
Chinese doctors through a single, independent, democratically elected
medical council. A traditional healers council should deal only with
herbalists, surgeons and birth attendance, not abaprofethi [prophets] and
sangomas whose work on a metaphysical dimension cannot be monitored or
controlled.

We must ensure that at national and regional levels formal structures exist
to provide for co-operation and collaboration between all these health
professionals. This should follow through into working groups and research
teams that tackle issues like Aids, TB, malaria and cholera regionally and
locally.

Hon Minister, we welcome and support many of your initiatives. However, I
will dwell on our differences. Let us scrap the most damaging of our failed
policies, the centralised model with unfunded mandates, bureaucratic
conditional grants - the idea that one size fits all. It is confusing and
lacks accountability and should be simplified and decentralised.

Let national government establish frameworks and minimum standards. Let
provincial and local governments control funds and choose priorities. Then
hold them accountable. Let discipline be meted out close to where doctors
and nurses work; build stronger health districts and improve co-ordination
between hospitals, clinics, mobiles in rural areas and between these
schools and local police and install integrated information systems - here
we agree with the hon Minister. Let us remove constraints that prevent
districts and hospitals from negotiating partnerships with the private
sector or working with NGOs and international donors.

Currently, most NGO funding is politically motivated, weakening the impact
it has on major epidemics in South Africa. To improve access to quality
care, let’s embrace public-private partnerships, PPPs; contract the private
sector to run mobile services in rural areas and to manage clinics or
hospital works and to train nurses and do away with licensing according to
need - it is subjective and open to patronage and corruption. We should
rather draw health workers to underserved areas through incentives which
achieve more than coercion.

The greatest burden on public hospitals is HIV and TB. Here, the IFP also
suggests major changes. Let us treat HIV like an ordinary disease without
special secrecy provisions. Testing should be the norm with an opt-out
provision for those who refuse it. Let us change the focus of rights, from
privacy to nondiscrimination. The excessive pro-focus on privacy adds to
the culture of denial and gives people the sense that HIV is something to
be ashamed of.

How do we reduce medical costs? Require all who work to pay a percentage
towards a medical scheme of their choice with a low-cost option offered by
government. Enforce caps on medical scheme administration fees which enable
schemes to hide huge profits.
In hospitals, let government hospitals establish private wards and retain
profits. Let government reduce costs by bulk buying of private services for
registered patients, paid for per day or per capita or per procedure. Where
medicines are concerned, enforce transparency along the entire chain of
medicine supplies. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you. Hon Minister, Deputy Speaker, at the heart of all
measures to improve the South African health system and making it more
accessible is the issue of transforming it from a fragmented and
inequitable system to a health system that is integrated, inclusive and
responsive to the needs of all South Africans.

Primary health care services are the backbone of health care, and equity,
effectiveness and efficiency in the provision of these services are
critical to the functioning of the entire health system. A stronger
multisectoral approach is urgently needed as rural health care has often
been compromised by lack of infrastructure and services, such as roads,
water and electricity. Hopefully, integrated municipal development plans
will offer some solutions.

Of course, health systems remain severely underresourced despite
interventions such as recruitment of health professionals from outside
South Africa, community service in underserviced areas and rural and scarce
skills allowances.

Migration of skilled workers from developing to more developed countries
remains a very real challenge, and efforts to counter the situation must be
reviewed and intensified along with innovative measures to train health
care aids to assist professionals in communities. Disparities in salaries
and service conditions between health workers in provinces and
municipalities - and disparities in quality of service as a result of
inequitable distribution of resources - must also be addressed.

Reliable and timely health information is essential and sufficiently strong
and effective systems are not at present in place. We need dedicated health
information services personnel at hospitals, subdistrict and district
levels, relevant skills development, staff training and ongoing support in
all areas of health information systems.

Lastly, HIV and Aids place enormous pressure on all aspects of the national
health system and must not continue to be just a funding priority, but must
be recognised as the national emergency that it is. When we stand in any of
our hospitals that are struggling with no beds, people queuing, people
sitting on floors and health professionals depressed and stressed, we
obviously realise the emergency in a much more real sense. Thank you.
Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, poverty has left its scars on every
aspect of South Africans’ lives. It has indeed been this democratic
government that has churned its wheels to eradicate poverty and diminish
its effects on living in our country.

However, like most countries plagued by the challenges of poverty, severe
health risks and health problems exist. With the coming of a new regime,
there are great expectations that the country’s problems will be wished
away by the wave of a wand. But, over time, when the changes do not meet
the expectations, we are met with impatience and intolerance.

The MF believes that the department’s focus has primarily rested on making
health more accessible to South Africans, especially those from previously
disadvantaged backgrounds. And we cannot argue that many have gained this
access.

However, the challenges of minimum resources and areas that still do not
have access to adequate health systems remain. It is time for us to get
back to our drawing board and address our challenges so that our soon-to-
follow Budget Speech by our hon Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel, will
include special funding to address these shortfalls and challenges.

The MF has full confidence in our new hon Minister of Health and her
abilities to steer South Africa to better and more accessible health care
facilities. We feel that each province comes with its own challenges, and
we expect these to be reported to us and for much more oversight to be done
by Parliament so that we work efficiently at tackling the country’s health
issues and assist the department in its endeavours in health care. I thank
you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, I wish to commend the Minister of Health for
her open and frank input here this afternoon. My input starts by way of
saying that despite improvements in living conditions over the past decade,
the health of South Africans has worsened, according to the South African
Health Review. It doesn’t have to remain like that, but that’s the status
as we see it.

The World Health Organisation has warned that in times of financial crisis,
people tend to turn to bad health habits, such as alcohol, tobacco and
drugs as measures of coping with such times.

A concern has also been raised by the World Bank that about 60 million
people will be exposed to severe poverty if economic growth in developing
countries is halved during the year, which is a possibility.

According to the South African Health Review published last year, the
overall health of South Africans has worsened considerably. HIV/Aids is, of
course, the major cause of our country’s worsening health. The three main
factors that impact on our nation’s health and mortality rates are unsafe
sex, interpersonal violence and alcohol abuse.

The FD, a member of the Christian Democratic Alliance, the CDA, suggests
that there is a need for increased public education targeting bad behaviour
patterns in an attempt to limit those factors of concern. Considerably more
must be done to improve public health funding so that it keeps pace with
rising inflation, and district health services in poorer areas must invest
more funds to meet the growing demands of its people.

In conclusion, the FD feels that an intersectoral approach is required
since the first line of attack is to reduce the impact poverty has on the
behaviour of all our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the challenges of the health
care system are not limited to the national and regional structures. This
government has, since day one, embarked on prioritising primary health care
and rightfully so, I believe.

It therefore goes without saying that one departs with an analysis of the
primary health care system. It is clear that the primary health care
service has efficiency problems, putting immense pressure on the national
and regional health care systems. Sometimes the solution lies in simple,
yet effective, planning.
I wonder if the hon Minister is aware of the fact that even before the
poorest of the poor can get to a clinic, they have to stand outside these
clinics most of the time, from as early as five o’clock in the morning, and
half of them are elderly or sickly people - a situation that flies in the
face of the ANC government’s promise of a better life for all.

The NA wishes to share its concrete and practical approach to problem
solving. To the hon Minister: this situation can be addressed by simply
introducing a delivery system for those patients receiving the same
medication every month. This will alleviate pressure on clinic staff and
allow them to attend to patients that need immediate and urgent medical
attention.

I trust that the hon Minister will seriously consider this proposal in the
spirit of ensuring a better life for all. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Minister, your speech was very much like the vitamin B12
cocktail, an inspiration and, I hope, an immune booster and an injection of
hope. A senior colleague of mine on the opposition benches said this was
the first time he could remember the opposition applauding the Health
Minister.

Aids treatment and prevention pose some of the greatest challenges to our
health care system. Currently, at least 16 000 new people go onto
antiretroviral medication every month. Access to medication is a human
rights issue.

The MEC for health in the Free State, the hon Belot, is violating this
right as we speak because, despite a R9,5 million transfer from Treasury,
no new persons from the Free State are on antiretrovirals, and baseline
blood work for people living with HIV and Aids has been suspended since
November 2008. Other medicines are also in short supply, no explanations
are forthcoming and his silence and inaction on the issue are only making
the situation worse.

You alluded to taking legal opinion earlier and I hope that it becomes
available quickly, because, in my book, the MEC is accountable.

Last year in South Africa, 64 000 children under the age of five died, and
one in seven deaths were Aids related. Currently, fewer than 30 000
children are on treatment, and it has been proven that effective mother-to-
child-transmission interventions can significantly reduce the infection
rates, by 50% to 90%.

Minister Hogan, you have been referred to as a breath of fresh air, but
fresh air alone cannot save lives. Access to medication can. I was stunned
to hear at a recent seminar on HIV and Aids that five years ago a month’s
supply of ARVs cost R10 000, but that it now costs the state R250. So the
question is not about affordability, but more about accessibility.

HIV and Aids affect the economically active population, drain human and
financial resources, affect livelihoods and cause child-headed households.
The stigma and discrimination generated by this disease were starkly
highlighted by the desperate tragedy of the mother in Lusikisiki who
murdered her four children and then committed suicide because she could not
deal with the whisperings in the community about her status. In view of
this, it is the considered opinion of the DA that a deputy ministry for HIV
and Aids is vital so as to deal holistically and yet specifically with the
pandemic.

We in the DA also echo the Speaker of Parliament in calling on all public
representatives to encourage a culture of knowing your status. We firmly
believe that if you know your status, you can make informed decisions on
managing your health.

Minister, several months ago the DA wrote to the Department of Health
requesting a list of sites authorised to provide prophylactic treatment for
rape survivors. There has been no response to date. I appeal to you today
to publicise this information so that any person who is raped will have
access to antiretrovirals. As an MP I cannot access this information, so
can you imagine then the trauma a rape victim goes through as they go from
clinic to clinic looking for an authorised site?
In conclusion, I support the call by the Deputy Speaker for a cross-party
committee in Parliament specifically to address issues on HIV and Aids and
I echo the Minister’s acknowledgement of the many dedicated health care
professionals. I hope that you will go one step further, Minister, and that
you will inspire those health care professionals who have left the country
to return home. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A F MADELLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers, hon members, officials of the national Department of
Health, distinguished guests, “dames” [ladies] and “here” [gentlemen],
firstly, let me take this opportunity to wish everyone an excellent 2009,
characterised by good health and happiness.

The recent cholera outbreak that hit our country is noted with grave
concern by the ANC. We wish to express our sincere condolences to everyone
who has lost a loved one, a mother, a father, a child, a brother, a sister
or a friend to this dreadful disease.

A few days ago, Monday, 26 January 2009, to be exact, the national
Department of Health indicated that a total of 6 202 cases of cholera were
reported across all nine provinces. The provinces with the highest number
of reported cases were Limpopo with 3 045; Mpumalanga with 2 922; the
Western Cape with 9, although I think the figure is now 11; the North West
with 7 - this is the province that the DA hopes to govern, but I have bad
news for them, they will still be in the opposition in a few months’ time
... [Interjections.] They will continue to be in the opposition.
[Interjections.] In KwaZulu-Natal there were two cases, and the Eastern
Cape, the Northern Cape and the Free State had one case each. A total, hon
Waters, of 44 people died as a result of this dreadful disease. Twenty-nine
were from Mpumalanga whilst eleven were from Limpopo; three were from
Gauteng and one was from KwaZulu-Natal. Statistically, we can say that
KwaZulu-Natal is the worst off province, with 50% of its cholera patients
dying, but that would be mischievous because they have had only two
reported cases of cholera.

What is cholera? How is it transmitted and who is at risk? Cholera is a
waterborne disease and is generally considered to be an acute illness that
results in profuse, watery diarrhoea caused by the bacterium vibrio
cholerae, an organism that lives in fresh water.

According to the distinguished Professor Willem Sturm, head of the Medical
Microbiology and Infectious Diseases department at the Nelson Mandela
School of Medicine in Durban, there are more than 60 strains of cholera,
but only two of them are deadly or cause diarrhoea. The two strains are
called serogroups 01 and 0139. Serogroup 01, importantly, is prevalent in
Africa – and this is probably what we are confronted with at the moment.
The other strain is more prevalent in Asia.
It is said that under normal circumstances your body, with specific
reference to the stomach, absorbs water and nutrients from the food you eat
and drink. However, when infected with cholera, the opposite happens. The
toxin released by the bacteria causes increased secretion of water and
chloride ions from the intestine, which results in watery diarrhoea.
Instead of absorbing water, you are losing water. If the diarrhoea goes
untreated, death can result from severe dehydration and shock.

The national department presented clinical guidelines on cholera
infections. The following signs and symptoms characterise this dreadful
disease: its onset is very sudden; the diarrhoea is profuse; the
dehydration occurs very rapidly; and, of course, all complications result
from the effects of loss of fluids and electrolytes in the stool; vomiting,
muscle cramps, acidosis, peripheral vasoconstriction and ultimately, renal
and circulatory failure may occur if treatment is not given timeously,
which could lead to death.

Cholera can be transmitted through the following means: drinking water –
and this is important - that has been contaminated, through contaminated
food, by soiled hands and, of course, through fish, particularly shellfish
taken from contaminated water and eaten raw or insufficiently cooked.

As said before, cholera is usually transmitted through contaminated water
and food and remains an ever-present risk in many countries. It occurs
especially in parts of the world where water supply, sanitation, food
safety and hygiene are inadequate. These kinds of characteristics are more
common in developing countries such as ours. Our beloved South Africa has
experienced outbreaks of cholera.

Without a doubt, the people most at risk of contracting this disease are
the poorest of the poor, those living in conditions in which there is
limited or no access to safe piped water and to adequate and proper
sanitation. Those who still have to access water for their daily
consumption from rivers and streams are most at risk of falling prey to
this disease.

The World Health Organisation argues that the treatment of this disease is
straightforward. It is basically, rehydration, and it believes that, if
applied appropriately, it could keep fatalities to the absolute minimum and
even prevent them. It further states that in the long term improvements in
safe water supply and adequate sanitation are the best means of preventing
cholera. In the case of a cholera outbreak, the best control measures
include the early detection of cases and treatment of patients.

Improving the socioeconomic conditions of our people – and I’m happy that
many of the speakers have made reference to this - to prevent communicable
diseases is our number one priority. Indeed, the areas worst affected by
the cholera outbreak, the Mpumalanga and Limpopo provinces in particular,
have communities that are still plagued by conditions in which they have
limited or no access to safe piped water and are forced to fetch water from
streams and rivers.

As the ANC, we acknowledge with pride the enormous progress our government
has made over the past 14-odd years in delivering safe drinking tap water
to millions of our people who, under the yoke of apartheid, were denied
this right. We also acknowledge the progress made in eradicating the bucket
system, prevalent in the main amongst the poorest of the poor. Eighty-eight
percent of our population today have access to safe drinking water
delivered through pipes to their homes. Eighty-eight percent and more do
not have to go to rivers and streams to fetch water.

Sanitation has also improved tremendously over the same period. In 1994,
when we came into government in this country, 609 675 households used the
bucket system, whereas by June last year it was a mere 14 812. Indeed, the
complete eradication of the bucket system is about to become a reality.
These measures by our government intend to improve the quality of life of
our people and, indeed, continue to create conditions for a better life for
all.

Our ability as a country to contain the cholera outbreak tells us in no
uncertain terms that though we have done well, we must do more. We are
absolutely, resolutely committed to doing more. In the coming period we
have set our sights on achieving the following objectives, as outlined in
our election manifesto: the continued democratisation of our society based
on equality, nonracialism and nonsexism; national unity in diversity which
is the source of our strength; building on our achievements and experiences
since 1994; an equitable, sustainable, and inclusive growth path that
provides for decent work and sustainable livelihoods, education, health,
safe and secure communities and rural development; targeted programmes for
the youth, women, workers, rural masses, and people with disabilities; and,
of course, a better Africa and a better world.

As the ANC we acknowledge the many achievements in improving access to
health care and we would be the first to say that much more still needs to
be done in terms of quality of care and ensuring better health outcomes.
The hon Minister has referred to this.

We will continue to work towards reducing the inequalities in our health
system, to improving quality of care and to bettering public health
facilities. We will also continue, even after the elections, when we are
returned with an even larger majority, to boost our human resources in the
public sector, increasing our onslaught against HIV/AIDS and other
diseases. [Interjections.]

As the ANC, we can confidently say that through implementing programmes to
achieve these noble objectives, we will be able to avoid incidences such as
the cholera outbreak we are currently confronted with.

The short answer to the question, hon Deputy Speaker, as to whether we are
capable of dealing with this particular health challenge, the cholera
outbreak, is yes - a resounding yes. International organisations, such as
the Red Cross, have declared that we have successfully contained this
dreadful disease. This is a clear and unambiguous vote of confidence in our
government, our Ministry of Health and everyone who assisted in fighting
this disease.

This outbreak of cholera occurred in Zimbabwe, as the Minister has
indicated, in mid-October 2008, and within weeks areas bordering Zimbabwe
became prone to this infection. We want to stress that cholera is spread by
water and not by people. We cannot, and we should not, fall prey to blaming
people for this disease. We must understand that it is spread by water.

We have noted with immense pride the speed at which our government has
acted to contain and prevent the disease from causing more harm. In this
regard, we wish to salute the Minister of Health, Comrade Barbara Hogan,
and her team of experts, officials from the national Department of Health,
the National Institute for Communicable Diseases, the World Health
Organisation, local and international nongovernmental organisations such as
the SA Red Cross Society, the private sector, in particular the Hospital
Association of SA, together with other officials from provinces,
municipalities and all other role-players, and especially members of the
affected communities who collectively worked round the clock to address
this disease.

The president of the ANC, the hon Comrade Jacob Zuma, accompanied by the
Minister of Health, Comrade Barbara Hogan, visited the Musina area in
Limpopo yesterday to apprise themselves of the good progress being made,
and to demonstrate ANC and government support and commitment to all those
who have been involved in the fight against cholera and to the struggle for
quality, accessible and free health care for all.

As the ANC we strongly believe that rallying behind government’s efforts to
deal with this outbreak is the right thing to do. Stopping this outbreak
and eradicating all symptoms of cholera must become a collective effort.
Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish to recognise the presence at this
important debate of the Deputy President of the Republic. Thank you, Ma’am,
for attending this debate. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 15:21.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

   1. Introduction of Bill

     (1)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


          a) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
             Amendment  Bill [B 3 – 2009] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 31798 of 23
             January 2009.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Provincial and Local Government of the National Assembly, as
             well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 28 January 2009:


          a) National Land Transport Bill [B 51D – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 76(1)).


          b) Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

      1) The following members have been elected to serve on the Mediation
         Committee in respect of the Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2D – 2008]:

         ANC
         Daniels, Ms P
         Maserumele, Mr F T
         Moathshe, Mr M S
         Nhlengethwa, Ms D G
         Sotyu, Ms M
         Van Wyk, Ms A
         DA
         Kohler-Barnard, Ms D
         King, Mr R J (Alt)


         IFP
         Bekker, Mr H J

TABLINGS


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


   (a)      Reply from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to
       recommendations in the Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water
       Affairs and Forestry on Public Hearings on Forestry Transformation
       Charter, National Forest Action Plan and Industrial Policy, as
       adopted by the House on 10 June 2008.


       Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry.

