---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2009-11-17
---

TUESDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I have been informed that
the Whippery has agreed that we will not have motions, except for the
motion printed on the Order Paper.

We will now proceed with questions as printed on the Order Paper. Now, if
there are follow-up questions, I urge hon members to phrase their questions
precisely, rather than give long preambles that waste time. Where time is
concerned, I am going to be a bit strict today. Hon members will see we
have a very long agenda, so we will have to try to stick to the time as set
out.

Where’s Mr De Beer? Hon member, in response to your question, Question 63,
the Minister has written a letter informing me that she will unfortunately
not be available today, as the President has requested her to perform some
other function. I asked that you be sent a message to this effect. The
Minister has written a response in reply to your question, and I have
ordered that it be copied to all the members. Are you happy with that?

Mr C J DE BEER: Chairperson, I received the Minister’s answer in response
to the question and I would like to inform the House that I am taking this
issue to the Northern Cape province’s economic summit on 30 November 2009
for it to be tabled there. The Minister will be present at that occasion.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All right.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                  ECONOMICS

                                  Cluster 4

MINISTERS:

 Success of Construction Industry Development Board in ensuring sustainable
          growth and empowerment in previously disadvantaged areas

64.   Mr H B Groenewald (DA) asked the Minister of Public Works:
     Whether there has been any success with regard to the Construction
     Industry Development Board, in ensuring sustainable growth and
     empowerment in previously disadvantaged areas; if not, why not; if so,
     what are the relevant details?     CO183E


The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, noticeable and positive changes
have taken place in the sustainability and empowerment of previously
disadvantaged contractors. Although trends have varied across various
classes of work of the Construction Industry Development Board, CIDB, as
well as contractor grades and ownership categories, the profile of black
ownership of contractors has shown absolute growth between 2006 and 2009.

These are the details with regard to this growth: 11% in the CIDB grade 7
in general building. This has gone up from 2006, when 53% of black
ownership in grade 7 in general building was recorded, to 65% currently.
There were 20 black-owned contracting grade 7 enterprises in 2006, and
there are 102 black-owned grade 7 contracting enterprises currently. There
were 275 black-owned grade 4 contracting enterprises in 2006, and the
number has risen to 597 black-owned grade 4 contracting enterprises
currently.

Similar trends have also taken place in other CIDB classes of work, such as
civil engineering, women ownership, youth and the disabled.
Much of this growth can be attributed to government interventions, as well
as interventions by the CIDB. These include, among other things,
government’s enhanced focus on infrastructure spending; government’s
targeted procurement policies, including the Preferential Procurement
Policy Framework Act, PPPFA; the CIDB’s support to government
interventions; the strengthening of public sector infrastructure delivery
capacity supported by the Infrastructure Delivery Improvement Programme,
IDIP; targeting of contractors, made possible through the CIDB’s register
of contractors; procurement reform led by the CIDB and their procurement
guidelines and practices; and encouraging contractor development of
previously disadvantaged contractors through the construction contact
centres, or triple Cs, established by the CIDB and Public Works.

Memoranda of understanding have been signed with financial institutions
including First National Bank, Absa and Standard Bank – that is, three out
of the four big banks. Specific interventions in the national emerging
contractor development programme to support emerging contractors have been
launched, using successful projects with eThekwini Metro, the South African
National Roads Agency Limited, Sanral, and others. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Before I continue with any supplementary
questions, I recognise the President of the Senate of the Democratic
Republic of Congo and his entourage. They are seated right opposite me in
the Chairperson’s gallery. [Applause.] They are on a bilateral visit to the
NCOP during which we will be sharing some ideas on how to run our
parliamentary issues. I wish them well during their stay in the country.
Thank you, sir; we are honoured by your presence.

    Stemming of job losses and increasing of long-term job opportunities

65.   Mr Z Mlenzana (Cope) asked the Minister of Public Works:

      (1)   Whether his department has been able to stem job losses in
          respect of long-term and permanent employees during the past six-
          month period for which information is available; if not, why not;
          if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether his department has been able to reverse the trend by
          increasing long-term job opportunities either of its own accord
          or through discussion with the private sector, other government
          departments and/or agencies; if not, why not; if so, what are the
          further relevant details?          CO226E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, the Expanded Public Works
Programme, or EPWP, is an important element in government’s capacity to
provide employment for the poor, who are not part of the formal labour
market in South Africa.

This position was reinforced in the framework document for South Africa’s
response to the international economic crisis, which was adopted by
Nedlac’s social partners in December 2008. The EPWP prioritises programmes
that provide regular, predictable and ongoing employment.

In the infrastructure sector, the programme is expanding on maintenance
programmes that will provide ongoing employment. For example, the Zibambele
programme in KwaZulu-Natal has been implemented successfully.

In the social, environmental and cultural sectors, many of these programmes
are ongoing, since they provide the needed social and environmental
services that are continuous and not time-bound.

The programme is also accelerating the roll-out of the community works
programme. This is an innovative programme that involves local communities
in deciding on the work that must be done and then selecting unemployed
members of the communities, who are guaranteed work for two days a week. By
the end of September this year, 223 552 work opportunities had been
created.

The EPWP is designed to be a social safety net to cover people during
periods of unemployment and provide work for those who never had the
opportunity to work. It is common knowledge that the state alone cannot
provide jobs, but it can create the enabling conditions for job creation.

Through the EPWP, the state consciously intervenes by delivering needed
infrastructure and social services and, at the same time, provides an
opportunity for the unemployed to earn an income through productive work by
contributing to their communities. In some cases these jobs are short-term
jobs, in that they are the product of government-designed infrastructure
projects in a way that maximises the use of labour. This will allow people
to be involved in the numerous infrastructure projects that are implemented
across the country to address infrastructure backlogs. Thank you.

Mr W F FABER: Chairperson, I would like to know, after these people have
been trained in the EPWP projects, they are placed on a database through
which they will later be able to find jobs? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chair, I would like to thank the hon member
for the follow-up question.

Yes, before the programme starts. Let me give you an example. Last week, we
launched the Food for Waste programme in Kokstad. Everybody who was
registered to participate – 100 people were enrolled – underwent two days’
training. This was necessary because, while one might think that it is easy
to handle waste, there is hazardous waste as well.

So, it might be good if, via the committee in the NCOP, you ask our
department to present the enterprise development that we have for EPWP
projects. Allow me to give hon members an example of this: In the Working
for Water project, 3 322 small co-operatives were formed, so it is not the
end of everything once the government programme comes to an end. These
people can provide a further service and employment for themselves by being
entrepreneurs. That is already being looked at by Public Works. It is,
however, a comprehensive and detailed presentation, which I think the
committee should invite us to make. Thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I just want to ask the hon Minister whether
government is on track with the creation of 500 000 new jobs before the end
of this year.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Minister, I was just checking whether that
really is a follow-up question. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Yes, Chairperson. [Laughter.] I think the
figure I gave was 223 522. That was at the end of September and, at that
particular time, when we released those figures, there were another 80 000
that had to be verified. On the basis of those figures, I think the
projections are clear that we are going to make our target. Thank you.

               Details on eradication of mud schools programme
66.   Mr Z Mlenzana (Cope) asked the Minister of Public Works:

      (1)   Whether his department or the government has (a) a programme and
           (b) a budget in place to rebuild schools that were built with
           mud bricks; if not, why not; if so, when will the rebuilding
           programme begin, especially in the Eastern Cape and Limpopo;


      (2)   what (a) are the relevant details for the rebuilding programme,
           (b) are the timeframes for the completion of the project and (c)
           amount has been budgeted for in respect of rebuilding each
           school?                      CO227E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, I thank the hon member for
asking this question.

Yes, there is a government programme for the eradication of mud schools and
other inappropriate structures. This programme was identified as a national
priority in the President’s 2008 state of the nation address.

The national Department of Public Works does not administer the budget for
the programme. However, a budget of R2,7 billion was initially allocated to
the Department of Education over the 2009-11 MTEF period as additional
funding for infrastructure development, with a particular focus on the
eradication of unsafe, undesirable and mud structures through the EPWP. The
Independent Development Trust, IDT, board of trustees approved a
contribution of R150 million in 2007 for the eradication of mud schools.

The IDT has managed the implementation of this programme, which includes 39
projects across eight provinces. Of these, 26 projects, 16 schools and 10
toilet projects have been handed over to the education departments of the
Eastern Cape, Limpopo, KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, Free State and North
West.

To date, over 5 600 learners from pre-primary to Grade 12 have benefited
from the programme, through the construction of 126 classrooms, 27
specialist rooms, computer centres, libraries, laboratories, multipurpose
centres, early childhood development centres and 256 toilets.

The Eastern Cape department of education is also implementing a mud schools
eradication programme that is not funded from the R2,7 billion programme
and the IDT has been appointed as implementing agent for 45 projects. To
date, 38 classrooms, 9 specialist rooms and 59 toilets have been completed.
The total allocation to the IDT for this programme was R510 million.

To enhance the learning environment, the IDT is providing additional
facilities beyond the normal construction scope, including computer
laboratories in seven schools, furniture in 13 schools, waste water
treatment to allow water recycling for irrigation in four schools, and
solar power to three schools.

The implementation of the IDT-funded programme, including the additional
facilities, will be completed during the 2009-10 financial year. The IDT
has been appointed as implementing agent for five provincial programmes, of
which four have confirmed budgetary allocations for this financial year.
The total of that is R188,5 million out of a total national allocation of
R800 million.

The IDT is currently implementing 53 projects, of which five have been
handed over to the Department of Education, and of which 18 are currently
under construction. A total of 19 classrooms, specialist rooms and 49
toilets have been completed to date.

The needs of each school vary considerably, with some schools requiring
full reconstruction and others only the addition or replacement of certain
buildings. Also, school sizes vary considerably, as do material costs due
to location. Budget allocation is therefore based on a pre-assessment of
each individual school’s needs. I thank you.

Mr Z MLENZANA: Chairperson, I would like to ask the Minister whether he
would consider it a nightmare if his department, the Department of Public
Works, tried to get back the mandate of actually building schools –
particularly in this programme – without negating the fact that the budget
is with the Department of Education. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, I think it could be done by
agreement. There is no other legal mechanism for us to do this because we
must remember that they are concurrent functions. This particular function
is a qualified function. In Schedule 4 it says that the provincial
department of public works must provide that service.

There have been informal discussions between the national Minister of
Education and me, and we are going to see whether we can have joint Minmec
meetings where we determine how we can assist the provinces in the delivery
of this. But it certainly wouldn’t be a nightmare and I think it is
something that we should do.

 Allegations regarding National Lottery Distribution Trust Fund and inquiry
                 into administrative challenges experienced

67.   Prince M M M Zulu (IFP) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (1)   Whether his department has been informed of allegations in a
           media report regarding a certain organisation (name and details
           furnished); if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
           what are the relevant details;
      (2)   whether he or his department has put any measures in place to
           rectify the situation; if not, why not; if so, what measures;


      (3)   whether his department will consider conducting an inquiry with
           regard to the nature of administrative problems experienced by
           the recipient organisations in accessing lottery funds; if not,
           why not; if so, when will the inquiry be conducted;


      (4)   whether his department or the government has any plans to assist
           recipient organisations providing essential support services to
           needy communities, including children and HIV/Aids
           organisations, in the event of nonpayment of their grants; if
           not, why not; if so, what plans?  CO231E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Chairperson, the
Minister is aware of some allegations regarding the National Lottery
Distribution Trust Fund, NLDTF, and the difficulties expressed by
organisations in accessing the funds and receiving timely payments where
grants have been approved.

Based on this allegation, the Minister initiated a round table meeting
involving the National Lotteries Board, the distribution agencies and the
Ministries responsible for sport, arts and culture and social development.
At this round table meeting, challenges were identified, most of which were
administrative in nature.

A subcommittee was established to propose measures to address these
administrative challenges. The subcommittee agreed on a number of measures,
including revising the grant management process to fast-track applications
and facilitate speedy processing, as well as streamlining processes for
approval of payments.

These measures are currently being implemented and are expected to bring
about a significant improvement in the turnaround time. The other important
measures relate to the speed with which inspections should be conducted, as
payments are sometimes conditional. For a positive inspection report, the
subcommittee recommended that the template for inspection be revised to be
more focused on matters that pose a risk to the release of the grants and
not be broad and general, as it currently is.

The subcommittee also recommended the strengthening of the administrative
capacity within the National Lotteries Board to deal effectively with
publications. These measures are currently being implemented by the
National Lotteries Board as a measure to increase access to funds by needy
organisations.

The Minister is in the process of issuing regulations to remove the
requirement for applicants to provide audited financial statements for the
preceding two years. This requirement has proved to be a hindrance to many
needy organisations which may not have audited financial statements due to
various factors, including the size of the organisation. Therefore the
requirement will be relaxed, particularly for first-time applicants. The
regulations are in the process of being consulted upon with various
stakeholders and will be published for general public comment in due
course.

Lastly, the department has enquired about a number of allegations made by
organisations and these have been addressed. These enquiries are addressed
on an ongoing basis, but with the process mentioned above, it is expected
that these challenges will be addressed effectively.

The subcommittee has also recommended to the National Lotteries Board that
it conduct an audit of all applications received to date in order to
identify those that may be pending so that they can be attended to and
finalised. The results will be made available to the subcommittee in
December 2009. This will assist the department to address the cases that
may be outstanding. I thank you.

 Number of flights procured by Department and Ministry of Trade and Industry
                              in September 2009

68.   Mr T Harris (DA) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (a) How many flights were procured by his Ministry and/or his
      department for use by departmental officials in September 2009, (b)
      what were the reasons for procuring each of these flights and (c) what
      was the total cost of all these flights?     CO238E

Mr T HARRIS: Chairperson, I move that Question 68, which is my question, be
converted to a question for a written reply. If you look at the question,
it is not appropriate for an oral response. I would be quite happy to
receive a written reply from the Deputy Minister.

And while I’m standing, let me add that on Question 69, the next one, I
have had a word with the Chairperson about the reason it was scrapped from
the Question Paper. He said he would get back to me but I just wanted to
reiterate that that question was appropriate for oral response. For some
reason, it was scrapped from the Question Paper. So I await a response as
to why.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, for the
benefit of all the members here, we will ask the Minister to actually give
a reply to Question 68. [Interjections.] Mr Watson, do you have anything to
say? No? Please proceed, Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms B M Ntuli): Chairperson, the
reply is as follow: With regard to the first part of the question, 492
domestic and international flights are included. With regard to the second
part of the question, the mandate of the DTI, particularly in relation to
trade, investment and export promotion, requires extensive international
interaction. In this regard, all travel was in connection with official
business and executed in accordance with the departmental travel and
transport policy and the guidelines in the ministerial handbook. Finally,
with regard to the third part of the question, the amount is
R3 549 599, 66. Thank you.

 Discussion on agreements to deregulate operation of African airlines in the
                        airspace of African countries

70.   Mr R A Lees (DA) asked the Minister of Public Enterprises:

      Whether she and/or any members of her department have entered into
      discussions with authorities of African countries and/or the African
      Union to secure agreements to deregulate the operations of African
      airlines in the air space of African countries; if not, why not; if
      so, what are the relevant details?
                       CO240E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Deputy Chairperson, neither I nor my
department have entered into discussions with the authorities of African
countries and/or the African Union to secure agreements to deregulate the
operations of African airlines in the airspace of African countries.
Both state-owned airlines have extensive African route networks. South
African Airways operates in 20 African countries, while SA Express operates
in six African countries connecting to the domestic and intercontinental
network of SAA, which is based at its hub airport, O R Tambo International
Airport.

Both SAA and SA Express are licensed by the International Air Licensing
Council to operate African routes established by means of bilateral air
service agreements negotiated by the Department of Transport and concluded
by my colleague, the Minister of Transport, who is promoting the
deregulation of inter-African air services. Whilst the Department of Public
Enterprises is consulted on these matters, this remains the mandate of the
Minister and Department of Transport. As Minister of Public Enterprises I,
therefore, have no authority to pursue air service negotiations with other
countries. Thank you.

     Upgrading of national roads in Mpumalanga and co-operation between
              provincial and national government in this regard

71.   Mr A Watson (DA) asked the Minister of Transport:

      (1)   (a) What progress has been made with the upgrading of the
           national roads in Mpumalanga and (b) what is the
            co-operation between his department and the provincial
           government of Mpumalanga in this regard;
      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         CO241E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Deputy Chairperson, I thank the hon
Watson for the question. The SA National Roads Agency Limited, Sanral, is
the agency that reports to the Department of Transport and is responsible
for the country’s proclaimed national roads.

I have a list of some eight roads that are currently under construction in
your province, Mpumalanga. I won’t read the whole list but it includes the
R37 between Sabie and Nelspruit; the N2 between Camden, Piet Retief and the
KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga border; and so on and so forth. We will
obviously supply the full list.

There is another list of some six roads where construction has recently
been completed. The list includes, amongst other things, some 30 kilometres
of the R23 between Volksrust and Perdekop, the R23 between Rietfontein and
Greylingstad, and so on. And then there is another list of some 18
programmes where construction is programmed to start in the next 12 to 24
months.

In some cases we are at the design phase, and in other cases we are still
at the planning phase. This list includes some 30 kilometres of the R23
from Perdekop to Platrand, etc. We will provide the full list. All of the
national roads within the network managed by Sanral have routine road
maintenance contracted during the day-to-day actions necessary to keep the
roads trafficable.

With regard to 1(b) of the question, the national and provincial
governments are jointly responsible for the road network at the national
and provincial levels. Sixteen provincial infrastructure plans are in place
to assist provinces with managing and maintaining the infrastructure
network.

With regard to part 2 of the question, the Minister of Transport is indeed
planning a visit to your province, the Mpumalanga province. Arrangements in
this regard have been made with the MEC for roads and transport in
Mpumalanga, and also with the Mbombela Municipality. Announcements on key
projects in Mpumalanga will be made during Minister Ndebele’s visit. Thank
you, Deputy Chairperson.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Deputy Chairperson, it would be unrealistic of me to ask
the Deputy Minister about the number of potholes in these roads, so I’ll
await the written replies. I thank him for attending to the question so
carefully. Thank you, Minister.

  Role of department in addressing customs clearance congestion at border-
             post facilities between South Africa and Mozambique

72.   Mr A Watson (DA) asked the Minister of Transport:

      Whether his department will play any role in addressing the serious
      problem of customs clearance congestion at the border-post facilities
      between Lebombo, South Africa and Ressano Garcia, Mozambique; if not,
      what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant
      details?         CO242E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, the Department of Transport
is represented in the Border Control Operational Co-ordination Committee,
BCOCC. It’s an interdepartmental structure which is responsible for co-
ordinating the activities and plans of various government departments and
agencies that are operating at the border crossings.

This particular co-ordinating committee, the BCOCC, is under the leadership
of Sars and is responsible for the implementation of a one-stop border post
at the Lebombo-Ressano Garcia border post, which you were specifically
asking about.
The construction work on the South African side will commence in the next
three months and will cover, amongst other things, the creation of a truck
clearance facility which will be set back approximately eight kilometres
outside the border crossing. There will also be a bypass road linking
Lebombo to Ressano Garcia.

This will help to expedite the processing of freight trucks. The intention
is to complete this phase by or before June 2010.

The Department of Transport is also providing input into the actual design
of the border crossing to ensure that sufficient lanes, including fast
lanes, are created to separate different types of traffic crossing the
border.

The Department of Transport, through the Cross-Border Road Transport
Agency, which falls under it, also provides inputs regarding the location
of cross-border taxi and bus facilities in and around the border. We
understand that the taxi facility is currently located right at the border
gate and this contributes to the conflict between passengers and vehicle
traffic.

There are a couple of other things we would like to mention. One of them is
the rail issue where the Department of Transport, in conjunction with the
Mpumalanga provincial government and Shosholoza Meyl, were in discussions
to revitalise the Komatipoort rail facility. The aim is to divert at least
some of the cross-border passengers as well as cargo traffic onto rail and
off the road.

Finally, the Department of Transport is in the process of developing a
freight movement optimisation plan for all major border crossings, which
includes the Lebombo crossing. The intention is to ensure an unencumbered
flow of both passenger and cargo traffic at these border crossings. Thank
you.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Minister for the
comprehensive answer.

The whole concept of the one-stop border post was initiated by the MCLI,
the Maputo Corridor Logistics Initiative, that was started way back by hon
Phosa. I know that they started this initiative because I worked with them
quite closely and I want to ask if there is any co-operation between the
Minister’s department and the MCLI, which is a body that is quite active.

If the Minister is not in contact with them, I would suggest that he does
get in touch with them. I say this because this is a very important aspect,
not only because of the traffic but also because of the crime that takes
place at this border post, as well as drug and human trafficking. We really
need action there as a matter of urgency. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, I cannot answer
categorically yes or no. I am sure there is co-operation and I certainly
hope so. The point that was raised by the hon member has been noted and I
will refer it to my department and particularly the officials involved in
this process.

I just want to add that you would have seen that the World Bank, during the
course of this week, published an interesting report on infrastructure in
Africa. It said that often the infrastructure is not bad, but when it hits
border-crossing posts, time saved on building decent infrastructure is
consumed in costly, problematic and poorly designed things. This certainly
also applies to some of our cross-border areas.

Thank you for that suggestion; I will certainly follow it up.

  Applications submitted to SA Bureau of Standards and processing of these
                                applications

73.   Mr K A Sinclair (Cope) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      How many (a) applications have been submitted to the SA Bureau of
      Standards, SABS, for approval in the 2008-09 financial year, (b) of
      these applications have been granted, (c) of these applications will
      be completed by the end of the 2008-09 financial year and (d) have
      been carried into the 2009-10 financial year for approval?
                       CO243E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Chairperson, I
would like to thank hon Sinclair for the question.

The reply is as follows: The South African Bureau of Standards, SABS, is
the national body responsible for the development of South African national
standards, Sans, in terms of the Standards Act, Act 8 of 2008.

The SABS, therefore, does not receive applications, but receives many
enquiries in relation to the South African national standards. Most of the
enquiries relate to the existing 6 489 national standards that are
available.

The SABS also receives regular requests for the development of new South
African national standards, or the amendment of the current national
standards. These requests are filtered and prioritised in terms of national
priorities.

In 2008-09, 643 new and amended South African national standards were
finalised. A consensus process is used to develop them. The average time
necessary for the development of a new South African national standard or
the amendment of a current South African national standard is 18 months to
2 years.

Over the next three-year period, the SABS will focus on the standards
development activities in South African national standards required by the
sectors prioritised in the National Industrial Policy Framework as well as
standards for the environment, energy efficiency and water efficiency.

The DTI and the SABS will also increase the SABS’s capacity and
appropriately resource work with regard to the South African national
standards. Thank you.

   Targets set for foreign economic representatives and inclusion of these
     targets in investment and trade promotion targets set for Trade and
                           Investment South Africa

74.   Mr K A Sinclair (Cope) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (1)   Whether his department has set any targets for foreign economic
           representatives, FERs, based in missions abroad with regard to
           investment and trade promotion; if not, what is the position in
           this regard; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether these targets are included in the investment and trade
           promotion targets set for Trade and Investment SA, Tisa; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        CO244E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Chairperson,
again I would like to thank hon Sinclair for the question.

The reply is as follows: The DTI is implementing a detailed foreign
economic office strategy that will allow this important instrument in the
export and investment promotion value chain to perform optimally.

An important aspect of this strategy is the synchronisation of the business
plans of the foreign economic offices with that of the DTI, including the
targets and outcomes that the DTI has committed to in the Medium-Term
Strategic Framework, MTSF.

These business plans are project-based and, in the case of investment and
investment pipelines, R40 billion is set as a consolidated target for this
financial year.

In view of the global economic downswing, export projects had to be
substantially amended and a concerted effort is under way also to set
quantitative targets for the foreign economic offices in this regard. These
targets are in line with what Trade and Investment South Africa, Tisa, has
committed itself to in its business plan and the MTSF. Thank you.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Chairperson, I would like to ask the Deputy Minister about
the DTI representatives in the foreign missions. I would like to know how
these representatives are trained in respect of the formulas to be followed
when dealing with a request from a specific country to partner or trade
with South Africa. Thank you.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Chairperson, the
answer to this question will be very substantive. I request that the hon
member give me time to give the answer in written form, which I could send
to him. Thank you.

    Disbursement in terms of Framework for South Africa’s Response to the
                   International Economic Crisis document

75.   Mr K A Sinclair (Cope) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (a) What are the budget amounts for the 2009-10 financial year for his
      department to disburse in terms of the document titled Framework for
      South Africa’s Response to the International Economic Crisis, (b) to
      which (i) departments and (ii) state-owned enterprises will these
      amounts be disbursed and (c) how much has been spent up to 30
      September 2009?              CO245E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Deputy
Chairperson, the answer to Question 75 is: The department did not
specifically budget for disbursement in terms of the document entitled
Framework for South Africa’s Response to the International Economic Crisis.


However, with regard to the rules of the Small and Medium Enterprise
Development Programme, SMEDP, incentive schemes were subsequently reviewed
to accommodate firms that are in distress and cannot satisfy the original
criteria on which their applications were approved. Notwithstanding the
above, the Industrial Development Corporation, IDC, which is self-funding,
is being utilised as the main source of funding in the response to the
economic crisis.

For this purpose, the Industrial Development Corporation, IDC, has set
aside R6,1 billion over the period of the 2009-10 and 2010-11 financial
years. The Department of Trade and Industry, DTI, does not disburse any
funds to departments and state-owned enterprises.

With respect to the SMEDP schemes, the department has disbursed over a
billion rand in the 2008-09 financial year. And for the period 1 April to
30 October 2009, a total of R758 million has been disbursed. These
disbursements are inclusive of disbursements to firms in distress.

For the period 1 April to 30 September 2009, the IDC has approved R988
million for companies in distress as a result of the economic crisis. I
thank you, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Gunda, could you
allow all other members to be attentive and stop having your own conference
over there. Thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, thank you to the Deputy Minister for
her answer to the question.

I want to raise the following question: Given the enormity of the economic
crisis and the impact that it has had on South Africa, wouldn’t the
Minister believe that it was an oversight from the department’s side not to
directly budget for this to assist in helping to address the crisis?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Deputy
Chairperson, thank you for the follow-up question. I would like to say to
the hon member, yes, there is this enormous crisis that has befallen South
Africa. I’d also like to say to the hon member that owing to the resources
that we have at hand, we couldn’t budget for everything, but we are surely
trying our best to make sure that  businesses that are in distress do not
close shop. Thank you very much.

Mr T HARRIS: Deputy Chairperson, the framework document refers to the
development of incentives for investments in the programme to create large
numbers of green jobs. Now I gather from the Deputy Minister’s response
that she won’t be able to give figures in terms of budget disbursements. If
she can’t do that, can she update us on the status of the incentives to
create these green jobs?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Deputy
Chairperson, for me to give you an extensive answer on the incentives that
we have, I will need to do that in writing and give you all the incentives
in relation to the co-operatives, small businesses and so on. That will
require me to sit down and give all the incentives in writing so that I
give the correct figures that you need. Thank you very much.

 Provisions made with regard to promotion and adoption of energy- efficient
  and renewable energy technology in revised guidelines for the Enterprise
    Investment Programme, Manufacturing Investment Programme and Tourism
                              Support Programme

76.   Mr K A Sinclair (Cope) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      What provisions have been made in the revised guidelines pertaining to
      the (a) Enterprise Investment Programme, EIP, and (b)(i) Manufacturing
      Investment Programme, MIP and (ii) Tourism Support Programme, TSP,
      with regard to the promotion and adoption of (aa) energy-efficient and
      (bb) renewable energy technology?
            CO246E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Chairperson, the
Enterprise Investment Programme, EIP, with its subprogrammes, the
Manufacturing Investment Programme, MIP, and the Tourism Support Programme,
TSP, is aimed at incentivising capital investment in the manufacturing and
tourism sector.

From a review of past incentive programmes managed by the department, we
have learnt that we should not try to achieve too many objectives with one
incentive scheme. In line with this, the department has tried to ensure
that the EIP remains focused. The MIP prioritises investments that are job-
intensive and those that are in sectors that the Department of Trade and
Industry has prioritised.

The TSP prioritises investment that creates decent jobs outside the
traditional tourism clusters of Johannesburg, Durban and Cape Town. There
are other incentive instruments that will be available, with the emphasis
on promoting the adoption of energy-efficient technologies such as the
industrial policy tax incentives under section 121 of the Income Tax, Act
58 of 1962. Thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I want to enquire from the Deputy Minister if
the department is satisfied with the tourism support programme, with a
specific emphasis on the impact that it might have on emerging
entrepreneurs regarding the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Chairperson, as
the department, we would like to see more tourism businesses coming up. We
will never be satisfied with the existing ones. We would like to see more,
especially small and medium-sized tourism businesses.

In respect of that, I would also like to say that we really think that we
must work harder to make sure that this happens. For that reason I want to
make it clear that we are totally unsatisfied that we have covered all the
sectors of our communities in relation to tourism businesses in South
Africa. Thank you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That Rule 239(1), which provides, inter alia, that the consideration of a
   Bill may not commence before at least three working days have elapsed
   since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the purposes of
   consideration of the Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009]
   (National Assembly – sec 77) and the Repeal of the Black Administration
   Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] (National
   Assembly – sec 75) on Tuesday, 17 November 2009.
Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE - MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET
                              POLICY STATEMENT

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS - MEDIUM-TERM
                           BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, when the Minister of Finance
tabled the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, MTBPS, in the National
Assembly on 27 October 2009, we once again reminded Parliament, and South
Africans in general, that this was our statement of intent and that this
was a policy statement intended to serve as a mechanism for Parliament to
begin the engagement in the Budget process.

As we know, there are three stages at which Parliament can engage with the
Budget process, namely that of influencing it, that of exercising oversight
over it, and that of holding us to account.

The statement sets out the economic contexts and assumptions that inform
the following year’s Budget as well as the framework in which the Budget is
prepared. It has four components. The first is that of the fiscal
framework; the second is that of government’s spending priorities; the
third concerns the division of revenue among the spheres of government; and
the fourth contains the tabulation of all the conditional grants to follow.


I want to take this opportunity to thank the NCOP for the thorough and yet
speedy manner in which it has deliberated on the MTBPS. I would like to
stress, as I have previously indicated, that this is an important process
through which the opinions of the public and civil society can be drawn
into the Budget process.

I would like to reaffirm our commitment as government to ensuring that, no
matter what the situation, we will never compromise on the five major
priorities as outlined in the manifesto of the ruling party. I also note
that these priorities received widespread support and that the comments by
various groups to the committee reaffirm the correctness of the approach.

I would like to repeat what these priorities are. The first is education,
where we are focusing on improving the quality of the foundation phase of
education. We are going to strengthen further education and training
enrolment and we are also going to place a particular emphasis on teacher
development and school-building.
The second priority is that of health. Here we have focused particularly on
fighting HIV/Aids and tuberculosis, the improvement of hospital management
and implementing the National Health Insurance.

The third priority is that of creating sustainable jobs, implementing the
framework agreement that government adopted with labour in February this
year, accelerating the roll-out of the Expanded Public Works Programme,
EPWP, Phase 2, and the reorientation of our business and industrial support
measures to support job creation and prevent job losses.

The fourth priority is that of rural development. We want to implement a
comprehensive rural development strategy that focuses on raising rural
incomes, investment in rural infrastructure, supporting farmers and
implementing land reform.

The fifth priority is that of fighting crime and corruption. We are going
to focus on better integration in the sector, enhanced IT systems and
increasing the number of personnel, particularly detectives and forensic
specialists. We are also going to focus on better court case management.

This spending is broadly in line with the priorities and we welcome the
suggestions made at the hearing as well as those reflected in the reports
of both the Finance and Appropriations committees. We note, in particular,
that rural development has featured quite high in that report. Land
restitution has also been raised. We will also consider these matters in
preparing the Appropriation Bill for next year.

We will also look seriously at proposals around water, at proposals around
taking the EPWPs to rural areas, and at proposals supporting our
municipalities in building capacity and making sure that service delivery
is enhanced.

The issue of savings featured quite prominently in our MTBPS and in the
reports. It is clear that there is an in-depth process under way. We have
only started and we still have a very long way to go. We indicated that we
were able, through savings, to identify R14,5 billion in the national
departments and R12 billion in the provinces. This was made possible by
making sure that we cut the frills and focus on the core functions of each
department. It was also made possible by making sure that we root out
corruption and all sorts of maladministration.

This process is about culture change. One of the initiatives involves
improving the procurement outcomes. Here, centralising the procurement of
some large projects was considered. In this regard, an agreement was struck
with the Department of Health in which it was established that we are going
to deal with their procurement as our pilot project. We want to reiterate
that we need the support and the vigilance of Parliament as an institution
in order for us to succeed in this quest.

We think the suggestion of the committee to review the conditions of the
municipal infrastructure grant, MIG, is very useful. We will liaise with
the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs to review
these conditions. This process has already begun.

We are also concerned about the issue of land restitution. There is a
significant gap between the allocated resources and the cost of completing
the land restitution process.

We can assure you that we are working with Minister Nkwinti to find ways to
complete this process as speedily as possible, given the resource
constraints. Most of us agree that the present model is unaffordable and
the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform is exploring ways to
achieve the same objective, but in a more affordable and cost-effective
manner.

The latest employment data indicates that we have now lost close to a
million jobs since the onset of the crisis. This is about 7% of the
workforce and most of the people who have lost their jobs are young people,
domestic workers and people in the informal sector.

Let me indicate that signs of a recovery are beginning to be seen but lots
of uncertainty lies ahead. Positive signs can be seen in manufacturing and
mining data, but consumption remains weak and business investment is still
very low.

We pledge to work with Parliament to develop the capacity to process the
MTBPS in terms of the new legislation and the Budget. We are also prepared
to look at the timeframes for the Budget to make the parliamentary process
more robust and useful. We agree that we need more oversight from
Parliament in order to monitor the quality of spending and whether
departments are taking measures to reduce costs and improve service
delivery.

With these words I once again want to thank the committees for having
worked on the MTBPS and want to say that I look forward to its
implementation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C J DE BEER: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and members, it’s a
privilege to participate in this debate. On 27 October 2009, the Minister
of Finance complied with section 28 of the Public Finance Management Act,
which requires the Ministry and the Department of Finance to present to
Parliament the multiyear budget projections and also to set out the Budget
framework, fiscal policy, revenue projections, spending estimates,
borrowing requirements and assumptions concerning debt interest cuts over
the period.

The relevant committees of Parliament were assigned to process the Medium-
Term Budget Policy Statement, MTBPS, and the Adjustments Appropriation and
to present their recommendations and responses, in this case, to the NCOP
today. The committee had to perform its duties within a very short space of
time, given the parliamentary schedule. Joint meetings were held with the
Standing Committee on Finance in the National Assembly. Substantive
comments and useful inputs were received from business, organised labour
and respected economists.

The committee reflected on the following: the state of the economy,
economic policy outlook, fiscal and monetary policies, spending priorities
and the Budget deficit. The MTBPS was tabled in the biggest economic
downturn since the Great Depression. It is an environment that is hostile
to the poor and the emerging economies - and it is not their fault.

The economic downturn has required a co-ordinated global response that
focuses on new approaches to governance, regulation and greater recognition
of all role-players, including developing countries.

The closure of factories, small farms that fail, people who struggle to get
by on reduced incomes - all of these sometimes lead to hunger. When hunger
knocks at the door, then human dignity and survival are at risk.

As we speak, the economy is very slow in recovering, but it will take a
long time and a tiresome process to come to where we want it. We must do
things differently with less money to address our people’s needs. This also
means taking tough decisions that will sometimes be unpopular.

We must commend the Minister of Finance and also the Deputy Minister on the
fact that the country’s national framework response to the global crisis is
indeed yielding positive results. Economic recovery can only be realised if
proper and sound economic policies, with better co-ordination between all
spheres of government, are implemented and monitored.

The committee commends the Minister and the Finance team for protecting key
priority areas as outlined in the state of the nation address.

With regard to corporate South Africa, a few lessons can be learned about,
firstly, unsustainable banking practices to maximise profit and huge
bonuses to executives; and secondly, overvalued corporate assets and stock
market shares. This led to high levels of debt and more unsustainable
transactions in the world economy.

Goethe wrote, and I quote:


  Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must do.

And what must we do? We accept the MTBPS as printed and submitted to the
committee and to Parliament by the Minister. But what do we do now?

The first thing is the creation of decent jobs. There must be a balance
between welfare and work; we are not a welfare state. Do not abandon the
inflation targeting now. Get consensus on the fight against corruption. As
we sit here, from different political parties and backgrounds, let’s fight
corruption.

We need qualified and quality teachers, doctors, engineers, chief financial
officers and policemen - the people who form the frontline. We need a
smaller administration and more operational people. We need to address the
structure of the economy and address it seriously - the legacy of the
economy we inherited. Progressive thinkers in the world and in South Africa
must have a battle of ideas so that they can think and do things
differently.

We must be bold and decisive in what we want to do and where we want to go.
We must invest in fast-tracking public finance management skills. As
parliamentarians, we must, through our various committees, vigorously
monitor expenditure patterns in government departments and parastatals, and
support Operation Clean Audit.

We should also do our oversight in our constituencies more seriously and
thoroughly and address, as a matter of urgency, the mismatch between
billions of rands being pumped into provincial coffers and the impact of
this on the quality of people’s lives.

The focus must be on the core functions. A comprehensive expenditure and
service delivery review per department must be done, specifically on
education and health, to determine gaps and inefficiencies that must be
addressed. We need to strengthen oversight roles and responsibilities
through improved planning and tighter monitoring and evaluation.

It is important that interventions improve the performance of provinces as
they relate to planning, monitoring and evaluation; and feed into the
National Planning Commission and the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit in the
Presidency.

Having considered the 2009 MTBPS and also conducted public hearings with
the Standing Committee on Finance, the Select Committee on Finance made the
following projections and recommendations: Firstly, the setting up of the
Parliamentary budget office in the next term in order to support the work
of the Finance and Appropriations committees, especially during a value-for-
money oversight and accountability exercise. It would therefore be ideal
for the director of the parliamentary budget office to be appointed in
January 2010.

Secondly, we recommend the strengthening of the working relationship
amongst parliament’s committees and Statistics SA, the newly established
Ministry for performance monitoring and evaluation and the Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs department in order to design and
implement a co-ordinated approach to value-for-money oversight and
accountability.

The committees should be provided with sufficient capacity in terms of
administrative, content and research support in order to fulfil their
legislative and oversight function.

The parliamentary programme should allow adequate time for parliamentary
committees to engage with the MTBPS. The NA and the NCOP should expedite
the process of reviewing the current Southern Africa Customs Union, or
Sacu, revenue formula. The distribution and transfer of revenue to other
member states forms a critical part in terms of the amount of revenue the
economy generates.

The new money bills amendment Act requires that members of this House, as a
matter of urgency, take a keen interest in the Budget process as it gives
Parliament more powers and clarity on how best we can perform our oversight
and responsibilities.

Chairperson, I take the opportunity to ask this House to approve and adopt
this report in the NCOP. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S S MAZOSIWE: Chairperson, first of all, let me, on behalf of the ANC,
join the speakers before me in supporting the report on the MTBPS.
Secondly, I want to say from the outset that we have sound economic
policies. Our finances are in good hands and, therefore, the ANC, once
more, supports the direction which the government is following with regard
to economic policies. We are moving forward; we are prospering as a
country.

The MTBPS 2009 sets out the policy framework that will inform the 2010
Budget allocation. It is an indication of how fiscal and monetary policies,
expenditure and revenue will be structured over the next year. Therefore,
the MTBPS represents government’s vision and set of priorities by means of
which it intends to change the lives of our people.

It is important to note that the MTBPS looks into the following areas: the
assessment of the economic climate; revision of the fiscal framework; the
containing of government’s spending priorities; and the division of revenue
among the spheres of government – national, provincial and local. We
adopted this strategy in order to make sure that our policy brings
certainty and predictability to all spheres of government, in so far as the
Budget is concerned.

It is true that these days nobody wonders what the Budget for next year
will look like; nobody wonders what the Budget will look like in two years’
time, because the ANC government has made sure that Budget reform in this
country is taking root and is understood by everyone. Most importantly,
everybody in the country is now able to take part in the Budget hearings
and make inputs so that their lives can be improved on a daily basis.

It is, therefore, important for us to note that our country is moving in
the right direction; the ANC is leading this pack in such a way that we are
able to improve the lives of our people. I need to indicate, however, that
we are discussing the MTBPS within the context of an economic crisis, as
mentioned by the previous speakers.

We have been hit hard by the economic meltdown, but we are pleased to note
that our government has already made certain interventions in order to save
our economy. This has been explained by the Deputy Minister of Finance, who
answered questions on economic development in the country when he alluded
to a number of steps taken by our parastatals to assist our communities to
relieve their economic plight.

Reduced revenue projections are envisaged for 2009, as a result of the
economic downturn. We are also pleased and encouraged that, although this
country is projecting a 1,9% growth in the economy in 2009, it will improve
by 1,5% in 2010, according to figures supplied by the National Treasury.

China and India are probably two of the few countries that are projecting
significant growth over the same period. We have read the documents
supplied, again by the National Treasury, in which they are saying that
China is projecting 8,5% and 9% growth in the economy in 2009 and 2010
respectively; and India 5,4% growth in 2009 and 6,4% in 2010. We, however,
need to learn from the experiences of these emerging economic powerhouses
and find out what it is that they have done correctly to realise this kind
of growth.

The ANC has, however, looked into this economy and prioritised many areas
that have been alluded to by the Deputy Minister and also by the
chairperson of the committee, one of which is health. We need to improve
the health profile of all South Africans. Access to health should be the
concern of all citizens in this country. This matter is so serious that one
day we should have a debate on it.

The president of America, President Obama, has succeeded in convincing
Americans to adopt his health care plan, including insurance for the poor,
something that has never been seen in America. Today they boast an
insurance plan for the poor in so far as health care is concerned.

Sadly enough, in this country there are still people who are sceptical
about the idea of making sure that health care is accessible to everyone.
They go out to people and garner votes, and once the votes have been
delivered to their parties, they pursue policies other than those that
their constituencies would want to identify with. It is sad that we have
such people in our country, in this day and age.

We need to intensify the fight against crime and corruption as alluded to,
again, by the Deputy Minister and the chairperson. It is a scourge, and we
need to close all the fronts so that criminals do not have a market.

We need to inform the police whenever we see criminal activities in our
communities. We need to manage our resources very carefully, so that we can
save a lot of money and redirect some of it to other programmes.

We have noted the improved government spending on electricity and
infrastructure. If you go around the country, anywhere in the country, you
will see roads being constructed and you will see massive road construction
projects. Sometimes we come across stop-go controls and we wait for a few
minutes in order to make sure that those people doing the work do it
properly. We have seen airports and stadiums being built through this
massive infrastructure investment in our country.
In conclusion, the municipal infrastructure grant, MIG, projects need to be
speeded up. Rural development is the cornerstone of the economic
improvement of our rural communities. They will, after all, be the main
beneficiaries of our hard-earned democracy. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr T HARRIS: Chairperson, colleagues, the finance Minister and his team
must be commended for doing an admirable job in a very difficult situation.
A R70 million hole in the budget is a tough thing to fill. Unfortunately,
it is not yet clear how we will be able to fill it or even if we will be
able to fill it

The most alarming calculation in this Budget is that government debt, as a
percentage of GDP, is now 30%, but it will rise to 40% in 2012. It hasn’t
been at these levels since the apartheid administration managed us into a
fiscal hole.

Of course, this figure is partially a reflection of the Minister’s stated
approach to respond to a recession by maintaining the level of state
expenditure - a response that the DA has supported in general. I say “in
general” because we have serious problems with the fact that a large chunk
of this expenditure will be ploughed into propping up poorly managed and
often dysfunctional parastatals that should have been privatised long ago.
The amounts concerned are staggering. In 2008-09, R200 billion worth of
financial aid was provided to state-owned enterprises. Notwithstanding the
dubious destinations of much of this government expenditure, we support the
maintenance of spending levels during a recession as an important
countercyclical strategy. The question is: What happens to the fiscal
balance once the recovery kicks in? The answer is that the finance Minister
and the Ministry will have to man up to the fact that expenditure growth
needs to be seriously constrained from next year.

In this regard, the DA supports the finance committee’s reports in general,
but cannot support the theoretical proposals in that they are clearly
unaffordable. The programming Whip outlined some of them a few moments ago.
In this regard, my one regret is that the fine proposals of the chair of
the Finance committee were not included in the committee report. I hope
he’s not nervous of putting forward his views in the sister committee of
Appropriations, chaired by our young lion from the North West. This is
because the budget deficit has doubled from February’s estimates to a
massive 7,6% of GDP. This is completely out of line with other emerging
markets and is similar to deficit levels in rich countries that have many
more resources to cope with higher debt levels. Yes, France has a budget
deficit of 8,2%, Japan has 7,7% and the euro area as a whole has 6,5%. But
look at Brazil, Poland and Argentina. Brazil’s deficit is at 3,2%, Poland’s
is at 2,3% and Argentina’s is at a humble 1%.

We are completely out of line with economies of a similar size and
structure as ours. We have neither the natural resources nor the scale to
easily work ourselves out of this debt situation, as developed economies
do. More alarmingly, we are now the only economy in Africa that is
shrinking. Every single other African economy is growing, but ours is
shrinking by 1,9% a year. We are now a drag on the continent.

Of course, growth will return to the South African economy in time. With
good management and a moderation of expenditure plans, Treasury will be
able to see us back onto the path of fiscal sustainability. In the title to
the first chapter of the policy statement, the Minister calls this
objective “Supporting the Recovery”.

That’s all very well. But what kind of growth path will we return to? This
is a million rand question for this administration. It’s a question implied
in the second part of that title, which is “Transforming the Economy”. This
is a question that the Treasury appears to have begun thinking about
answering in this policy statement. This is because it is obvious to all
that the jobs crisis remains our most pressing priority in South Africa.
The old ideas we have rolled out for 15 years are not going to work. We
need fresh thinking on creating what the statement calls “a massive
expansion of employment”.

Firstly, we need thinking like my party’s proposals on opportunity vouchers
to give young South Africans access to work and skills development.
Secondly, we need wage subsidies to lower the cost of employment; and
thirdly, we need tax incentives to stimulate job creation.

I am pleased to report that each of these proposals is in this document
that we are debating today. If the hon members here haven’t read it yet, I
encourage them to read it. There are three proactive responses to creating
jobs that go far beyond the spin-heavy job opportunities of the EPWP, and
the DA fully endorses their development into legislation.

These three policy ideas didn’t receive much press coverage, but they were
bravely included in the statement by the Treasury that appears to have
finally had enough of this country being crippled by an inability to employ
our people.

Another brave inclusion was the extraordinary admission on page 23 of the
statement - under the section “Global Lessons for Growth” that countries
such as Australia and Korea, where prices and wages have adjusted more
quickly to weak demand and rising unemployment, have been able to
demonstrate a competitive edge.

I enquired about the policy implications of this statement in a question
for oral reply that the Minister was meant to answer in this House today,
but it was struck from the Question Paper under mysterious circumstances.
Chair, you can be assured, as agreed between you and me earlier today, that
I will ask the question again.

This is because the answer to this question, which is the reform of our
real economy on the one hand, and on the other hand, our labour market to
remove rigidities, is the key to a true transformation of our economy.

If the Treasury and other mainline economic Ministries like Trade and
Industry, Economic Development, and the Ministry responsible for the
planning commission can sort out their differences and appoint someone from
among their ranks to drive this reform, then we will finally begin tackling
unemployment in our country. I thank you. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo waleNdlu baba Mabhoko, iPhini likaSihlalo,
mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe nePhini lakho uMadlokovu, nabanye oNgqongqoshe
abakhona namalunga ahloniphekile aleNdlu. Madlokovu, lesi sikhathi
sesabiwomali sokuphela konyaka, yisikhathi esibaluleke kakhulu sokuthi
kubhekelelwe thina esihlala emakhaya. Ngikusho lokhu nje ngoba mina
ngihlala emakhaya, ezilalini- ezishiwo abaseKoloni. KwaNongoma yilapho
ukuhlupheka kudlange kakhulu khona ngakho-ke kufanele nisibhekele impela
ngoba laphaya eKhayelitsha babebhekwe kangconywana khona nakuba
babebandlululwa nabo kodwa babengafani nathi thina esisemakhaya.

Sikholwa ukuthi ngeke siyithole imisebenzi thina ngoba akukho mafemu
angakhiwa le ngakithi, ngakho-ke kufuneka nibheke emkhakheni wezolimo kube
yiwona enifaka imali kakhulu kuwo ukuze abantu bakithi bazoba nokudla badle
basuthe, bezilimela le emakhaya. Ayikho enye indlela esingabuye senze ngayo
ngoba ayikho imisebenzi emakhaya ngoba awekho amafemu.

Ifemu yethu enkulu esiye sithembele kuyo uhulumeni uqobo oyaye asiqashe
sibe ngomabhalane emahhovisini akhe. Ngizomshayela ihlombe uhulumeni wakho
uma sengibone kahle ukuthi izidingo zabantu ziyafezeka ngokuthi
kusetshenzwe ngokuhlanganyela. Kodwa-ke uhulumeni udinga ukulekelelwa ngazo
zonke izindlela – ngokuthi uma esebheda, ashaywe kahle agxekwe ngendlela
ekahle eyakhayo. Ngoba uma ezogxekwa ngokungakhi, mina njengendoda
yakwaZulu angigxeki umuntu kodwa ngingenakho engikubekayo okungcono
okungenziwa.
Ngiyahambisana nalesi sabiwomali esikhona, kodwa ngicela ukuthi nibhekelele
izindawo zasemakhaya. Indaba yamapulazi impela angiyizwa kahle, ngoba
asinawo amapulazi ezindaweni zasemakhaya kodwa sinezindawo zokulima. Uma
nithi nizobheka amapulazi thina esingebona abalimi nizosenzenjani? Yizinto
ezifana nalezo mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe ekufanele nizibhekelele kakhulu
kubantu bakithi. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech
follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson of this House hon Mabhoko, Deputy
Chairperson, hon Minister and your deputy hon Madlokovu, other Ministers
present here as well as hon members of this House. Madlokovu, this year-end
budget allocation is very important because it comes at a time when we, the
people, who are living in the rural areas are supposed to be catered for. I
am saying this because I live in the rural areas – ezilalini, as they are
referred to by the people of the Eastern Cape. Poverty is rife in
KwaNongoma; therefore you need to really look out for us because in
Khayelitsha they are better catered for. Although they were also
discriminated against, their situation was not the same as that for us who
are living in the rural areas.

We think that we will never find employment as factories cannot be built in
our area. You therefore need to look into the agricultural sector and you
need to allocate more funds to it so that our people can have food to curb
their hunger, through ploughing out there in the most remote areas. We have
no other alternatives because there are no employment opportunities in the
rural areas because there are no factories.

The biggest factory on which we pin our hopes is the government itself, as
it appoints us as clerks in its offices. I will applaud your government
once I have seen that the needs of the people are being met through working
together. However, the government needs to be supported by all means – but
it also needs to be called to order and criticised constructively if it is
going astray. Because if it is destroyed, I as a man from KwaZulu-Natal
will not just criticise someone without coming up with something better.
I support this Budget allocation, but I am requesting you to cater for the
rural areas. I really do not understand the issue regarding farms, because
we do not have farms in the rural areas but ploughing fields. And if you
say you are going to consider the farms, what are you going to do about us
who are not farmers? It is such issues, hon Minister, that you must look at
when it comes to our people. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, Ministers and the honourable House, at this
time, when people are losing jobs left, right and centre, government’s
single most important priority should be saving the jobs that are still
there and creating new jobs in sustainable industries. With a projected
growth of 1,5% in 2010 - the year of the World Cup - very few of the
unemployed will find work.

Now is the time for this government to implement a massive solar geyser
programme. This will provide work, inject money into the economy, reduce
electricity demand, enhance health, help households facing increased
electricity bills and protect the environment. An expenditure of such a
nature will help 100% of our people and prepare our nation to reach out
into Africa with solar solutions for the continent.

Cope advocates an activist state, and this is the first thing we would have
done. South Africa has always been identified as a diamond country, yet
what are we doing in respect of setting up industries to polish the super
diamonds we have in this country? The demand for super diamonds is going to
grow by leaps and bounds.

Cope is satisfied with the salary adjustments which are being budgeted for
to accommodate occupation-specific dispensation agreements. Our party
welcomes the R12 million expenditure.

Of great concern to us, as Cope and the select committee, is the lack of
spending on infrastructure in various departments. Respective Ministers and
directors-general should have their travel, administrative and personnel
budgets for the new year slashed by a corresponding amount. This amount
should then be added to the unspent amount to double it. We take a very dim
view of departments that do not prioritise spending on infrastructure. This
House must find a way of censuring them.

This year, R524,9 million is being given to Public Works. About a quarter
of this amount will be used to renovate houses of Ministers and to upgrade
their offices. Who will believe that this is unforeseen and unavoidable
expenditure? Let us be partners, please, Minister. Let us have the exact
details of what is happening.

Now I come to Rural Development and Land Reform. Here the budget was sliced
from R4,4 billion to R1,7 billion. As usual, rural development is taking a
back seat. This government’s failure to promote economic growth in our
rural areas will see more people migrating into towns and cities. Most
towns and cities cannot meet the service demands of these people.

Honourable House, I now come to Education. As government is pulling back
from OBE, it is now going ahead with OBG. [Interjections.] Thank you. [Time
expired.]

Mr T E CHAANE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister,
hon members, on 27 October 2009 the Minister of finance hon Pravin Gordhan,
tabled a Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, outlining the budget
priorities of government for the medium term. The MTBPS was tabled together
with the Appropriation Bill. These were later referred to the Select
Committee on Appropriations for consideration in terms of its mandate.
Among its responsibilities in terms of the MTBPS, the committee is required
to consider and report on the following: the spending priorities of
national government for the next three years; the proposed division of
revenue between spheres of government and between arms of government for
the next three years; and the proposed substantial adjustments to
conditional grants to provinces and local government, if any.

In his foreword to the MTBPS, the Minister of Finance pointed out that as a
country our constitutional vision enjoins us to, and I quote:

  ... improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of
  each person as we build a nation based on economic values, social justice
  and human rights.


This is in line with the ANC’s understanding that the most pressing
challenges that confront our people today are unemployment, poverty and
inequality. It reiterates the party’s determination to halve unemployment
and poverty by 2014 and to substantially reduce social and economic
inequalities. The Minister made sound and realistic assurances and calmed
the waters by presenting one of the most balanced policy statements during
very difficult times.

The fiscal framework makes available an additional R78 billion for
spending. Additional savings of about R14,5 billion at national level and
R2,6 billion at provincial level are expected to contribute to financing
new priorities. The revised total expenditure estimate for 2009-10 is R781,
4 billion, growing to R834,9 billion the following year and reaching R954
billion in 2012- 13.

It increases baseline allocations for departments, provinces and local
government, with departments considered strategic to policy implementation
getting a fair share of the cake.

Although this results in deficits for the coming three years, thus putting
our country into debt, it is encouraging that most economists agree that,
as much as the amount is large by South African standards, it is not
particularly large within the current crisis response paradigm.

Even the economists from Idasa support this view by saying that:

  South Africa’s response remains consistent with that of the G20 countries
  and envisaged levels of indebtedness are not in excess of that of the
  majority of these countries.


So the DA should not worry; we are on course.

Chairperson, I stand here to report, without any fear of contradiction,
that the budget priorities over the medium term support policy priorities,
that is, social spending, infrastructure expansion, the fight against
crime, education, health and job creation. This shows that our government
is committed to continued spending even if growth is expected to recover
slowly and tax revenue even more slowly. It indeed does not have a choice
given the poverty, the inequality and the unemployment that continue to mar
our democracy.

Both the Adjustments Appropriation Bill and the MTBPS give hope to our
people that many promises made by the ANC during the election campaign will
be achieved. They firmly and convincingly lead us on a path towards the
achievement of commitments made by the President during his May 09
inauguration speech, when he had this to say to the nation and the world,
and I quote:


  For as long as there are South Africans who die from preventable
  diseases; for as long as there are workers who struggle to feed their
  families; for as long as there are communities without clean water,
  decent shelter or proper sanitation; for as long as there are rural
  dwellers unable to make a decent living from the land on which they live;
  for as long as there are children who do not have the means or the
  opportunity to receive a decent education, we shall not rest, and we dare
  not falter, in our drive to eradicate poverty.


This policy directive does exactly what the President further said during
the state of the nation address, and I quote:

  The economic downturn will affect the pace at which our country is able
  to address the social and economic challenges it faces. But it will not
  alter the direction of our development.


  Since the implementation of our programme will take place in the face of
  the economic downturn, we will have to act prudently - no wastage, no
  rollovers of funds - every cent must be spent wisely and fruitfully. We
  must cut our cloth according to our size.

We should commend the Ministry for being a good example in this regard.

Chairperson, allow me to conclude by saying that the 2009 MTBPS strikes a
positive balance of priorities in the wake of the recession. It made a
strong policy position to evaluate spending in terms of impact assessment
and efficiency in order to ensure value for money and reprioritisation
towards higher-impact priorities.

The statement also covers significant areas identified in the Medium-Term
Strategic Framework, MTSF. There are, however, some weaknesses within the
statement, as identified in the committee report, that require some
consideration. It is encouraging to hear from the Deputy Minister here
today that they found such committee recommendations useful and are busy
considering them.

Hon members, the stage is now set for us as Parliament to play our
oversight role, to ensure that departmental budgets are in line with the
set priorities, to hold everyone accountable and ensure that where there is
deviation, noncompliance, waste of funds, etc, necessary corrective
measures are put in place by the executive.

In conclusion, let me remind our opposition partners that as the ANC, we
always make sure that we don’t forget the people who mandated us to come to
this Parliament. As parties in Parliament, the fact that we are
representing different people tells a story that our views, approaches and
strategies will not always be the same. It is most fortunate that we have
chosen this path as the ANC and we believe that we are on track.

Chairperson, on that note I recommend the adoption of the MTBPS. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I now call upon the Deputy Minister to respond
to the debate. [Applause.] I can see some of you are feeling very cold, but
some of you are asleep. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: It’s after lunch, Chairperson. [Laughter.]
This depends on what some of us do during lunch.

Chairperson, once again let me thank this House, particularly the Select
Committee on Finance and the committee on appropriations, for the work they
have done on this report. I want to recommit our department to ensuring
that we take your recommendations seriously, as the hon Chaane has
indicated.

I did indicate earlier that the short time that was given to Parliament to
deal with the MTBPS is regretted, and we trust that in future we will be
allowed more space. This was indeed a peculiar year. We trust that next
year, once all systems are in place, we will be able to deal with this, hon
Chairperson De Beer.

We are all aware of the current situation and the current economic climate
in which this MTBPS was tabled - the issue of loss of jobs and the issue of
the origins of the crisis that we are in. A lot of people have alluded to
this. We trust that with our sound economic system, we were better placed
to weather the storm. That, however, did not spare us from the wrath and
the severity of the storm.

Chairperson De Beer also reminded us of the important point we made in the
MTBPS – that of balancing the welfare state and whether we would have the
trade-off between welfare and the creation of employment. The issue that
needs to be looked at quite seriously is that of addressing the structure
of the economy. We would all agree that no matter what we do, because of
the skewed nature of our economy, it will continue to widen the gap between
the haves and have-nots - even if it grows.

We also thank the committee for their support on Operation Clean Audit.
Both Houses in Parliament agree with us and emphasise that we need to
tighten oversight, monitoring and evaluation.

As the chairperson has indicated, the issue of the establishment of a
budget office is a critical area, as is adequate support for
parliamentarians in order for them to discharge their responsibilities.

It is very difficult to say anything after members have all indicated that
they are in full support of our statement. Even though Mr Harris pretended
not to agree with the MTBPS, he quoted from the statement. He was very
accurate in quoting from the statement, except that he said that it is DA
policy. So we are finding each other. They say no matter how right-wing you
are, you will always find the left wing somewhere! [Laughter.] So, I am
pleased, Mr Harris, that you have finally found the left wing.

The other question he raised is that he is not too sure how we are going to
finance the deficit we find ourselves in. This is the situation we find
ourselves in, and we trust that it is a counter-cyclical measure we have
allowed ourselves to get into. You will recall that before we got into this
situation, we were in a moderate surplus.

The promise and undertaking we make is that once the economy recovers, we
will have to reduce the budget deficit which we find ourselves in. But, at
the moment, the trade-off we have cannot be done by reducing the budget
deficit at the current time and then compromising our priorities. So, the
budget deficit is the only way out.

On the kind of growth path we are going to return to, we have all agreed
that if we invest in the productive capacity of our economy, we will be
better placed to benefit beyond this recession and even after the Fifa
World Cup, which has spurred on a number of the infrastructure development
projects we are involved in.

Baba uMageba, Mntwana, izwakele indaba yakho yokuthuthukisa izindawo zethu
zasemakhaya. Ngenhlanhla nami ngiphuma khona endaweni yasemakhaya ngakho-ke
usizi siyalwazi futhi asiluzwa ngendaba sikhuluma ngoba siphuma kulona
thina uqobo lwethu. umehluko phakathi kwethu nabanye abantu esingaphumi
nabo ndawonye kulokhu kuba yikho lokho ukuthi umangabe sikhuluma
ngentuthuko eyabo iyakekela ifuna ukudla ngalapho kungakhona ukwenzela
ukuthi siqhubeke nokunikeza izinsiza lapho esasizifaka khona kuqala.

Nohulumeni ulithathela phezulu udaba lokuthuthukiswa kwezindawo zasemakhaya
ikakhulukazi kwezolimo njengoba usho Mageba, sivumelana nawe futhi senza
konke okusemandleni. Njengoba ngishilo nakwinkulumo yami ukuthi
ukubambisana phakathi koMnyango wethu kanye noMnyango kababa uNkwinti
onikezwe uMnyango Wezokuthuthukiswa Kwezindawo Zasemakhaya Nezinguquko
Zomhlaba kuqine kakhulu.

Ubaba uMakhubela, impela kona kuyiqiniso. Noma ungahamba uyoze ubuye ngoba
phela sikhuluma ulimi olulodwa manje. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Mageba sir, Prince, we have heard the issues you raised with regard to
rural development. Fortunately, I also come from a rural area, therefore we
know about this plight first-hand. We are talking because we have
experienced it as well. The difference between us and the others who have
not experienced this is that whenever we talk about development, the focus
is shifted to their direction so that we continue allocating resources to
the same areas that have benefited previously.

The government is also very concerned about the issue of developing rural
areas, especially in respect of agriculture, as you have mentioned, Mageba.
We are with you there and we are doing our level best. As I have mentioned
in my speech, the partnership between our department and that of Mr
Nkwinti, who is the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform, is very
solid.

Mr Makhubela, that is indeed true. Even if you go, you will still return
because we are speaking the same language.]

I fully agree with you when you say we must embark on a massive solar
geyser programme. This just shows that there is no way you will ever
develop policies other than the policies from where you come from. This is
something that the Interministerial Committee on Energy is looking at. We
are definitely going to take this, not just as your advice but also as the
fact that you are on the right track. We agree with you.

You also proposed an active state. That’s precisely what we are as a
developmental state, so I don’t understand what the difference is.
You are calling for a partnership on the issue of the R524 billion for the
implementation of the programme of revamping Ministers’ houses and offices.
That partnership is there, and your role as Parliament is to exercise
oversight. The information will be available to Parliament from time to
time. This won’t be just a public-private partnership, PPP, but there will
be a partnership. This is because if it becomes a PPP, we will then have to
probe for your interest in the matter.

I must say I am encouraged by the support we have received from all parties
and also the constructive criticism of the statement. We once again want to
say that we take it quite seriously. Thank you very much, sir. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement be
adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement accordingly adopted in
accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement be
adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement accordingly adopted in
accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As there is no speaker’s list, I shall now put
the Votes in the order in which they appear in the Schedule to the Bill.

Vote No 1 – The Presidency – put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Congress of the People dissenting).

Vote No 2 – Parliament – put and agreed to.

Vote No 3 – International Relations and Co-operation - put and agreed to.

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – put.

Mr T E HARRIS: Chair, the DA opposes Vote No 4 and calls for a division.

Division demanded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, a division has been called for. I
must ascertain that four members are in favour of the division.
[Interjections.] I have now ascertained that four members are in favour of
the division. I would also like to caution members that during the division
no debate will be allowed.

The question upon which the Council will divide is Vote No 4. Those who are
in favour will take their seats to my right; and those against, to my left.
The Council divided:

   AYES - 37: Adams, F; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer C J; De Beer, O;
   Dikgale, M C; Feldman, D B; Gamede, D D; Gunda, J J; Jacobs, M P; Mabe, B
   P; Mabija, L; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C; Makhubela, M W; Makgate, M W;
   Mashamiate, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Mazosiwe, S S; Memela, T C;
   Mlenzana, Z; Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Mokgobi, M H;
   Mokgoro, G G; Moshodi, M L; Ntwanambi, N D; Nyambi, A J; Nzimande, L P M;
   Qikani, A N D; Rantho, D Z; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Themba, M P;
   Zulu, M M M.

   NOES - 8: Bekker, J M G; de Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F; Groenewald, H B;
   Harris, T; Lees, R A; van Lingen, E C; Watson, A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I now go to Vote No 5. Just sit there. The hon
member who is late, you are seated in the wrong place.

Mr A WATSON: How do you know, Chair?

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Permission granted.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Chairperson, you have not put the case to that hon
member, so you cannot tell that member on which side she should sit. It’s
unfair influence. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: My apologies! Let me put the question. Hon
member, those who are voting yes must sit on this side, and those who are
voting no on that side. Where do you want to sit? We are on Vote No 5.
[Interjections.] You want to sit there? Okay.

Mr D V BLOEM: Seeing that there’s a dispute between the DA and the ANC, she
can come and sit with us here, with Cope. That’s the middle road.
[Laughter.]

Vote No 5 – Public Works – put.

Vote agreed to (Congress of the People dissenting).

Vote No 6 – Government Communication and Information System - put and
agreed to.

Vote No 7 – National Treasury - put and agreed to.

Vote No 8 – Public Administration Leadership and Management Academy - put
and agreed to.

Vote No 9 – Public Service and Administration - put and agreed to.
Vote No 10 – Public Service Commission - put and agreed to.

Vote No 11 – Statistics South Africa - put and agreed to.

Vote No 12 – Arts and Culture - put and agreed to.

Vote No 13 – Education - put and agreed to.

Vote No 14 – Health – put.
Vote agreed to (Congress of the People dissenting).

Vote No 15 – Labour - put and agreed to.

Vote No 16 – Social Development - put and agreed to.

Vote No 17 – Sport and Recreation South Africa - put and agreed to.

Vote No 18 – Correctional Services - put and agreed to.

Vote No 19 - Defence and Military Veterans - put.

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, the DA opposes the Defence and Military Veterans Vote
and therefore calls for a division.

Division demanded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: A division has been called for.

The Council divided.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I now ask both Chief Whips to count the
results.

   AYES - 39: Adams, F; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; de Beer C J; De Beer, O;
   Dikgale, M C; Feldman, D B; Gamede, D D; Gunda, J J; Jacobs, M P; Mabe, B
   P; Mabija, L; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C; Makhubela, M W; Makgate, M W;
   Mashamiate, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Mazosiwe, S S; Memela, T C;
   Mlenzana, Z; Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Mokgobi, M H;
   Mokgoro, G G; Moshodi, M L; Ntwanambi, N D; Nyambi, A J; Plaatjie, S H;
   Rasmeni, R M; Nzimande, L P M; Qikani, A N D; Rantho, D Z; Sibande, M P;
   Sinclair, K A; Themba, M P; Zulu, M M M.

   NOES - 8: Bekker, J M G; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F; Groenewald, H B;
   Harris, T ; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 20 – Independent Complaints Directorate – put and agreed to.

Vote No 21 – Justice and Constitutional Development – put and agreed to.

Vote No 22 – Police – put.

Vote agreed to (Congress of the People dissenting).

Vote No 23 – Agriculture - put and agreed to.

Vote No 24 – Communications - put and agreed to.
Vote No 25 – Environmental Affairs and Tourism - put and agreed to.

Vote No 26 – Human Settlements - put and agreed to.

Vote No 27 – Rural Development and Land Reform – put.

Vote agreed to (Congress of the People dissenting).

Vote No 28 – Minerals and Energy - put and agreed to.

Vote No 29 – Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs - put and
agreed to.

Vote No 30 – Public Enterprises - put and agreed to

Vote No 31 – Science and Technology - put and agreed to.

Vote No 32 – Trade and Industry - put and agreed to.

Vote No 33 – Transport - put and agreed to.

Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry - put and agreed to.

Vote No 35 – Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries - put and agreed to.

Vote No 43 – Water Affairs – put.

Vote agreed to (Congress of the People dissenting).

Schedule put and agreed to.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr T E CHAANE: Chairperson and hon members, through the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill, the executive seeks Parliament’s approval and adoption
of its spending plans for the new financial year. Amounts allocated for the
new MTEF period are then appropriated from the national revenue fund in
terms of the Appropriation Act, once it has been approved by the President.


The main Budget also provides for a contingency reserve for expenditure
related to unexpected circumstances. The adjustment Budget allocates any
unused funds, mainly from the contingency reserve, which comprises approved
funds for particular types of spending. The adjustments Budget includes
amounts allocated in the main Appropriation Act, as well as the amount of
the adjustments.

While the estimates of the national expenditure describe in detail the
planned spending of all national government departments over the MTEF
period, the adjusted estimates of national expenditure describe in detail
the revised spending plans for the first year of the MTEF period, that is
the current financial year.

The adjustment Budget makes provision for rollovers, unforeseeable and
unavoidable expenditure, virements, function shifts, unallocated amounts
announced in the main Budget, significant unforeseeable economic and
financial events, emergencies, self-financing expenditure and declared
savings, gifts, donations and sponsorships.

The Adjustments Appropriation Bill for 2009-10 deals exclusively with
necessary amendments in the current financial year. The Select Committee on
Appropriations has considered, analysed and further engaged the Minister of
Finance on the 2009-10 Adjustments Appropriation Bill.

The committee further conducted joint public hearings with the Standing
Committee on Finance, the Standing Committee on Appropriations and the
Select Committee on Finance, where a panel of economists, organised labour
and business made their inputs.

Having considered the 2009-10 Adjustments Appropriation Bill and inputs by
all stakeholders, the committee hereby recommends the adoption of the 2009
Adjustments Appropriation Bill as presented by the Minister, without
amendments. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                             16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Before I call the Minister, I just want
to make a remark. I want to thank the Minister very much. When I got here,
I found her seated there, right from the beginning of the session. She
never went out – I noticed that – but sat there. What made her sit there I
do not know, but it shows that she has a great interest in what the NCOP is
doing. [Applause.]

I want to thank the Minister for that. Some don’t do what she is doing.
They speak quickly and move on. You have shown a very great interest,
Minister. Right from the beginning you have been with us, and I want to
thank you for that.

I now call on the hon Mayende-Sibiya to deliver her address. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, hon members of the House, ladies and gentlemen, I am honoured
and appreciate very much the decision of this House to allocate time to
discuss a challenge that is undermining the moral fibre of our society: the
violation of the rights of women and children to enjoy freedom and live in
a safe environment.

Chairperson, before I get to the issue of the 16 Days of Activism campaign,
it is important that I briefly address the unfortunate reports that
appeared in some of the weekend press about the Ministry of Women, Children
and People with Disabilities.

The negative comments made about the performance of the Ministry are
unwarranted and undermine the process of monitoring and evaluation that has
been created by the current administration to enhance government’s
performance.

The strategic framework of the department has been developed and is
supported by budget proposals and an organisational structure that, we
believe, will support the implementation of the programme of action of the
department. All of these three documents have been presented to the
portfolio committee responsible for oversight of our work as the Ministry.

Like all other new or reconfigured departments, we have submitted our
organogram to the Department of Public Service and Administration for
consideration and endorsement. We have already advertised for the position
of director-general, and the selection process will commence immediately
after the closing date, which is 7 December.

We will certainly not allow the sideshow that is being created through the
media to divert us from the critical task of leading, jointly, the efforts
to address the major challenges of violence affecting the women and
children of our country.

The resources for the implementation of the 16 Days of Activism campaign
were allocated to the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs, where the 16 Days secretariat was located before the formation of
the Ministry of Women, Children and People with Disabilities. Because of
this arrangement, we are working together with the Department of Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs in the implementation of this
year’s campaign.

The 16 Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children campaign
is a UN-endorsed campaign. It takes place annually from 25 November, which
is the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women, and
runs until 10 December, which is International Human Rights Day.

The period of the campaign, hon members, coincides with the commemoration
of World Aids Day on 1 December and the International Day of Persons with
Disabilities on 3 December. This allows us to focus on the links between
sexual violence and the spread of HIV infection, as well as incidents of
abuse experienced by persons with disabilities.

The 16 Days of Activism campaign focuses on generating increased awareness
of the negative impact of violence on women, children and society as a
whole. In the SADC region, the campaign has gained significant momentum
through the adoption of the Addendum on the Prevention and Eradication of
Violence Against Women and Children by heads of state, and the plan of
action and strategies for promoting gender parity in the region.

The year 2009 officially marks the 10-year anniversary of the 16 Days of
Activism campaign. Over the 10 years we have witnessed the exponential
growth of this campaign, making it the second most known government event
in South Africa, after the state of the nation address, according to the
Government Communication and Information System tracker survey of last
year.

There is growth in public awareness of the campaign and its messages. This
awareness has extended to vulnerable and marginalised communities, such as
the farmworker community, through the Farm Workers Awareness Programme.

There is commitment by government, in partnership with NGOs, to fight the
scourge of violence throughout the 365 days of the year. This commitment
has resulted in the development of the 365 Day National Action Plan to End
Gender Violence.

Although the campaign has succeeded in raising awareness amongst the South
African public, the abuse of children and women continues to occur. This
disjuncture between a high level of awareness and persistent abuse is a
cause for concern. It is also an indication that more needs to be done to
cultivate a culture of relevant authorities in the criminal justice system,
communities, civil society and other stakeholders taking action against
abuse..

The continuing incidents of violence necessitate a review of the
arrangement and programmes around fighting gender-based violence and child
abuse that have been implemented over the past 10 years. This will be the
primary focus of the summit that will be held at the Birchwood Conference
Centre in Boksburg on 25 November to mark the launch of this year’s
campaign.

While highlighting successes, the summit provides an opportunity for
government and its partners to reflect on the 10 years of the campaign and
agree on the interventions needed to ensure an effective response to the
growing scourge of gender violence and violation of children’s rights.

The Ministry of Women, Children and People with Disabilities will lead a co-
ordinated effort to sustain the campaign into its next decade.

On 24 November there will be a media event and the lighting of the Torch of
Peace at the Union Buildings in Pretoria. The Torch of Peace forms a link
between the 16 Days of Activism campaign and other major national campaigns
that support the programmes of government.

This year’s closing ceremony will be held in the Free State on 10 December.
Other important highlights will include the popularisation of initiatives
currently being undertaken by the Ministry of Women, Children and People
with Disabilities. These include: popularisation of the South African Cedaw
Report, commemoration of the 30th anniversary of Cedaw and the
popularisation of the UN convention on disability.

We will also reinforce interventions against early and enforced marriages
through community engagements that highlight the need to protect young
women and children against early and enforced marriages under the pretext
of a traditional practice called “ukuthwala”.

I am happy with the programme by the NCOP, which is trying to address and
add its voice to this particular challenge. We appreciate that.

To maintain the strong corporate identity and communication impact of this
campaign, we have retained the look and feel of the campaign under the
theme, “Don’t look away, act against abuse”. The retention of this theme
has been consulted on with partners.

Participating partners are requested to feature the campaign logo
extensively in their communication tools. Partners are also encouraged to
support the white ribbon campaign and to source their white ribbons from
women’s empowerment groups for fundraising purposes. When we came into the
House earlier this afternoon, we were given ribbons by one hon member.
Thank you very much.

Chairperson, I hope that as this House goes into recess for this year, hon
members will take these messages to their respective provinces and ensure
that there are activities in their constituencies that seek to address the
challenges of gender-based violence and child abuse. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister. I am the only one who
did not get a ribbon. I want to see the member who is distributing the
ribbons. [Interjections.] You are discriminating against us! [Laughter.]
Thank you very much.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces,  Deputy Chairperson, hon Chief Whip in absentia, hon
Minister Mayende-Sibiya, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers in absentia hon
members, I’m very happy to participate in this debate on 16 Days of
Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children. The subject of this
debate is very close to my heart as a mother and human rights activist.

We must remember that this debate takes place at a time when the Free State
province, which houses the Supreme Court of Appeal, mourns the death of
Teboho Sikisi, the ANC provincial spokesperson in the Free State, who met
his death on Saturday night in a car crash outside Bloemfontein while
travelling with his comrades.

Indeed, the life of this young leader, who was a pillar of strength to the
Free State government and Premier Magashule, will not go unnoticed. It is
for this reason that I want to join the people of our country in paying
tribute to the late Teboho Sikisi by remembering the poem of the renowned
poet John Donne entitled Death be Not Proud. The ruling party is correct in
saying that the tragic death of Teboho Sikisi has robbed the national
liberation movement of one of its dedicated and committed cadres. This
august House must mourn with the provincial legislature and provincial
government of the Free State. Their loss is our loss in the NCOP. May his
soul rest in peace.

The 16 Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children campaign
is an important campaign that asserts that Parliament should play a
fundamental role in generating an increased awareness of the negative
impact that violence has on women and children, and on society.

This year’s theme is “Commit, Act, Demand: We can end violence against
women”. This theme will play a critical role in guiding the proceedings of
this year’s debate to take centre stage in combating violence against women
and children. It will further set the tone for a reflection on the gains
that have been made in protecting the rights of children and women.

Women and children are not only subjected to the struggle against violence
but they are also severely affected by the struggle against poverty. This
new form of oppression is more dangerous because of its socioeconomic
nature. It is a silent killer and women are the hardest hit by it. Today we
have the great challenge of the global food crisis and women and children
bear the brunt of it.

Remember, hon members, it is we, the public representatives and female
leaders, who carry the hopes of vulnerable women and children, especially
those in the rural areas. We have to give them hope in the form of
something concrete and it is in this debate that we must come up with that
hope. If we don’t, this silent killer, violence against women and children,
will continue claiming the lives of our people.

For many decades, the ruling party has recognised and acknowledged the fact
that the emancipation of women and gender equality are among the defining
features of the national democratic revolution. Since the advent of
democracy, the ANC-dominated Parliament has been at the forefront of the
struggle for gender equality. As Parliament is the supreme institution in
the land, we are bound to be examples to the nation and continent by taking
the lead to protect the rights of the vulnerable who, in this context, are
the women and children.

The month of November is indeed important in the calendar of events that
characterise the programmes of organs of state. I’m saying this because
South Africa took part in the campaign of No Violence Against Women and
Children in 1999 and made significant strides in creating awareness around
the link between gender-based violence and HIV and Aids.

The NCOP is in a strategic position to locate the campaign of 16 Days of No
Violence Against Women and Children nationally because the Constitution
gives the NCOP the representative role of ensuring that provincial
interests are taken into account in the national sphere of government.

The NCOP has played a critical role in educating the nation to uphold the
rights of children and women. This can be attested to by the programme that
was convened by this august House towards the end of the Third Parliament.
The review of the NCOP pertaining to children aimed to consolidate the
parliamentary achievements for South African children.

The leadership of this House must be commended for convening such a
programme, which had as its principal objectives the crafting of a road map
for the furtherance of children’s issues and strengthening oversight work
of the NCOP on issues related to children. Working together with Unicef, we
must continue to organise children’s programmes in this Fourth Parliament.

We recognise the role that has been played by the Women’s Parliament in the
past by calling our government to be at the centre of implementing the 365
Day National Action Plan to End Gender Violence. This will assist in
prioritising gender policy goals at the level of implementation and
monitoring, as well as developing management tools for integrating work on
gender into its project cycles.

The struggle for no violence against women and children is winnable. It is
for these reasons that I can proudly say that our country will remain
incomplete until women participate fully and on an equal footing at all
levels of society.
In Luanda, Angola, in 1981, former ANC president Oliver Tambo was right
when he said our struggle will be less than powerful and our national and
social emancipation can never be complete if we continue to treat the women
of our country as dependent minors and objects of one form of exploitation
or another.

No longer should it be that a woman’s place is in the kitchen. In our
beleaguered country a woman’s place is at the battlefront of our struggle.
The late Oliver Tambo stated that the liberation of the land of our birth
and all its people will materialise as a popular victory on the basis of
the involvement of the masses, including women in their millions, as a
conscious and active part of the antiracist and anticolonial democratic
movement of South Africa.

One of the fundamental tasks that the NCOP confronts is the liberation of
the women of our country from their oppression on the grounds of sex, class
and colour. Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chair, Deputy Chair, hon Minister, today we are here to
debate the 16 Days of Activism and as hon members of this House of
Parliament we should stand responsibly and firmly against violence against
women. The Minister has stolen a lot of thunder from my speech and so has
the hon Magadla - we obviously did research on the same websites! We all
know that the campaign takes place from 25 November until 10 December.
Something very interesting that I came across is that in South Africa women
started with the Women’s Charter adopted at the founding conference of the
Federation of SA Women in Johannesburg on 17 April 1954. In the preamble it
says:

  We, the women of South Africa, wives and mothers, working women and
  housewives, African, Indians, European and Coloured, hereby declare our
  aim ...

So, it included all of us. It goes on to refer to a single society. Women
do not form a society separate from men. There is only one society and it
is made up of both men and women. Most importantly, the charter then refers
to the test of civilisation, and I now quote:

  The level of civilisation which any society has reached can be measured
  by the degree of freedom that its members enjoy. The status of women is a
  test of civilisation. Measured by that standard, South Africa must be
  considered low on the scale of civilised nations.

That was in 1954. How mature is South African society today - and the
nation - after 55 years since the charter was written? Are we on a level
where we respect one another in a civilised society in a civilised nation
if there is violent crime all over the place? My friend, hon Jac Bekker,
came with me in the car this morning and we discussed this issue. He said
to me there are three forms of respect, namely self-respect, respect for
your neighbour and respect for your God. If there is respect, very little
can go wrong.

There were lots of other charters that followed after the Women’s Charter,
like the Charter for Effective Equality in 1994, and then in 2003, the
Women’s Charter on Information Society and Development. So, we have all
these charters, conventions, platforms and Acts protecting us against
gender violence. But the worst form of gender violence happens at the core
of our family lives, right in the heart, where love should prevail and hold
the family and everything else together. It almost seems as if one steps
into a different world when we enter our homes and close our doors behind
us. Suddenly there is no charter, law or Act to protect us against
violence, poverty and substance abuse.

I want to say thank you to all of you who are wearing the white ribbons
today in support of the 16 Days campaign. In doing so we show support; we
create awareness.

It’s so sad that there is nobody from the press anywhere to be seen in
order to encourage others to take part in the campaign and to show our
concern and commitment to a violence-free South Africa. As hon Magadla
said, the theme for 2009 is “Commit, Act, Demand: We can end violence
against women”, so as political leaders we all have a responsibility to end
gender-based violence together.
We can make a difference. Every action, no matter how big or small, can
make a difference. To be accountable we can do four things. We can ask this
House now to call for the implementation of the Beijing Platform for
Action. We also call on the United Nations to take bolder action on the UN
secretary-general’s UNiTE to End Violence against Women campaign’s
Framework for Action. We are all accountable for playing a part in reducing
violence.

And just like we did with Madiba Day, where we had 67 minutes of doing
community work on 18 July, maybe we should now for 16 days do 16 minutes of
action work a day in this campaign. We will then come and report back to
the NCOP what we as leaders have done for the women and children in our
communities. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, as the ANC we
have been in the lead of campaigns against all kinds of abuse and
oppression. Therefore, today is one of those days when we as leaders and as
representatives of our people should come together and take stock of what
impact our campaign of no violence against women and children really has
had.

It is so painful to witness our neighbours, children, mothers, sisters,
nieces, cousins, etc being violently abused or killed by their partners,
brothers, fathers, nephews or cousins. For instance, a small boy has just
been killed by his father in Mitchells Plain.

It is once more time for us as men and women to stand up and speak out, as
the theme is “Don’t look away, act against abuse”. We must emphasise that
breaking the silence is not a disgrace, and women and children must speak
out against abuse. More and more women and children are breaking the
silence by openly and publicly talking about their experiences of
violation.

Violence against women must be fought at many levels. The unequal power
relationship between men and women, in society and at home, lies at the
heart of this violence. Therefore, it is necessary to challenge social
attitudes so that the rights and needs of women with regard to equality,
freedom and security of person, and with regard to other freedoms contained
in the Bill of Rights, can be asserted and defended.

Sihlalo, kubuhlungu nawutsi ulalela emacala etinkantolo uve kutsi indvodza
itsetse ematfumbu ayo yawabuyisela esiswini. Kubuhlungu futsi kutsi ubone
indvodza ihlanta emahlanta iphindze iwadle. Lesi sento lesibuhlungu
kakhulu. (Translation of Siswati paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, it is painful when you listen to cases in court and hear that
a man has raped his own children. It is also painful to hear that the man
has committed the same offence after being released from prison.]

We also need, as members of this House and of our communities, to visit the
courts and police stations and check on the impact of the laws and charters
that we are talking about here, as well as the conventions that we have
passed and the implementation thereof. What are the obstacles which we have
to amend? If identified, when and how are we going to make such amendments?


The 16 Days of Activism is a high-profile, annual event for the determined
effort of many South Africans. The challenge we face is to build a society
in which this campaign can become unnecessary sooner rather than later. We
can do that by making sure that the laws that we have passed as government
are correctly implemented and that where we need to amend them, we do so as
a matter of urgency.

The 16 Days of Activism is an awareness campaign that actually doesn’t mean
that we only have to observe this monster called violence against women and
children during the 16 days only. The South African government, led by the
ANC, declared a campaign of 365 days of no violence against women and
children. Hence I feel strongly that this is the time for taking stock of
the impact made on the implementation of our laws. We now focus primarily
on generating an increased awareness of the negative impact of violence on
women and children at a grass-roots level and on society as a whole. During
this time, as my colleagues have said, we must all wear the white ribbon to
support the victims of violence and abuse and to symbolise our solidarity
with these women and children.
As this is not the first awareness campaign of its kind, employers and
employees in the private sector and government are gearing themselves to
start distributing those white ribbons with ceramic beads from women
empowerment groups. I urge you to support them also by buying them in bulk
for your organisations.

We commend the work of the many NGOs and community-based organisations that
struggle on a daily basis to respond to the needs of those who experience
such violence and that campaign tirelessly to prevent abuse against women
and children.

We call on both government and the private sector to find ways to give
resources to these organisations and improve their capacity to undertake
this important work.

Chairperson, as recently as 2004, President Jacob Zuma, in his capacity as
Deputy President of the country at the time, said that we must not just
address the symptoms and manifestations of abuse but also the underlying
value system of male dominance that sustains the abuse.

Those religious, traditional and social values that regard men as superior
to women and women as perpetual minors must be exposed as immoral, with no
space in our constitutional dispensation. And in our vision of a moral
society, I must admit, to my distress, those words are unfortunately still
valid today.
In conclusion, the Book of Ephesians, in chapter 6, speaks of family love
and tells fathers to love their kids and not to make them angry or abuse
them. Chapter 5 of the same Book tells husbands to love their wives as
Christ loved all of us. And if we lived according to the Word of God, much
abuse would be eliminated.

I am also, Chairperson and hon members, calling on all of you to join the
ANC Women’s League, as we do have events and a programme of action. I hope
this is also so in other organisations and other parties, as the hon van
Lingen said that we must do this together.

We must share the events and visit each other and share ideas of how all of
us can together do away with violence against women and children.
Chairperson, I thank you very much. Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Gunda, this is a
very sensitive topic, and I take it that you are a parent. So, can we then
join hands and deal with this topic sincerely. I am not going to entertain
you. This is just a point of correction. May I please call upon the hon
Zulu.

Mr J J GUNDA: Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: There is nothing
wrong with my encouraging a member of this House if she speaks the truth.
If she speaks the truth, I have the right to encourage her and to agree
with her in my way. I am not taking this thing as a joke.

I was very serious when I said to her, “That’s right”, implying that she
had said the right thing. So, Chair, can you please withdraw what you have
said to me, namely that I take this issue lightly, because I am very
serious about it! [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I just say it
straight: I am not going to withdraw. It’s unfortunate that I understand
the language you used. Please, let’s not argue unnecessarily.

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Mphathi Sihlalo, Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe mama uSibiya,
amalungu aleNdlu ahloniphekile, ngithi sesingakuthatha sithi sekungumlando
nje ukuthi kube khona abanye abantu bakithi abanebala elinjengelami
nekungelona elami abakwazi ukuhlukumeza izingane zabo kanye namakhosikazi
abo emizini yabo.

Mina njengomuntu ozalelwe emasikweni ngamiswa phezulu kosikompilo lobuntu,
ngiyaziqhelelanisa nabantu okuthiwa bakwazi ukulala nezingane zabo uqobo -
uguqe ngamadolo phezu kwengane yakho ukhululeke sengathi usukhululeka
kunina uqobo.

Siyaziqhelelanisa nomuntu wesilisa oshaya umuntu wesifazane ngoba siyazi
ukuthi umuntu wesifazane akanawo amandla. Abantu besifazane sibazi
njengomgogodla wezwe. Kodwa ngithi le mficane esikhona kuleli lizwe lethu,
phela iqale ikakhulukazi kulezi  zindawo zethu okuthiwa ngamadolobha. Ngoba-
nje nangu umnewethu lapha uGamede angangifakazela lapho ngisuka khona
angikaze ngizwe nayinye nje indoda kuthiwa ihubhe umuntu wesifazane
ngenduku noma ngizwe kuthiwe indoda isivese yabamba ingane yayo yayikhomba
emacansini imbala. Asikwazi lokho, yinto eqhelelene kakhulu nathi leyo.

Bese ngibuyela kuleli siko lokuthwala, yilona futhi elihlukumeza kakhulu.
Akufuneki ukuthi uma abantu benza imikhuba yabo bese becasha ngosiko.
Kwelakithi ukuthwala, dadewethu Ngqongqoshe wukuthi uma ngithandana
nentombi ngingayishadi kuze kugane zonke izintombi ezaziqome kanye nayo;
ibisingala iye kwelinye isoka kungekhona ukuthi ayisangifuni kodwa
kungukuthi ifuna ukugana. Kuyaye kuthi uma senginazo izinkomo ngizohamba
ngiyoyithwala ngoba kwakuyintombi yami. Hhayi uvele usukele ingane
uyithathe uyoyinikeza omunye umuntu.

Usiko lokuganiselana dadewethu linje, kukhona ukubona ukuthi kwaGamede
izinkomo zikhona bese ngibiza izingane zami ngithi nayi indoda uGamede.
Kithi ekhaya kwafika uJenene uHolomisa ehamba neNkosi yamaHahabe uSandile,
bafika ngonyaka ka-1988 bezofunela uSandile umfazi. Samnikeza udadewethu
ukuze amgane hhayi ngoba emthwalile. Savele sathi nayi indoda. Wahamba
wayogana, basahlezi ndawonye namanje. Uma ubuka unyaka ka -1988 kuze kube
manje miningi kabi leyo minyaka. Hhayi lento yokuthwala.

Engicabanga ukuthi sisonke njengabantu abamele abantu kufuneka
sizibophezele ndawonye ukuba sifundise abantu bakithi ukuthi kunjani
ukuziphatha, ngoba manje silahlekelwe ukuziphatha, salahlekelwa
nawunembeza. Inkinga enkulu isemalokishini ikakhulukazi lapho kwenzeka
khona zonke lezi zinto. Emakhaya ayenzeki lento. Ngibonge Sihlalo.
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon Minister Mama Sibiya and  hon members
of this House, it is becoming the norm that some of our people, who are of
the same skin colour as I am, as well as others who are of a different skin
colour, are abusing their children and their wives in their homes.

As someone who was brought up with the culture of ubuntu, I distance myself
from those people who are said to be sleeping with their own children –
imagine yourself being on top of your own child doing it until you come as
if you are doing it with his or her mother.

We distance ourselves from a man who beats a woman because we know that
women do not have the strength to fight men. We know women as the backbone
of the nation. But this trend that is now emerging in our country started
particularly in our cities. My brother here, hon Gamede, can bear witness
that where I come from we have never heard of even one man who has ever
beaten a woman with a stick or of a man who had just grabbed his child and
demanded sex. We are not familiar with that; it is something that is really
foreign to us.

And going back to the culture of abducting a woman against her will, which
is the most abusive one, I want to say that it is not right for people to
hide behind culture when they want to indulge in their immoral acts. Where
I come from, the culture of abducting a woman against her will, my sister
hon Minister, means that if I am dating a lady and I do not marry her until
all the other ladies who dated their boyfriends at the same time as her
have been married, she leaves me and dates somebody else not because she
does not love me anymore but because she wants marriage.

My sister, the culture of arranged marriages can be explained like this:
When a father is aware that Mr Gamede owns a herd of cattle, he would then
call his children and tell them about Mr Gamede who is a potential husband.
Gen Holomisa came to my father’s homestead in 1988; he was in the company
of Inkosi of the Rharhabe clan, Sandile; they came to find a wife for
Sandile. We then offered that he could marry my sister, but not because he
had abducted her. We just told her that we had a husband for her. She
married him and they are still together, even today. If you count back to
1988, that is a very long time. And it had nothing to do with this
abduction issue.

I think that all of us as the representatives of the people need to commit
ourselves to teaching our people about morals because we have lost our
morality as well as our conscience. The biggest problem is particularly in
the townships, because that is where all these things occur. Such things do
not happen in the rural areas. Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Deputy Chair, hon Minister and hon members, I take exception
to what the Deputy Chairperson has said. I am a very serious man when it
comes to violence against women and children. I am not somebody to take
serious things lightly, and if the Deputy Chairperson misunderstood me, she
must say so.

Let me just say that, year after year, leading up to the 16 Days of
Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children, we stand here and
speak about all the atrocities that happen to them, but nothing ever
changes. We hear the same speeches, the same statistics and put on the same
concerned expressions, but nothing ever changes.

Hoe belangrik is hierdie 16 dae van geen geweld teenoor vroue en kinders
vir ons as leiers? Wat bedoel ons met hierdie tema? Ons moenie net vaskyk
teen fisieke geweld nie. Daar is ook emosionele mishandeling van vroue en
kinders, byvoorbeeld armoede. Die gaping tussen rykes en armes is so groot
dat dit neerkom op mishandeling. Die kwaliteit van gesondheid van die
minderbevoorregtes, spesifiek vroue en kinders, is in so ’n bedenklike
toestand dat die waarde van ons mense nie regtig gesien word nie.
Werksgeleenthede vir gestremdes bly maar ’n uitdaging. Ek weet nie hoe lank
dit ’n uitdaging gaan bly nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[How important are these 16 Days of No Violence Against Women and Children
for us as leaders? What do we mean by this topic? We should not fix our
attention on physical violence alone. There is also emotional violence
against women and children, for instance poverty. The gap between the rich
and the poor is so vast that it amounts to violence. The quality of health
of the underprivileged, specifically of women and children, is so alarming
that the dignity of our people is not recognized. Job opportunities for
people with disabilities remain a challenge. I do not know how long this
will remain a challenge.]

Almost every week we see stories in the media of women and children being
raped and killed, and it is clear that, as leaders and as society, we have
failed to protect the most vulnerable in our society. So we can surely
understand the frustration that led to an alleged rapist in the Eastern
Cape, who had been released on bail, being stoned to death by a group of 38
women. These 38 women took the law into their own hands, because they felt
that the law had failed the alleged rape survivor. The Freedom Charter says
that all shall be equal before the law. [Applause.]

Dit is hartverskeurend om in die media te lees hoe kinders mishandel en
vermoor word. Die reg van vroue en kinders moet nie beskou word as ’n guns
wat ons aan hulle doen nie, maar dit moet gesien word as ’n reg wat die
Here aan hulle gegee het. Die waarde van ’n vrou en ’n kind is nie minder
as ’n man s’n nie. Inteendeel, ’n vrou het meer aansien in die oë van die
Here as ’n man. Die Here het meer tyd vir ’n vrou as vir ’n man, en ’n kind
is ’n geskenk vir mense, omdat dit vir ’n mens wys hoe kosbaar ons is in
die oë van die Here. Ek wil dus vandag vir hierdie Huis sê dat ons in
hierdie 16 dae ernstig moet raak en doen wat ons moet doen, en ons vroue en
kinders goed behandel en respekteer. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is heart-rending to read in the media how children are being abused and
killed. The rights of women and children should not be seen as favours we
are granting them, but as rights given to them by the Lord. The value of a
woman or a child is not less than that of a man. On the contrary, a woman
has greater status in the eyes of the Lord than a man. The Lord has more
time for a woman than for a man, and a child is a gift to people, because
this shows us how precious we are in the eyes of the Lord. Therefore I want
to tell the House today that we must become serious in these 16 days and
that we must do what we must do and treat our women and children well and
with respect. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr O DE BEER: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, Cope is fully
supportive of the global campaign which focuses on ending gender violence.
It has been running here in South Africa since 1998.

Chair, as from next week, the NCOP, the government and the corporate sector
will act as a uniting force to make this year’s slogan a powerful tool with
which to tackle gender violence. The slogan is “Commit, Act, Demand: We can
end violence against women”.

Gender violence is common in our country. Its presence blights the good
name and reputation of our country. Quite often, gender violence is linked
to sexual abuse. Each year nearly a quarter of all children under the age
of 18 years are sexually abused. We’ve been in this crisis for far too long
and it is an indictment of all of us that this sorry state of affairs
continues yearly.

Surely our government can start to act decisively to bring all those who
commit violence against women and children to book. The President should
open his hotline for the two weeks exclusively to women and children to
report gender-related and violent acts.

The Stop Gender Violence Helpline offers such services, but by opening the
presidential hotline for just two weeks, people will get the message that
government is very serious about tackling this terrible conflict in
society.
Annually, over 1 000 children are murdered in our country and over
2 000 children come close to being murdered. Over the past few days we
heard of a young boy who was murdered in Cape Town; three weeks ago and an
84-year-old woman was raped in Port Elizabeth in an old-age home.

What kind of people live in our society who can unleash such violence
against women and children? Government has allowed this situation to go too
far. We should be debating this issue every quarter so that we can get
reports on what is being done to change this situation.

Another way of empowering women is through education. The life skills
curriculum used in schools can be extended to women through volunteers and
organisations. While empowering women is one thing, educating men is of
equal importance. In most cases, men are the perpetrators of gender
violence. Government must, therefore, target at least 50 communities where
gender violence is prevalent for the coming year.

Today, as we look ahead to the year’s campaign, we should be focused on the
audit of the campaign to determine its success. If we only make feel-good
speeches nothing will happen. We should have statistics after the campaign
to get a broad view of what was done and achieved.

Chair, I want to make a strong appeal to government to undertake an audit
of the 16 Days of Activism and to let us have the report for evaluation.
Together we can make it work.

Lastly, we ask the Minister to ask other departments such as the Department
of Safety and Security, the Department of Health and the Department of
Correctional Services to join hands in this campaign. We also want to
mention to the Minister that child trafficking is one of the fundamental
abuses of children and combating it should also be seen as a priority in
this phase. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order: I want to know and
understand why the chairperson of this committee, Mrs Mabe, is not on the
speaker’s list. She is the chairperson of the committee and I’m asking this
question seriously. Why she is not included on the speaker’s list to
participate in this debate, as she is the leader of this committee?

Mr S S MAZOSIWE: Deputy Chairperson, this cannot be a point of order
because the speaker’s list has been drawn up and there are no problems with
it. Therefore, this question is really out of order. Let us proceed.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): With due respect, hon
Bloem, this is not a point of order. Speaker’s lists are discussed and
members are informed that they will be addressing certain issues; she is
not being marginalised. I hope you understand.

Mr D V BLOEM: I’m very happy that she is not being marginalised.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): To be honest, we are
working together on a certain project with her.

Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I
don’t think that hon Bloem has to tell the ANC what to do. Hon Mabe can
speak for herself. You cannot be her spokesperson.

Chair, thanks for my being afforded an opportunity to participate in this
important debate on the 16 days of activism campaign against woman and
child abuse. This campaign runs from 25 November 2009 to 10 December 2009,
as other speakers before me have said. This is a period when the country
and the nation should intensify awareness around the abuse of women and
children and also strengthen the struggle against violence.

This campaign is used as an organising strategy by individuals and groups
around the world to call for the elimination of all forms of violence
against women, in the following ways: raising awareness about gender-based
violence as a human rights issue at the local, national, regional and
international levels; strengthening the local work around the issue of
violence against women; establishing a clear link between local and
international work to end violence against women; providing a forum in
which organisers can develop and share new and effective strategies;
demonstrating the solidarity of women around the world who are organising
against violence against women; and creating tools to pressurise government
to implement promises made to eliminate violence against women.

The great challenge is that women remain a marginalised and vulnerable
group in society, especially in the economic sector. Women lack skills and
education due to gender-based discrimination that has existed for years.
They suffer the most with regard to retrenchment due to a lack of skills
and education. They are still being subjected to the patriarchal tendencies
that exist in our social life as well as in our families or homes.

Government should have programmes for women’s development and empowerment
as well as emancipation, to liberate them from various kinds of oppression
like in Russia, which was the first country to develop or empower women in
many spheres. Opportunities should be created for women to diversify their
roles within the economy.

Women should have access to education and be adequately skilled to attain
better jobs. In this regard, a political commitment is needed to support
the empowerment of women. Women should be given top managerial posts or
jobs which were previously meant for men only due to societal stereotypes.
When looking at the extensive road construction in our country, women are
on the roads now because they have been given jobs which were initially
regarded as being for men only.

The most important stakeholders of the campaign are men – including me
standing in front here. In the Vhembe District in Limpopo, men have formed
a men’s forum called “Munna ndi nnyi” meaning “monna ke mang?” [Who is the
man?]. This forum was created to assist in the eradication of violence
against women and children.

I’m inviting leaders throughout the country, in all walks of life, to speak
out in opposition to violence against women and children at all levels.
These people have a powerful impact when they lend their influence to
helping shape new social attitudes and behaviour.

To conclude, there has been notable progress in making violence against
vulnerable members of society, specifically women and children, visible.
From the above it is evident that Parliament has undertaken various
initiatives, such as a number of international agreements, which aim to
protect women from, amongst other things, violence. Similarly, government
has implemented a number of projects and initiatives to combat violence
against women and improve services for victims of violence. Nevertheless,
on a daily basis, unspeakable acts of violence continue to occur and most
women are not much more secure than they were before the intensified work
on containing violence against women began.

Moswana o boletše a duletše mollo kua kgorong gomme a re rena botate re
swanetše go tlogela taba ye ya gore mosadi ke tšhwene o lewa mabogo. Rena
banna ga re a swanela gore ge re tsena ka malapeng a rena ra fetoga ditau.
O tla humana e le gore monna ge a sa tšwele, ke lethabo ka gae, eupša ge ba
ekwa lentšu la gagwe a kokota monyakong, lethabo le a sepela. Babangwe ba
tsena ka dikamoreng. Le ge bana ba be ba sa ja, ga ba sa natefelwa ke dijo
ka ge go tsene tau ka gae. Re fetogile ditau ka malapeng a rena. A re
tlogeleng se hle, botate. Ke a le mema gore re bontšhe boetapele gomme re
lwantšhe taba ye ya go šomiša basadi le bana ka bošaedi.

Mohlomphegi Tona ya tša Basadi, Baswa, Bana le Batho bao ba sego ba
itekanela, o na le thekgo ya rena tabeng ye. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Someone once said that men should stop oppressing women - that men should
stop being beasts in their own homes. It happens in some families that
family members only experience happiness when the man is absent, but
immediately they hear him knocking on the door, all the happiness fades
into thin air. Some of the family members even go to their bedrooms. If the
children were busy eating, they will immediately lose their appetite
because the beast has entered the house. We turned out to be beasts in our
homes. Men, please let us stop this. I invite you to model leadership and
fight against the abuse of women and children.

Hon Minister of Women, Children and People with Disabilities, we support
you in this matter.]

We are behind you; you have our undivided support on this matter. When I
leave this podium, I won’t look back but will fight the abuse of women and
children. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Chairperson,
I wish to thank all the members who participated in the debate. I also want
to thank the House for engaging in this important discussion. I have noted
all the inputs in support of the campaign.

I wish to say that I dream of a society where women and our daughters will
walk the streets of South Africa without fearing violence or being
attacked. We have the responsibility to walk towards that society. Together
we are being called – all of us, without exception – to take action. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

    REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS
                               AMENDMENT BILL
                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, before I go into the statement on the Bill
itself, I think it is important to say - because we are worried, as Gauteng
- that the chairperson of the committee that was debating just now was not
personally informed and nobody discussed it with her.This is a very serious
issue. We think it must be properly addressed because it is incorrect. If
there’s something wrong, our Whip from Gauteng should have been informed
and have dealt with this issue so that we know exactly what is happening.
We want to put it on record that we don’t think it is correct to do things
the way they are being done now. Thank you, Chair.

The Black Administration Act, Act 38 of 1927, is one of the last remnants
of apartheid that has still not been repealed in its entirety, as a repeal
of certain provisions of this Act is dependent on the implementation of
substitute legislation. Sections 12 and 20 of the Black Administration Act
deal with judicial powers of traditional leaders to preside over certain
civil and criminal matters.

However, in order for these sections to be repealed, the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development must put in place new legislation
that will regulate the rule and responsibilities of traditional leaders in
the administration of justice in the traditional courts. The Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development has since finalised its policy
framework on the traditional justice system under the Constitution and
subsequently introduced the Traditional Courts Bill in Parliament in April
2008.

The Traditional Courts Bill seeks to regulate matters dealt with in
sections 12 and 20 of the Black Administration Act and will provide the
legal framework for the operation of traditional courts. The operation of
the said sections of the Black Administration Act has been extended a
number of times to allow the department to finalise legislation and policy
in this regard.

In terms of the last amendment, the life of sections 12 and 20 of the Black
Administration Act was extended to 30 December 2009, when it became
evident, following submissions on the Traditional Courts Bill and the
conclusion of public hearings on this Bill, that more time would be needed
to deliberate and consult on the Traditional Courts Bill.

It should also be noted that the South African national elections and the
establishment of the Fourth Parliament in 2009 have impacted on
Parliament’s legislative programme for the year.

It is once again foreseen that the Traditional Courts Bill currently before
the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development will not
be signed into law by the deadline of 30 December 2009. The portfolio
committee has thus resolved to initiate the Repeal of the Black
Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, will you
take your seat. Members, someone is at the podium and let’s respect that.

Mr A G MATILA: The purpose of the Repeal of the Black Administration Act
and Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill is to amend the Repeal of the
Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Act, Act 28 of 2005,
in order to substitute a date, thus extending the date of application of
the provisions of sections 12 and 20 of the Black Administration Act of
1927 to 30 December 2010. This will allow time for further consultation in
respect of the content and structures of the Traditional Courts Bill.

We would, therefore, submit that this House support these particular
amendments because it is only the date that is being extended, precisely
because of the fact that time did not allow for proper consultation to take
place. Thank you, Comrade Chair. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): That concludes the
debate. I shall now put the question. The question is that the Bill be
agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political
parties to make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

Declarations of vote:
Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, with your permission, the hon chairperson
raised a serious issue in terms of the constitutionality of the Bill. He
indicated that proper consultation didn’t take place, and we know that
there are numerous instances in which the Constitutional Court ruled on the
fact that consultation hadn’t taken place, so I’m not speaking against the
Bill, but I am speaking against the remarks that were made by the
chairperson. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, I rise on behalf of the DA to state our support
for the Bill, because we see the need for it. However, in the committee
this morning, barely three hours ago, this Bill was presented to the select
committee by an official of the National Assembly portfolio committee.

The method by which it was conveyed to the select committee of the NCOP
annoyed all the members of all the parties equally. In fact, if it hadn’t
been for the seriousness of this Bill and the impact of the time that
lapses on the previous Bill’s extension to 31 December, I can assure you
that that committee would have rejected the Bill.

I therefore register, on behalf of the DA, our extreme disappointment at
the way the NCOP is being treated by the portfolio committee chairperson
and at the way in which the department involved has dealt with us this
morning, but at the same time we do understand the need for the Bill and we
will support it.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I please find out:
Was that your declaration on the Bill?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, the Bill that we are dealing with now ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I’m still
talking to Mr Watson. I’m not ignoring you; I’m coming back to you.

Mr A WATSON: Yes, with respect, Madam Chairperson, that was my declaration
of vote on behalf of the DA on the particular Bill. We will support the
Bill, but the declaration is that we are very unhappy with the process and
the way in which the Bill was submitted to the NCOP select committee.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay, we’ll accept it.

Mr A G MATILA: Chair, may I just correct one little issue? There was
extensive consultation that took place in the previous Parliament. In terms
of us here, we were only supposed to deal with procedural issues and
therefore there was no consultation that needed to take place now, you see.


The last NCOP sittings of the previous Parliament dealt with it
extensively. We were just supposed to adopt and deal with this particular
matter. Unfortunately election programmes did not allow them to do that. I
just wanted to correct what the member has said.

I also want to indicate that we agree with Mr Watson, because we were not
happy in the committee with the way we were dealt with in this particular
matter. It was brought to us just this morning.

The NA dealt with it last week and we have put it forward, but because of
the need to make sure that there’s continuity, we deal with these
particular matters. We have all agreed in the committee that this Bill
should go through and we would ask this House to pass it. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, no, there was an agreement this morning in the
committee and the speaker is 100% correct that all of us have agreed that
the process was not right. We support the Bill and we are not going to
stand in the way of the Bill, but next time we are going to reject
something that comes to us in this way.
I, however, fully support what our spokesperson has said, because we gave
him the mandate this morning to say this is the line that we were going to
take.

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, ngicabanga ukuthi njengoSotswebhu Omkhulu
kufanele usisize lapha. Akufanele kuphasiswe ukuthi kwiPhalamende lokugcina
kwenzakalani. Izinto zidlulwa yisikhathi ngokoMthethosisekelo. Lapha
sinegunya namandla ngokuthunywa ngabantu kodwa akufanele ukuthi enye iNdlu
... ngoba sinamandla afanayo. Ngaphandle uma nizoshintsha uMthethosisekelo
wenu nithi akusewona bese niqhubeka nokusebenza ngemithetho okumele
izophasiswa. Ukuba namandla okuphasisa imithetho kwaleNdlu, nikuvumele
impela emini ilanga libalele kusho ukuthi njalo nje nizovele niphasisa
izinto ezingekho emthethweni. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, I think that as the Chief Whip you must
assist us here. It is not advisable to act according to what happened in
the previous Parliament. Things become of no use as per the Constitution.
We have the power and the mandate from the people who sent us here, but it
is undesirable that another House ... because we have equal powers. Except
if you change your Constitution and say it is no longer the same one, then
you continue to work with laws that must be passed. Having the power to
pass the laws of this House, you must state clearly that you will keep on
passing laws that should not be passed. Thank you.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I will rather ask for
declarations of vote.

Ms B P MABE: Chair, I just want to understand the statement that was made
by hon Prince Zulu. Does it mean we have to reverse everything that has
been done; we don’t have to recognise what the previous Parliament has done
before us?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I wanted to answer, but
okay ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chair, I thought we were dealing with
declarations – not any engaging. We should go back to that.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Exactly, thank you. I
posed the question as to whether all political parties made their
declaration of vote. Okay?

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes. Declaration?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Mr Bloem, we are going
ahead with the procedures. Please! I’ve noted all the concerns raised here,
but now we are going to vote.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, are you not saying that it’s declarations? I
understand that we are going to vote, but are you not giving time for
declarations from political parties?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, that’s
exactly what I said at the beginning, and you people then decided to break
up the procedures and to start arguing. I am now pleading with you that we
follow the procedures.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I think all parties have made
their declarations already. We can’t have it twice.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): We will now vote.
Please use your cards. The voting has now closed. Could the Table staff
submit the results.

Forty members have voted yes, and two have not voted. The majority have
voted in favour and I therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of
section 75 of the Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE - GREEN PAPER:
                         NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLANNING

Mr C J DE BEER: Deputy Chairperson, we need a broad consensus on the
reaching of our long-term objectives, the outcomes of development and also
on the strategies and trade-offs needed in building the society we all
desire. We must take stock of the work we have done over the past 15 years.
What were our successes and what were our failures? We must identify the
areas that need serious attention to improve the quality of life of
ordinary people, with specific reference to service delivery.

The lack of coherent long-term plans has limited the capacity to mobilise
all of society in pursuit of developmental objectives. Weaknesses in the co-
ordination of government have led to policy inconsistencies and, in several
cases, to poor service delivery. The Green Paper should be seen as the
beginning of a process that seeks to enhance and improve the work of
government that is undergoing serious structural changes.

We congratulate the executive for taking this bold step. We also
congratulate the Minister in The Presidency for releasing this document to
generate public discussion on how government can improve its work. The
Green Paper is a platform to test ideas, to consult the public, to broaden
the debate and to build consensus. Planning deals with the use of today’s
resources to meet tomorrow’s needs.

The committee notes that issues raised in the Green Paper cannot be
resolved with immediate effect, as some of the issues should be regarded as
work in progress that will continue to receive the attention of the
executive. Parliament will also continue to perfect its role to be in line
with the changes that are happening at the executive level.

The Green Paper was tabled in the NCOP on 4 September 2009, but was only
referred to the Select Committee on Finance on 28 October 2009. Hon
Minister Manuel, Minister in The Presidency for planning, briefed the
select committee on 9 November 2009. Given the short period of time, no
public hearings could be held. The committee invited provinces to attend
the briefing and also to give their inputs. Of the nine provinces, the
Eastern Cape, the North West and Gauteng attended. Given this background,
we propose that the hon Minister visits provincial legislatures and briefs
the members of these institutions.

The Federation of Unions of South Africa, Fedusa, and the SA Local
Government Association, Salga, made submissions to the select committee.

Having considered the Green Paper on National Strategic Planning, the
Select Committee on Finance proposes the following. Firstly, the Parliament
of the Republic of South Africa supports the Green Paper on National
Strategic Planning.

Secondly, the President or the Deputy President chairs the Ministerial
Committee on Planning in order to ensure objective and independent
decisions on the National Planning Commission’s recommendations. This
second point is actually outdated, considering the decision that was taken
this weekend. I want to state again that it is the prerogative of the Head
of State, the President, to allocate responsibilities to Ministers in his
Cabinet.

Thirdly, the Minister in The Presidency for national planning chairs the
National Planning Commission.

Fourthly, the Minister in The Presidency for national planning presents the
findings and recommendations to the Ministerial Committee on Planning.

Fifthly, the Presidency provides a detailed report on how the National
Planning Commission is going to work together with all other departments
and other stakeholders, clarifying the roles of these departments or
entities. The report should be submitted to Parliament for consideration
and reporting on by the Select Committee on Finance within three months
after the adoption of this report by the House.

In the sixth place, the National Planning Commission should work together
with all departments mentioned under item 5.2 in the printed report in the
Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports.
In the seventh place, the Presidency should clarify the roles of provincial
executives in the National Planning Commission.

Lastly, the Presidency should clarify if there will be a revised Green
Paper or a White Paper on National Strategic Planning. It is recommended
that a revised Green Paper or a White Paper be published for consideration
and reporting on by Parliament in order to fully comprehend the overall
function of national strategic planning.

I move that the House adopts this report. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                         VLIDITY OF NOTICE OF MOTION

                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): There is a ruling that I want to
read to you: Hon members, I would like to make a ruling on a point of order
raised by hon Watson, with regard to a notice of motion moved by hon C J De
Beer on Thursday, 5 November 2009.

The hon member asked whether it was correct in terms of the Council Rules
for a member to move a motion on a matter that had been discussed in the
House. He requested that I make a ruling on this matter, which I said I
would do.

Hon members, I would like to bring to the attention of the House that there
is a difference between a notice of motion and a motion without notice. The
notice of motion is intended to inform the House that at the next sitting
of the House, a member intends to move a motion. It does not require any
decision by the House while the motion without notice requires the House to
take a decision on a particular matter.

In terms of Rule 75(2)(a) of the Council Rules, a draft resolution for
approval by the Council may not in substance be the same as a draft
resolution which has been approved or rejected by the Council during the
preceding six months. Therefore, until such time as the notice is acted
upon by the hon member by moving it, as he indicated in his notice, it
cannot be said that it is in contravention of the Rules of the Council.

I therefore rule that the notice of motion by hon C J De Beer should stand.


 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
                                DEVELOPMENT -
  DECLARATION OF AMNESTY IN TERMS OF SECTION 139(2)(a) OF FIREARMS CONTROL
                                  ACT, 2000

Mr L P M NZIMANDE: House Chairperson and hon members, I have the very
simple job of asking you to approve the notice on the new declaration of
the firearms amnesty for the period 11 January 2010 to 11 April 2010, and
doing so in terms of the Firearms Control Act, Act 60 of 2000, and
regulations thereof.

The select committee has considered the notice that outlines the process
and procedures put in place to implement the declaration and we took note
of the following issues contained therein. There will be no anonymity in
the voluntary surrendering of firearms. This means that people must declare
their identity, that their identities will be registered when they hand
over the firearms and that their firearms will be kept.

There will also be ongoing snap audits conducted regularly by the police in
keeping with the record. Consideration will also be given to the
experiences that emanated from the other amnesty that was announced in
2005. There will also be simplified administrative procedures for the
registering of personal details in order to prevent blockages and backlogs
in the system.

There will be safekeeping of firearms in the so-called SAPS 13 store, which
is like an archive. They will be catalogued in the database so that it will
be easy to track them and for the police to conduct these snap audits.
Therefore there will also be a total operational register system put in
place with this process.

Building on the successes of the 2005 amnesty, during which 98 000 firearms
were collected, we believe that this new amnesty will further assist those
people who are still in possession of such firearms. This includes, amongst
others, those who have knowledge of firearms and ammunition; manufacturers;
gunsmiths; private security firms; firearm dealers with surplus, obsolete
and redundant firearms; firearm parts storage facilities where firearms and
ammunition were stored; and individuals who stored firearms or their parts
without legal authorisation to do so.

These are the categories that would be included and are targeted by this
declaration, including those who keep the firearms, such as the hon Zulu.
As ilifa likababa [a heritage from the father] he must return that, if this
House approves! [Laughter.]

The surrendering of the firearms in this amnesty will be voluntary, as it
seeks to address the problem of violent crimes that are committed with
these illegal firearms that are in circulation. Through the process of the
prescribed regulation in the Firearms Control Act, both licensed and
unlicensed firearms will be destroyed within six months of collection.
There will be regular operations to search and seize illegal firearms.

This will also allow people who have failed to meet the firearm licence
application deadline to licence their weapons under certain circumstances,
so there would be fair consideration by the police during this period of
those people who couldn’t submit their applications for the renewal of
licences.

Of course, this is not done with any promise or pledge to pay any
compensation, so there will be no compensation. You will hand over ilifa
[heritage from the father] without payable compensation for surrendering
your firearm, whether legal or illegal.

There will also be some exclusions from this declaration. They include
explosives, which are not covered by the amnesty, and amnesty will also not
be granted for crimes committed with these surrendered firearms, except for
the possession of unregistered firearms. Therefore, ballistics tests will
be conducted on all surrendered firearms in order to ensure that none of
these firearms were used to commit crimes, and where such firearms are
discovered the police will be able to link the firearm to the person who
handed it in and details of this person will be on record.
We therefore urge that the House approves this declaration in terms of the
Act of 2000, but I also need to raise this concern and call for communities
to work and co-operate with the police. I was saddened by the reports in
the media about the incident this morning in which an R5 was used in a
meeting, as the media reported.

We need to send out the message that it’s deplorable during this time of
democracy, when there are platforms for discussion and meetings of
engagement, that we still go to meetings with people whom we know carrying
such firearms. I think this House and the committee really must express
their condemnation of such people conducting such activities and conducting
themselves in that fashion.

We therefore say during this period of the amnesty that all South Africans
who are committed to a safe society, safe families and safe communities
must co-operate in making sure that this amnesty is as successful as the
one in 2005 and we therefore recommend its approval. Thank you, Chair.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Order! That concludes the debate. I
shall now put the question. The question is that the report be agreed to.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
House. Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall now allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. I shall now call upon the
provinces to vote.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I just want to make a request that the hon Louis
must first hand in his illegal firearm so that all of us can hand in our
firearms. He’s sitting with an illegal firearm. I know that!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 consideration of report of select committee on security and constitutional
 development - provisional suspension of Magistrate N E Ndamase, additional
                           magistrate at Pretoria.

Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Modulasetulo ke ne ke kopa ho sisinya phetoho tlalehong
ya ... [Kena hanong.] [Chairperson, can I please suggest some changes to
the report of ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Honourable Mofokeng,
would you please come to the podium if you want to raise something.
[Laughter.]

Mong T M H MOFOKENG: Ke ne ke kopa feela ho sisinya phetoho tlalehong ya
repoto e nyenyane feela ha e qetella, e leng tlaleho ya komiti mabapi le ho
fanyehwa ha nakwana mosebetsing ha Mmaseterata N E Ndamase. Komiti kamora
ho lekola tlaleho ya ho fanyehwa ha nakwana mosebetsing ha Mmaseterata
Ndamase, mmaseterata wa tlatsetso sebakeng sa Pretoria, ho sa emetswe
sephetho sa diphuphutso bokgoning ba hae ba ho sebetsa jwalokaha ho hlokeha
ho Kgaolo ya 13 ya Magistrate Act.

Komiti e lekotse tlaleho e tekilweng ke Letona la Toka le Ntshetsopele ya
Molaotheo hore Khomishene ya boMmaseterata e nkile qeto ka la 29 le 30 mme
ya sisinya hore Mmaseterata Ndamase a fanyehwe nakwana mosebetsing. Ka la 9
Khomishene ya boMmaseterata e ile ya tlalehela komiti ka dikateng tsa
tlaleho moo e qetileng ka ho qosa Mmaseterata Ndamase ka boitshwaro bo
hlephileng ho ya ka Molawana wa 26 wa Tsamaiso ya tsa Toka.

Maikutlo a bona ke hore ho na le bopaki bo felletseng ho tshehetsa diqoso
tsa bona, mme ho ya ka Kgaolo ya 13 ya Molao wa Tsamaiso ya boMmaseterata,
Palamente e tlamehile hore e fetise ka potlako qeto e tshehetsang kapa e
hananang le tshitshinyo eo. Kamora ho sekaseka ditaba, komiti e ile ya
hlokomela bothata bo tshebedisong ya puo Makgotleng a Dinyewe e le e nngwe
ya ditshita mme ho tlamehile hore ho lekolwe dintlha kaofela phareleng ho
ya ka ho rarollwa le ho lokiswa ha Tsamaiso ya Toka hore e be maemong a
hantle.

Komiti e hlokomela hore ha ho na tharollo e bobebe qakeng ena empa tharollo
e tlamehile hore e fumanehe ka potlako. Jwalokaha e le mosebetsi wa komiti
ho lekola tshebetso ya mafapha a mmuso, komiti e tla etela a mang a
makgotla a dinyewe ho inwesa ka nkgo ka maemo a ditaba le ho ba le
dipuisano tse tebileng le Khomishene ho utlwisisa ka ho phethahala.

Kamora ho lekola tseo tsohle le hore re ntse re tlamehile ho kopana le
batho bohle ba nang le lesedi tabeng ena, ha ho qeto eo re e fihlelletseng
ntle le hore re kopa ho fuwa nako ho sebetsana le taba ena ho fihlella
pheletsong e kgotsofatsang. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: I would like to suggest some small changes to the last
part of the report of the committee in relation to the provisional
suspension of Magistrate N E Ndamase. Following the committee’s review of
the report on the provisional suspension of Magistrate Ndamase, the
assistant magistrate in Pretoria, we are still waiting for the conclusion
of the investigation into her fitness to perform her duties, as required in
terms of section 13 of the Magistrates Act.

The committee reviewed the report tabled by the Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development in which the Magistrates’ Commission took a
decision on the 29th and 30th, and recommended that Magistrate Ndamase be
provisionally suspended from her duties. On the 9th the Magistrates’
Commission informed the committee about the contents of the report, in
which it took the decision to charge Magistrate Ndamase with professional
misconduct in accordance with the Judicial Service commission Act.

Their opinion was that there was conclusive evidence to support the charges
and therefore, in accordance with section 13 of the Magistrates Act,
Parliament should, as a matter of urgency, consider the decision that
either supports or negates such an opinion. After reviewing the situation,
the committee realised that one of the problems within our court system was
the language problem and that all issues pertaining to this problem needed
to be addressed in the alleviation and solution of such problems for the
betterment of the justice system.

The committee realised that there was no easy solution to this problem and
yet a solution had to be found as soon as possible. As it is the
committee’s task to assess the performance of all government departments,
it would visit some of the courts in order to have a first-hand experience
of the situation and also to have further discussions with the Commission
for a full understanding.

After assessing all that, and considering the fact that we should also meet
with all the individuals who have information on this matter, no decision
has been reached except that we would like to be given more time to deal
with this matter in order to come to a satisfactory conclusion. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
       DEVELOPMENT FOR APPROVAL OF - DRAFT NOTICE: SALARIES PAYABLE TO
               CONSTITUTIONAL COURT JUDGES AND JUDGES ANNUALLY

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
 DEVELOPMENT FOR APPROVAL OF - DRAFT NOTICE: SALARIES PAYABLE TO MAGISTRATES
                                  ANNUALLY

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson, I rise on behalf of the Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Development for the approval of the
remuneration of magistrates and judges.

The interim Constitution of 1993 sought to change the ad hoc nature which
up to then had characterised the determination of the remuneration of
public office bearers. It provided for a permanent commission to make
recommendations to Parliament, provincial legislatures and local
governments regarding the remuneration and allowances of public
representatives. It was later entrenched in legislation.

The notion of an independent remuneration commission was subsequently also
entrenched in the 1996 Constitution, which prescribed, in legislation, the
establishment of a framework for the determination of salaries, benefits
and allowances. The Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public
Office Bearers Act of 1997 subsequently established the Independent
Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers, which was headed
by Justice Moseneke between 1 April 2004 and 1 April 2009.

In terms of section 2 of the Judges’ Remuneration and Conditions of
Employment Act of 2001, the President of the Republic determines the
remuneration of judges after consideration of recommendations made by the
commission.

The commission has made recommendations to increase the salaries of
Constitutional Court judges, other judges and magistrates after it found
that the remuneration levels of judicial office bearers have dropped in
real terms when compared to other public office positions, especially
directors-general.

Judicial remuneration practice has not kept pace with the changing judicial
environment and requirements of the judiciary; judicial remuneration was
not benchmarked correctly; remuneration levels were not high enough to
attract and retain the desired candidates, especially young professionals;
and a historic undertaking to link increases to the consumer price index
rate had not been honoured.

It was found that the gap between the lowest-level judge and highest-level
magistrate was too wide; whereas the reverse was true in respect of High
Court judges and the Chief Justice, which was also contrary to
international best practice. The commission’s recommendations were approved
by Parliament in 2008, with the exception of the salaries of the presidents
and presiding officers of the Divorce Courts.

With regard to the 2009 salary increases, the President issued notices on
12 November 2009, in terms of section 2 of the Judges’ Remuneration and
Conditions of Employment Act and the Magistrates Act of 1993, respectively,
indicating that he has approved a 7% salary increase for members of the
judiciary with effect from 1 April 2009 - which I suspect will include this
House. [Laughter.]

The total remuneration packages of the Constitutional Court judges and
other judges, which exclude pension benefits regulated separately under the
Judges’ Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, include an annual
salary cash component of 72,24% and 27,76% noncash component, including a
car allowance and medical aid.

The total remuneration package for permanently appointed magistrates
includes a basic salary component of 60%, pension benefits and a flexible
portion for the remaining amount. I therefore, on behalf of the committee,
request your approval in this regard.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on Draft notice: Salaries payable to
Constitutional Court Judges and Judges annually be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report on Draft notice: Salaries payable to Constitutional Court Judges and
Judges annually accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Draft notice: Salaries payable to
Magistrates annually be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Draft notice: Salaries payable to Magistrates annually
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS – OVERSIGHT VISIT: INTERVENTION IN MKHONDO LOCAL
                                MUNICIPALITY

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
  TRATIONAL AFFAIRS - OVERSIGHT VISIT: INTERVENTION IN NGAKA MODIRI MOLEMA
                                MUNICIPALITY

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I would
like to draw your attention to Order No 11 and say that the name of the
municipality is “Mkhondo”.

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson and the House, once again the report will cover
the two municipalities at the same time. The Select Committee on Co-
operative Governance undertook an oversight visit to Mkhondo Local
Municipality and Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality in North West
and Mpumalanga respectively on the 12th and 13th of November.

This was based on the resolution of the provincial executive council of the
respective provinces to intervene in the affairs of the two municipalities
in terms of section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution. If a municipality cannot
or does not fulfil its executive obligation, in terms of the Constitution
and legislation, the relevant provincial executive may intervene by taking
appropriate steps to ensure the fulfilment of that obligation, including
assuming responsibility of the relevant obligation.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, you are
causing a disturbance there.

Mr M H MOKGOBI: The main objective of the visit by the committee was to
determine whether procedural requirements were met in the application of
this Act; to verify whether the provincial executive had used its
discretionary powers appropriately; and determine how the provincial
executive intends to restore the fulfilment of the relevant obligation and
ensure long-term sustainability in that regard.
The main issues identified at Mkhondo Local Municipality are the following:
The municipality effectively failed in its constitutional obligation, did
not have a clear plan and the integrated development plan and the service
delivery and budget implementation plans, SDBIP, were not connected. They
were scattered. In fact, there was no adherence to the trinity of budget,
IDP and performance systems.

The IDP and the SDBIP appeared to exist outside of what is required by law.
Performance management measures were largely activity-centred. They were
not centred or linked to service delivery as required by law.

Furthermore, the committee found poor service delivery, loss of governance
control, poor management, anomalies in supply chain management and
corruption and internal squabbles that arose out of political quarrels and
competitions. These are the issues, amongst other things, that were found
at Mkhondo Local Municipality.

The other critical issue is that five wards, as we speak, still need
serious political intervention as they are like a no-go zone, politically.
We also have to recommend to the provincial executive that they step up the
efforts of what can be done on a daily basis to ensure stability. As things
stand now, we might go beyond the six months’ determination of intervention
without solving major things that we need to see on the ground.

The main issues that we found at Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality
are the following. The municipality operated beyond its constitutional and
legislative mandate. There are dysfunctional political governance
structures. The approval of the salary adjustment agreement between the
former municipal manager and the mayor, together with the SA Municipal
Workers’ Union, was totally outside of the national collective bargaining
agreement which, in terms of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
Management Act, is in breach of compliance with financial systems.

There is one point that needs to be emphasised, namely that once this
matter has been resolved, in terms of the eyes of the community, the
municipality will drift towards stability. I’m sure everyone knows that
where there is money, there is a problem.

There was also noncompliance with legislative provisions governing local
government as a sphere; irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure; the
breakdown of service delivery and instability caused by mismanagement of
union strikes and the dismissal of the municipal manager; and allegations
of fraud, corruption and mismanagement. You would know that this is the
municipality which was in the newspapers for sending the soccer squad to
Brazil for training.

The other things that are general to both the two municipalities is that
they need serious capacity-building and training, particularly for
councillors to understand the following pieces of legislation: the
functions of the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, which is a
political tool to guide councillors; the Local Government: Municipal
Systems Act, which is an implementation tool that guides management and
administration; and the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act,
which is very elaborative and only needs to be followed like the Ten
Commandments. Those who believe in the Bible can do these things.

Other issues on which more training is needed can be detected, but these
are the major things on which we need to engage the provincial executive to
ensure that there is compliance. The ward committees also need to be
strengthened, precisely because if they are weak, communication and public
participation suffer and that is a case in point at both municipalities.

At Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality the political organisation has
intervened and we have a new mayor who has already been there for two
months. What worried the committee, and we cannot hide it because the
premise of oversight is to engage primarily with the administrator who is
there in terms of section 139, is that when we arrived there, the
administrator was not there and there was no apology. The committee
summoned the administrator and he was there that day, and we did engage
with him to get what we wanted. But we condemned his absence as undermining
the authority of Parliament as the highest institution in the land.
Our recommendations are that the House should approve the necessary
interventions in both municipalities. Remember that we are an oversight and
not an executive authority and can only recommend that the House accept our
recommendations. We are within 181 days, as the NCOP, to engage on this
matter and therefore within the law.

Secondly, we recommend that the House approves that the provincial
executive should further look at extending the intervention precisely
because the one intervention period ends in December this year and the
other in January and, in terms of assessment, more still has to be done.
Generally section 57 is not in place in both municipalities; if not one,
two.

We further recommend that the provincial executive of the North West
province engages in a further extension. The duration will depend on how
the committee engages with them - either for the suggested three or six
months, but this can be further engaged on to understand what will happen.

In addition, it is recommended that the appointment of municipal managers
in terms of section 57 in both municipalities be fast-tracked and that the
provincial executive put structures in place that would, on a weekly basis,
do monitoring. Otherwise it will be compliance just for the sake of
applying section 139 without yielding results.

We also further request that Salga intervene in terms of training. They
were with us and noted what it is that they are supposed to be doing.
Therefore the portfolio committee wishes the House to approve this report
with matters that have been raised and other matters that still need to be
engaged with in order to comply with section 139. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on Oversight Visit: Intervention in Mkhondo
Local Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Oversight Visit: Intervention in Mkhondo Local Municipality
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Oversight Visit: Intervention in Ngaka
Modiri Molema Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Oversight Visit: Intervention in Ngaka Modiri Molema Municipality
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL
                  RELATIONS - COTONOU PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, the ACP Partnership Agreement is a covenant
between the members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States
on the one hand and, on the other, the European Community, which is
normally called the “EC” and its member states in the European Union, EU.
It was signed at Cotonou in Benin on 23 June 2000. The Cotonou Agreement
encompasses various aspects, including trade, development and political co-
operation.

The underlying objective of this partnership is embodied in Article 1 of
the agreement, which provides that it is meant to eradicate poverty and
create the environment for sustainable development to take place and
eventually facilitate the integration of the ACP countries into the world
economy. The most significant characteristics of the reciprocal credit and
payment agreement, RCPA, are the following: equality of partners and
ownership of development strategies; participation by other actors such as
civil society, the private sector and local governments; dialogue and
mutual obligation; and differentiation and regionalisation.
Now, the origin of the ACP Group of States dates back to the Treaty of
Rome, which established the European Economic Community in 1957. The ACP
countries formalised their relationship with the European Community in 1975
when parties engaged in the preferential trade arrangement as part of the
Lomé Convention. The external parties only enjoyed preferential trade as
part of the general system of preferences.

Due to the fact that external parties could not enjoy the same benefits as
the ACP countries, this arrangement put the Lomé trade regime at odds with
the rules of the WTO; hence it had to be amended.

Now, House Chairperson, the 2005 revision of the agreement focuses on
strengthening the political dimension by placing greater emphasis on
effective dialogue and results. In addition, it also introduces new
dimensions to the co-operative arrangements so as to include new issues
such as co-operation in countering the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and co-operation in the fight against terrorism, as well as
against mercenarism.

The revised agreement marks an important break with the past. It has been
designed to promote good governance; peace and security; human rights;
economic, social and cultural development of the ACP states; and a
generally democratic political environment. Thus, the revised agreement is
much broader in scope than any previous agreement and is designed to last
for 20 years.

South Africa participates in three joint political organs of the ACP-EU:
the council of ministers, the joint parliamentary assembly and the
committee of ambassadors. The ACP-EU also provides South Africa with the
opportunity to promote its policy objectives, strengthen South-South co-
operation and advance the consolidation of the African agenda and economic
regional integration.

South Africa has to accede to the agreement as stipulated since time for
ratification in the agreement lapsed in June 2009. I therefore ask and
request this House to agree that we accede to this agreement. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I will now afford hon
members the opportunity to bid farewell to each other as this is our final
sitting for the year.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You look very tired. You are looking forward
to going home! [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Exhausted!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I can see that. There is constituency work to
be done when you get there. It is waiting for you, but at least you will be
sleeping at home every day.

Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, in his play Romeo and
Juliet, William Shakespeare says: “Parting is such sweet sorrow,” and this
is exactly how I feel today. I, however, find solace in knowing that we are
only parting to meet again. So, we will meet again very soon.

Now, hon delegates, as the 2009 parliamentary year comes to a close, I wish
to pay tribute to all the people who contributed to the effective
functioning of this House.

Firstly, I would like to acknowledge the support of the colleagues that I
worked with: the Deputy Chair, hon Memela, and the House Chairs, hon
Magadla and hon Tau, as well as Chief Whip Ntwanambi, who have been great
to work with and have never failed to perform when asked.

Secondly, I also acknowledge the tireless work of the NCOP. Thirdly, a big
thank you also goes to all provincial Whips and chairpersons of select
committees, as well as members of the NCOP for doing their part to make the
business of this House run so efficiently thus far.

Fourthly, I also acknowledge the tireless work of the NCOP Secretariat
under the leadership of Acting Secretary Adv Phindela for the support they
gave to members of this House, as well as the staff in the office of the
Chairperson of the NCOP.

Fifthly, I would like also to thank the staff of the entire Parliament, in
particular the NCOP, for the professional and administrative skills in
serving the House by compiling Hansard records, processing legislation,
questions and petitions and serving select committees. Lastly, I want to
thank you very much for all the wonderful work you have done.

As we approach the new year, it is a very appropriate moment to look back
on the six months that have passed, where, among other things, the NCOP
strategic plan workshop and the Whippery workshop took place that helped to
chart the way for us this year as well as for the entire term of
Parliament. These workshops have helped a lot as more than two thirds of
NCOP members were new and were still finding their feet.

I must say I’m pleased at how quickly members have adapted. I never thought
you would adapt so quickly, but I’m smiling: I didn’t want to say it. You
know, if you count the older members who were here for the last term, I
think we are only seven. But I must congratulate you that you learned very
fast. I can go back to all your parties and say you are doing a really
wonderful job. [Applause.]

I can go back to all your provinces and tell them that they deployed people
who are prepared to work and who are serious about making the work of this
institution very effective and very prominent. I thank you very much for
adapting and learning so quickly. [Applause.] [Interjections.] No,
including hon Bloem. [Laughter.]

Ladies and gentlemen, I do not want to waste your time; all I want to say
is thank you for the work you have done during the provincial week. Mr
Watson, we investigated your matter and the letter is on its way; I don’t
want us to part in a sour mood. You must go home and enjoy. I have also
investigated the matter, and you will be receiving your letter very soon in
your office. But all of you have done a really wonderful job.
Every delegation reported that it was wonderful work that you have done.
Despite the challenging times this year, especially with our budget, the
accomplishments were satisfying.

I want to express my personal and heartfelt thanks to all of you for
maintaining your balance, your sense of humour, your fortitude and most of
all your humanity throughout the challenges of the year. You kept your
focus even in uncomfortable situations or circumstances, such as when you
worked late into the evening, like last Tuesday, when we had to pass the
National House of Traditional Leaders Bill and the Traditional Leadership
and Governance Framework Amendment Bill.

I am sure that the people of South Africa, especially the traditional
leaders, appreciate the work that you have been doing.

Now you should relax. Please! I emphasise this, relax and enjoy your well-
earned rest as much as possible with your families. They need you because
they haven’t seen you for the past six months, because you’ve been packing
your bags when you reached home and going to your constituencies which are
far from your own homes.

I hope we will come back next year fully recharged and ready for the full
year. I must warn you, though, that the programme for next year will be
compact, as you know that we are hosting the Fifa World Cup. You must also
go to the stadiums and watch the football. Do not just sit in front of your
TVs; go there and clap and shout, at the stadium, to motivate Bafana Bafana
so that they can move and win next year’s Fifa World Cup.

As you rest, please prepare for the coming year. Keep on supporting Bafana
Bafana, starting with the match tonight against Jamaica. I hope a lot of
you will be able to see that match. Shout at them from home, except that
you must tell them to sing the right national anthem and not to do what
they did when the Springboks were playing. [Laughter.] I don’t know who
motivated them to sing the way they were singing then.

I wish you all a very merry Christmas and a happy New Year, and I want to
invite you for a very light snack in the Queen’s Hall and to enjoy yourself
before you go home. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Chairperson, I must apologise to the House, I’m meeting the President of
the Senate of the Democratic Republic of Congo. I’m actually late; I should
have been there now, but I will be there in the next five minutes. If you
could release me to go and join them there, I will be happy. They are
waiting for me. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I hope that you are going to give me two more
minutes. Let me take this opportunity, on behalf of Cope, to add my voice
to the good and wise words of our Chairperson.
Thank you, Chairperson, for the very beautiful words. I must mention from
the outset that I have made very good new friends and others were not so
good, but they are good, all of you are good. [Laughter.] One thing I
really want to give to some members here in the House as a Christmas gift
is tolerance.

You know, some are not so tolerant. We must listen to the views of others;
we must respect that. Let me also convey greetings and blessings from our
president, Mosiuoa Terror Lekota. [Applause.] He wishes all of you a
blessed and prosperous New Year.

I have some tips for some of our members for the New Year. Hon member
Chaane, you are first. Here is a tip: you are too fast when reading your
speeches.

Ka puo ya setsotsi ra re: “wa spita, too much”, Ntate. [In Tsotsi taal
[language] this is expressed as: “You are too big for your boots”, sir.]

But you are not alone, you have a twin brother and that is Gunda. Gunda is
also very fast when he speaks. In Afrikaans we say: Jy is te haastig. Jy
moet net ’n klein bietjie afkoel. [You are too hasty. You must slow down a
little bit.]

The second tip is to our Chief Whip. Chief Whip, stop dreaming about Helen
Zille, please! [Laughter.] Please stop because I can see that you dream
about the Premier of the Western Cape and that will cause you to have a
heart attack. [Laughter.]

I have a very serious proposal to make, which is that when we come back
next year, the Chairperson must allow us to come into the House with
vuvuzelas so that when any one of you is not speaking sense we will blow
the vuvuzelas.

Let me wish all of you a merry and happy Christmas and a blessed New Year.
Go well and come back with energy and steam and let us move on. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: It is an honour to stand here again today, taking part in this
debate on this topic, for the sixth consecutive year in succession. This
signals the end of our first session and a very new experience for most of
our colleagues but that itself, I suppose, is emblematic of the changing
face of politics.

I would have loved to reflect on many of you, both the old ones, like the
troublemaking hon Freddie Adams, and the new ones, like hon Nzimande, who
said he is a Catholic and Communist; or maybe hon Bloem, the old hand
learning new tricks - and no, hon Bloem, you can’t make a statement.
[Laughter.]

Chairperson, that is not possible in the three minutes we have been
allowed. So, as a liberal and a Protestant, I will have to single out only
a few. But it seems that we cannot stop a meeting without referring to our
Chairperson, hon Mahlangu.

It was a happy surprise for all of us that you chose to come back to us and
not to go and rest on that farm you have been dreaming of for such a long
time. Welcome back and thank you for being such a unique leader, and may
you and the other presiding officers enjoy your well-deserved rest. I
didn’t copy Mr Bloem, but Chief Bloem, please find time to relax and
meditate on ways to be less excited about the Western Cape. [Laughter.]

Helen Zille is here to stay, so just relax and accept the inevitable. It is
good to observe that the winds of change for the better have at last blown
amongst our officials and I trust that they too will find some time to
rest. But Adv Phindela, you will all have to come back again early next
year and every year thereafter until you do it completely right.

The colleagues from the other opposition parties are all new to the NCOP
except, of course, hon Sinclair, who has been everywhere. [Laughter.] But I
must say it has been a pleasure working with them all.

In my April speech I speculated that jostling for position was going to
take place in the ANC, so all the newly deployed cadres that we see confirm
my prediction 100%. It seems the battle of Polokwane is not yet quite over,
so you will have to tackle the new problems and groupings within groupings
back home.

Most of my colleagues in the DA are also newcomers but they have been a
great team and have done a fantastic job. Thank you for your support and
hard work, colleagues. Please have a good rest but always keep your eyes
open to see what those others are contemplating.

Chairperson, I know my time has run out but, please, I want to leave you
with a special lesson that the pencil maker teaches the pencil. Firstly,
the pencil maker taught the pencil never to forget that everything you do
will leave a mark. Secondly, however, remember that your mistakes can be
corrected. Thirdly, therefore, never forget that what is most important is
what is inside you. Fourthly, know that in your life you will undergo many
painful sharpenings which will make you a better pencil and, lastly,
remember to be the best pencil you can be.

To be the best pencil you can be you must allow yourself to be guided by
the hand that holds you. May the Almighty further hold you and guide you,
Chairperson and hon members, especially our Chair of the House, and may the
wonderful message of Christmas find its way into your hearts and homes.
Bless you all! [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, amalungu ahloniphekile ngithi nginifisela
ukuthi neshwame kahle lonyaka. Sisebenze kahle sisonke ndawonye njengabantu
abamele izifundazwe eziyisishiyagalolunye zaleli lizwe. Ngithi ngiyabonga
kakhulu kuSihlalo waleNdlu, kwiPhini lakhe kanye nakubo bonke labo abamele
izifundazwe zonke ngokusebenzisana okuhle.

Ngithi sesibheke phambili, sengathi uNkulunkulu angasigcina kulezi zingozi
ukuze sikwazi ukuphepha sibone lonyaka ka-2010 ukuthi usiphatheleni. Bese
ngithi kumama uSotswebhu Omkhulu kumele nibengabazali nikwazi ukusiyala
kahle nabanye obaba laba abasebebadala ukuze sikwazi ukusebenza kahle
ngokuya phambili.
Besengithi ukuphikisana kwethu kukonke lapha kufuneka kusakhe ngoba
kuyizinsika zentando yeningi ukuba kubekhona abantu abaphikisayo kodwa
kuphikiswe ngokwakhayo. Ngibonge kakhulu ukuba ngisebenze nani ngifisa
sengathi uBaba O mkhulu angangigcina mhlawumbe ngibuye ngonyaka ozayo
ngisaphila. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson and hon members, I hope that you begin the
new year well. We worked well together as the representatives of the nine
provinces of this country. I say thank you very much to the Chairperson of
this House, his deputy and to all those representing the provinces.

As we march forward, may God protect us from accidents in order for us to
see what 2010 has in store for us. I say to you, Madam Chief Whip, you have
to be a parent and admonish us well - these experienced gentlemen too in
order for us to work progressively.

Let me also say that our debates here in totality should be constructive
because they are the pillars of democracy, as is having these people who
engage themselves in these debates, but in a constructive way. I am
grateful for having worked with you; my wish is that the Almighty protects
me, so that I may return next year. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr J J GUNDA: Chair, hon Chief Whip and Chairperson, in absentia, allow me
to say to you that it has been a wonderful journey this past seven months.
It is a pleasure to have worked with the people here. I appreciate it, and
I have learned a lot in these past few months.

Let me say this one thing: I believe what John C Maxwell said – that people
who are leaders can only lead when they can lead themselves. If you are not
able to understand a difficult person, you will never be able to lead that
person. You must learn to lead yourself and understand difficult people,
knowing that we can do our best.

I would like thank the hon Chief Whip for teaching me a lot in a short span
of time. To the Chairperson, M J Mahlangu, it is not the first time that I
have met him. Since being in the legislature in the Northern Cape, since I
met the Chairperson, he has been an absolutely unique leader. You see, you
must give credit where credit is due and don’t be jealous, because all of
us are unique. All of us can learn from one another.

I would like to say today that it is a privilege for me to meet people like
Gamede and Nzimande, the people who always say that they are from the
province with the name and the surname. So, people, I would like to wish
you a merry Christmas, a prosperous and a blessed New Year, and I hope that
when we come back ...

... gaan ons so ’n bietjie Afrikaans praat en dan gaan ons ’n bietjie bua
[praat] en dan gaan ons weer thetha [praat] en khuluma [praat] en avuxeni
[groete]. Dit gaan lekker wees in die nuwe jaar, maar daar gaan baie harde
werk wees vir ons almal. Ek wil graag sien of die Parlement, hierdie NRVP
en die Parlement as geheel, nie weer ’n slag daardie netjiese baadjies kan
kry met die wapens, as die Lede van die Parlement, om net ’n verskil te
maak en te wys ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[... we are going to speak a little bit of Afrikaans and bua [talk] a
little bit and then we are going to thetha [talk] and khuluma [talk] and
avuxeni [greetings] again. The new year is going to be enjoyable, but there
will be lots of hard work for all of us. I would like to see if Parliament,
the NCOP and Parliament as a whole, can obtain those neat blazers with the
Members of Parliament badges again, just to make a difference and to show
that ...]

... these are Members of Parliament.

Nog iets wat ek vandag vir u wil sê is dat in die nuwe jaar ... [Something
else that I want to mention today is that in the new year ...]

... we must do more oversight to see that service is being delivered to the
people.

There must be a better budget for the committees to go and do the work.
They have been elected to do oversight. They have been elected to see to it
that service reaches the electorate. We have been elected to be their ears,
to be their eyes, to be their mouthpieces, so next year, all chairpersons
of select committees, you must speak your mind to get us into an oversight
role, so that there must be money for us to go and see that the people have
to be serviced.

I thank you, Chairperson. Enjoy your holidays and enjoy your kids. Those
who are married men, enjoy your wives. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: House Chairperson, hon members and comrades,
I must say, for the first time I have worked very well with a member from
the DA, who is also my provincial Whip. This says that in the NCOP we are
able to work with one another. I must also say that there are members here
who really ... [Interjections.] Continue that sentence. I didn’t say that.

I also want to say that as we come to the end of 2009, we must look back
and all agree that it was a greatly challenging year. We all participated
in the election campaign, each party hoping to get the 50% plus one, but
there always be only one victor, and we will always be that.

Whether you agree or you don’t, you have no choice on this one. You have to
agree with me. I also want say, Chair, as we go back to our constituencies,
let’s engage our communities, educate society about the laws that we make,
about the laws that empower them and about the laws that protect them.

We will begin our new year with the workshop that we have postponed.
Remember, tomorrow we were supposed to have a workshop. We have postponed
that until next year, together with other matters. Of course, we have to
plan for what we will do next year and how we will take our work forward
for the whole of next year.

House Chair, we rise at a time when the world is observing the 16 Days of
No Violence Against Women and Children campaign. I want us to make sure
that, together, we work with the police to protect their lives. It is such
a bad and heartbreaking thing to see young children being killed by their
fathers.

When a husband doesn’t agree with me, the mother, then he makes sure that
he’ll take the child’s life. Because I am the mother, I must feel that
pain. It is the responsibility of all of us to protect our children. That
problem knows no race; it knows no colour.

I also want to say that as we mention the 16 Days of No Violence Against
Women and Children, we will mention World Aids Day, but we don’t speak
about 3 December. We don’t speak about that, so next year, as we continue
with this debate, we have to make sure that people with disabilities hear
us speaking about them, those of us who are not yet disabled, because
sooner or later, we will be joining that club. I know Mr Watkins is slowly
moving there. You know, Mr Watson has changed his surname. The unfortunate
thing is that you all don’t know that I am the only one who knows it. So,
don’t be surprised when I call him Watkins. He has two names now. Today he
is Watson, and on another day he is Watkins.

Chair, I want to thank the provincial Whips, the political parties and all
members for their good co-operation. I know that in the process I might
have trampled on your toes. You must know that it was not deliberate. It
was because I wanted us to be taken as a House, not as a hokkie [little
cage]. We are a House here.

Lastly, I want to thank the support and advisory staff of the NCOP, under
Adv Phindela, and thank the staff in my office, without whom I wouldn’t
have been this successful a Chief Whip. It is due to them that I have been
able to work.

Lastly, on behalf of the ANC and on behalf of myself, as the Chief Whip, I
wish you a good and enjoyable rest. May God Almighty be with you all till
we meet again, but remember: Arrive Alive. Don’t drink and drive. Drinking
doesn’t apply to men only. May all of us not drink and drive. May you have
a merry Christmas and a prosperous 2010, and we hope that, for the first
time in our lifetime, of course, Africa will bring the World Cp home. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The Council adjourned at 19:09.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         WEDNESDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1     Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted
    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 11 November 2009 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] (National
              Assembly – sec 77).


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
              Appropriations of the National Council of Provinces.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
    (a)     A copy of the recommendations of the Independent Commission for
        the Remuneration of Public Office-Bearers in respect  of  salaries,
        allowances and benefits of public office-bearers for 2009/2010  was
        submitted to Parliament on 11  November  2009  in  accordance  with
        section 8(5) of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration  of
        Public Office-Bearers Act, 1997 (No 92 of 1997).

   2. The Minister of Social Development

     a) Report of the Central Drug Authority (CDA) for 2008-2009 [RP 252-
        2009].



                         THURSDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 12 November 2009:


          a) National House of Traditional Leaders Bill [B 56D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


          b) Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment Bill
             [B 57D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 12 November 2009 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
              Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] (National Assembly –
              sec 75).


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
              Security and Constitutional Development of the National
              Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

           a) Policy Imperatives: Parliament 2009 - 2014.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Trade  and  International
    Relations on the Accession to the Revised Cotonou Partnership Agreement:
    Agreement Amending the Partnership Agreement between the Members of  the
    African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, of the one part, and the
    European Community and its Member States, of the other  part,  dated  12
    November 2009:

The Select Committee on Trade and International Relations, having
considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Accession to the
Revised Cotonou Partnership Agreement: Agreement Amending the Partnership
Agreement between the Members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group
of States, of the one part, and the European Community and its Member
States, of the other part , referred to it, recommends that the House, in
terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.

Report to be considered.

                          FRIDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

     1. Membership of Committees

        1) Mr. S D Montsitsi has been elected as co-chairperson of the
           Joint Standing Committee
           on Defence with effect from 13 November 2009.

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1. The Chairperson

   a) Draft notice and schedule in terms of section 2(4) of the Judges’
      Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001(Act No 47 of
      2001), determining the rate at which salaries are payable to
      Constitutional Court Judges and Judges annually, with effect from 1
      April 2009, for approval by Parliament.


   b) Draft notice and schedule in terms of section 12(3) of the Magistrates
      Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining the rate at which salaries
      are payable to magistrates annually, with effect from 1 April 2009,
      for approval by Parliament.

   Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
   Development for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations on the Adjustments
    Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 12
    November 2009:


     The Select Committee on Appropriations, having considered the subject
     of the Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] (National Assembly
     – sec 77) referred to it and classified by the JTM as a section 77
     Bill, reports that it has agreed to the bill without amendments.

Report to be considered

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations on  the  2009  Medium
     Term Budget Policy Statement, dated 13 November 2009

 1. Introduction and Background

The Minister of Finance, Honourable Pravin Gordhan, tabled the  Medium  Term
Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) on 27 October  2009,  outlining  the  budget
priorities of government for the medium term. The MTBPS was tabled  together
with the Adjustments  Appropriation  Bill  [B13  -  2009].  The  Adjustments
Appropriation Bill was referred to the Select  Committee  on  Appropriations
for consideration and report while the MTBPS  was  referred  to  the  Select
Committee  on  Finance  and  the  Select  Committee  on  Appropriations   to
consider, in accordance with their respective mandates as  outlined  in  the
Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act No 9 of 2009.  Among
its responsibilities in respect  of  the  MTBPS,  the  Select  Committee  on
Appropriations (the Committee) is required to consider  and  report  on  the
following issues:

    • the spending priorities of national  government  for  the  next  three
      years;
    • the proposed division of revenue between the spheres of government and
      between arms of government within a sphere for the next  three  years;
      and
    •  the  proposed  substantial  adjustments  to  conditional  grants   to
      provinces and local government, if any.

The  Committee,  in   collaboration   with   the   Standing   Committee   on
Appropriations,  invited  the  national  departments  of  Basic   Education,
Health,  Rural  Development  and  Land  Reform,  Public  Works,  Water   and
Environmental Affairs as well  as  Cooperative  Governance  and  Traditional
Affairs as they were considered strategic partners in the implementation  of
policy priorities. These departments were  required  to  account  for  their
budget  plans.  Furthermore,  the  Human  Sciences  Research  Council,   the
Financial and Fiscal Commission,  independent  economists  and  the  Peoples
Budget Coalition were invited to comment on the 2009 MTBPS. All the  invited
organisations and individuals made their submissions with the  exception  of
the People’s Budget Coalition.

The Committee acknowledges that the MTBPS is tabled during a time when
world economies, including South Africa’s, are in economic difficulty. This
presents serious challenges including decreased revenues, job losses and
increased dependence on social programmes. The economic meltdown and
projected decline in the tax revenue, in the near term, may require changes
in medium term budget proposals. This will in turn necessitate that
domestic policies ensure that funds are directed to those sectors and
programmes which have the greatest impact on the lives of people living in
South Africa.
 2. Budget priorities for the medium-term

The budget priorities over the medium-term support policy priorities of
government. In line with the second 2009 State of the Nation Address
(SONA), government prioritises its resources in the following five areas:
    • supporting job creation initiatives and realigning support to business
      to enhance employment opportunities;
    • enhancing the quality of education and skills development;
    • improving the provision of quality health care;
    • driving a more comprehensive rural development strategy; and
    • intensifying the fight against crime and corruption.

These priorities are supported by a government strategy which includes the
shifting of resources to labour intensive sectors of the economy.
Furthermore, government will strive to improve State performance with
specific regard to the delivery of services to the poor. In the light of
the current budget pressures, the Committee is of the view that limited
resources should be utilised to produce maximum output, without
compromising the quality of services.  The fiscal framework makes an
addition of R78 billion to the baseline budget. A substantial share of this
budget is allocated to provinces for health and education. This increase in
provincial baselines is intended to finance health and education for salary
increases as well as the Occupational Specific Dispensation (OSD). Other
resources are allocated for antiretroviral treatment, workbooks for early
phases of schooling and housing programmes. Infrastructure programmes
including the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) received an additional
allocation. The additional budget to national departments will finance the
child support grant, rural development, the criminal justice sector as well
as industrial development and job creation. The consolidated expenditure of
government is expected to be R841.4 billion, and R1 052.8 billion in
2009.10 and 2012/13 financial years, respectively.

 3. Overview of the Budget Adjustments

The downturn in the global economy and various domestic constraints have
affected millions of South Africans where the economy has contracted by 2
per cent in the first quarter of 2009 which was eventually estimated to 1.9
per cent for 2009. However, an estimate of 1.5 per cent economic growth in
2010 has been projected in the domestic economy as a result of an increase
in government spending on transport projects and soccer stadiums for the
2010 Federation of International Football Association (FIFA) World Cup.
Domestic economy is driven by a strong investment growth and continuous
investment in the economic infrastructure to provide an important support
to economic recovery, reduce infrastructure backlogs and attract more
private investors. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects the rest
of the world to grow by approximately 3.1 per cent in 2010.  The additional
R14 billion that has been proposed in the Adjustments Appropriation Bill is
welcomed. This addition includes R5 billion on the higher interest costs
and R9 billion in higher non interest spending. It is noted that,
initially, the overall budget was R738.5 billion and this has been adjusted
to R752.5 billion during the adjustment period. While the departments have
only managed to spend R368 billion in the first six months of the 2009/10
fiscal year, the MTBPS allocates an additional budget of R14 billion.

The Committee supports the proposed increased lending capabilities of the
Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) by about R102 billion over the
next five years to focus and contribute to development. The Committee also
supports an additional funding of R1 billion a year in the provincial
equitable share for spending in frontline services particularly in
education and health in order to accommodate higher salaries for teachers
and doctors and to strengthen good governance and oversight in provinces
and municipalities.

Public infrastructure is allocated R872 billion over the medium term to
invest in school buildings, public transport, water and sanitation. The
Committee welcomes this allocation, as infrastructure development is needed
to boost the recovery of the economy. Careful planning and monitoring of
infrastructure projects is essential to limit the risk of costs escalation.

An amount of R1.5 billion, which emanated from the rollovers arising from
commitments related to unspent funds in the 2008/09 budget, has been noted.
Among other things, the non-payment and non-completion of projects within
specific timeframes result in unspent funds. This state of affairs remains
a cause for concern according to the Committee as most of these projects
are regarded as essential projects which are associated with job creation
as well as with the 2010 FIFA World Cup. This is indicative of poor
planning and non compliance with certain supply chain management and
finance legislative frameworks.

The Committee welcomes the additional funding of R12 billion in order to
the increase in the public service’s compensation of employees particularly
with regard to the Occupational Specific Dispensation (OSD) agreements; it
is hoped that this will assist in retaining scarce skills in the public
sector such as those of doctors, civil engineers, architects etc.

The Committee supports the additional allocation of R509 million to
compensate municipalities for the escalating costs of providing free basic
services such as water and electricity to citizens that qualify for free
basic services under the indigent policy of municipalities. This will
assist in reducing pressure imposed by the costs of free basic services to
municipal budgets which must be provided to indigent households in order to
keep up with the Bill of Rights as stipulated in chapter 2 of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.

The 2009 MTBPS proposes a culture of savings rather than under-spending. It
was indicated that there is a need for the government to identify areas of
savings through rearrangement of government priorities and reduction of
spending in non-core functions. This can be achieved through reduction in
irregularities, corruption and fraud as well as reduction of fruitless and
wasteful expenditure, and creating a culture of doing more with less.

 4. Budget Estimates for the 2009/10 Mid-Year

National departments were allocated R399.6 billion in the 2009/10 financial
year, excluding the direct charge. The Adjustments Appropriation Bill
proposes an additional spending of R9.2 billion for national departments in
the 2009/10 financial year. Of these funds, R1.9 billion was rolled over
from the previous year’s budget. It was indicated to the Committee during
public hearings that rollover funds have already been committed by the
departments. Among the Committee’s concerns was a lack of spending of
infrastructure budgets by various departments. This pattern was evident in
respect of the MIG projects, which required a rollover of R287.8 million.

The budget adjustments propose a shift of R2.3 million from the Department
of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA) to the Department
of Rural Development and Land Reform. This shift was necessitated by the
transfer of the rural development programme from CoGTA to the Department of
Rural Development and Land Reform, in line with the reconfigured government
structure. The Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs
(CoGTA) indicated that the lack of spending in MIG was due to 33
municipalities that could not spend their allocations. CoGTA indicated its
intention to withhold funds and request National Treasury to redirect them
to spending municipalities. It is determined that of the 33 municipalities
that did not appropriately spend on the MIG, three were affected by the
recent service delivery protests. These were the Mbombela Local
Municipality, Nala Local Municipality and the City of Johannesburg.

The lack of spending on the MIG is a matter of serious concern,
particularly in light of recent service delivery protests in some of the
under-spending municipalities. The Committee notes that the shifting of
funds from under-spending to other municipalities would be problematic as
it could create infrastructure backlogs for the under-spending
municipalities. This intervention might therefore have undesired political
outcomes. Needless to say, its constitutionality and legality might be
questionable.

The Department of Public Works is allocated an additional amount of R524.9
million for unforeseen and unavoidable expenditure. This includes funds for
the offices and residences of new Ministers and Deputy Ministers, the
Devolution of Property Rates Grant and salary increases. Some of these
funds are for the creation of new jobs through the Expanded Public Works
Programmes (EPWP) to meet the targets announced by the President, His
Excellency Mr. Jacob Gedley’hlekisa Zuma, during the State of the Nation
address.  The Department rolled over R116.7 million for infrastructure
projects from the previous financial year. These include funds for Re
Kgabisa Tshwane projects, upgrading of some buildings in Bloemfontein, land
ports of entry development projects and prestige accommodation. The
Department does not seem to have enough capabilities to spend funds
allocated to the Re Kgabisa Tshwane and Prestige projects. Funds from these
programmes have been rolled over since the 2006/07 financial year. With
regard to the prestige projects, the Department has indicated that work has
already been done for Ministerial houses but the payment was still to be
made to the Property Management Trading Entity (PMTE). The Department also
indicated that there is a challenge in the conceptualisation of the Re
Kgabisa Tshwane projects. It is only responsible for the purchasing of the
land while the actual construction is done through a Public-Private
Partnership (PPP). The Department indicated its intention to contribute to
the comprehensive rural development strategy through this programme.

The Committee understands the purpose of the Re Kgabisa Tshwane projects to
be the refurbishment and provision of office space for national
departments. It also understands its operations to be limited to the City
of Tshwane and any proposal to extend the projects beyond this might be
outside its scope and purpose. The persistent rollover of funds for similar
projects is a matter of concern, since funds could have been redirected to
urgent priorities.

The Adjustments Appropriation Bill proposes a shift of functions from the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry due to the reconfiguration of
government structure. This shift of functions resulted in R487.6 million
originally allocated to this Department being shifted to the Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The shift of the sanitation function
to the Department of Human Settlements has not been fully implemented and
no funds have been shifted for this purpose. The Department rolled over
R232.3 million of the funds for capital projects from the previous
financial year. These include funds for the construction of the De Hoop Dam
and the Regional Bulk Infrastructure grant. The funds for the De Hoop Dam
have been rolled over since the 2007/08 financial year. The Department has
indicated that delays in finalising a memorandum of agreement with 23 mines
contributed to the slow spending in the 2008/09 financial year.
Furthermore, continuous rainfalls delayed the timeous completion of
projects. The late submission of invoices delayed spending on the Regional
Bulk Infrastructure.

The Department of Rural Development and Land Reform indicated that it had
requested an additional budget of R4.4 billion for the 2009/10 budget
adjustment to fund rural development, new offices of the Ministry as well
as the Restitution and Deeds Trading Entity. Due to the bad economic
conditions, the Department revised its request downward to R1.7 billion. An
additional budget of R292 million was allocated to rural development, R9
million to the Ministry and R31 million for general salary adjustments.  Of
the R3.5 billion requested for the Restitution programme, only an
additional budget of R1.1 billion was granted. The Department indicated
that it might be difficult to meet the objectives of rural development due
to budget constraints. Shifting of funds will need to be made to finance
the restitution programme.

The Committee is in agreement with the Department that the budget
allocation to the Restitution programme is not sufficient to support the
development needs of the country. The Restitution programme had already
spent 91 per cent of its budget by the end of the second quarter and the
lack of sufficient funding in this area compromises the rural development
agenda of government. It is reported that this challenge is worsened by the
attitude of land owners who inflate land prices when negotiating the land
sale agreement with government and the cost of land is selling at the price
which is three times more than the market price which makes the purchase of
land expensive. This is worrying since land is central to the
implementation of the government’s comprehensive rural strategy and if
resources are not prioritised for land reform programmes, the objectives of
this strategy might not be achieved.

The Department of Education received a total Adjustment of R561.686
million. The Department rolled over R8.6 million for operations, R3.5
million for HIV/Aids conditional grant (for Limpopo province) and R9
million for new functions of the Council on Higher Education (CHE). The
Department also received an additional budget of R8 million for the new
ministry of Higher Education. This will go towards sustaining the
ministerial offices and those of the Director-General. In future, it is
anticipated that more funds will be required for the running of the new
Department of Higher Education. A substantial amount of R524.1 million was
allocated for workbooks for literacy and numeracy for grades 1 to 6
learners in quintiles 1 to 3 schools. An amount of R8.5 million was
allocated for increase in improvement of conditions of service.

The Department indicated that R94.4 million was requested for examination
and assessment, and R291.7 million for the National School Nutrition
Programme was requested but funding was not provided for these. The
Department noted that the Occupational Specific Dispensation for Educators
was not fully funded. The Committee expresses is concerned about the lack
of sufficient funding in the National School Nutrition Programme.

 5. Medium Term Spending Priorities

The Minister of Finance indicated to a joint meeting of the Finance and
Appropriations committees that ambitions of government are curtailed due to
the financial pressures. He noted that borrowings will burden some parts of
future generations and that savings will be made in government spending.
The Minister called upon the business sector to commit and outline its role
in the government savings programme. He indicated that employment is not as
fast as expected and that it was necessary to improve training programmes
and basic education in South Africa. Over the period ahead, more people
will be employed for the front line and less in the administration. Matric
vouchers programme is proposed to subsidise the costs for employers in
hiring persons with matric certificates without lowering applicable
salaries. The Minister reiterated government’s commitment to infrastructure
investment. With regard to uprooting corruption in government funds, a task
team has been established to look at each case of corruption and weaknesses
in the procurement system. He called on society at large to assist
government in fighting the culture of corruption. It was indicated that
spending priorities support the policy priorities.
The  Financial  and  Fiscal  Commission  (FFC)  noted  that,  the   national
proportion of the Division of Revenue continues to decline over  the  Medium
Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) from 50.1 per cent  in  2009/10  financial
year to 46.9 per cent in the 2012/13 financial year. On the other  hand  the
provincial and local proportions are increasing  over  the  MTEF  (refer  to
table 1 below).

    Table 1: Division of nationally collected revenue


    |         |2009/10       |20010/11    |2011/12     |2012/13  |
|         |revised       |            |            |         |
|% share  |              |Medium-term estimates               |
|National |50.1          |48.3        |47          |46.9     |
|Provincia|42.6          |43.6        |44.4        |44       |
|l        |              |            |            |         |
|Local    |  7.3         |  8         |  8.7       |  9.1    |

Source: FFC presentation

The Commission was  particularly  concerned  about  the  unanticipated  wage
bill. It suggested that there should be a deliberate attempt to  synchronise
the centralized bargaining process of the  public  sector  with  the  budget
process to reduce undue burden to  sub-nationals  by  decisions  over  which
they have no direct control. The high wage bill led to immense  pressure  on
provincial budgets. Of the R39  billion  added  to  the  provincial  fiscus,
R32.7 billion is transferred in the  form  of  equitable  share  while  R7.1
billion is transferred in the form of conditional grants over the MTEF.  The
Commission highlighted the need to identify which  conditional  grants  were
impacted by the increase.

5.1   Expanding employment and safeguard social security

The MTBPS proposes a shifting of resources towards labour intensive  sectors
and the  creation  of  jobs  in  the  delivery  of  public  services.  While
government expects all its  prioritised  programmes  to  contribute  to  job
creation, its main target for expanding  employment  is  skills  development
and training, infrastructure  development  and  the  expanded  public  works
programme. Government intends to create 4.5 million jobs over the next  five
years.  An  amount  of  R114.5  million  is  provided  for  community  works
programme in the budget adjustments in  the  current  financial  year.  This
programme is expected to create  180  000  full  time  jobs  by  2014.   New
incentives to encourage government departments  and  municipalities  to  use
their budgets for labour intensive programmes in the  infrastructure  sector
are proposed. These  incentives  will  be  extended  to  the  environmental,
cultural and social sectors.

The  Human  Sciences  Research  Council  (HSRC)  welcomed  the  government’s
commitment to generate sustainable employment. It noted however that it  was
not  always  easy  to  make  the  connection  between  the  need  to  create
employment and the budget. It was critical for the country  not  to  compete
purely on price but also to explore  product  development,  venture  capital
and  market  access.  Continued  infrastructure  spending  is  critical   in
creating jobs. The HSRC highlighted a need to prioritise the youth over  the
next four years of the current administration.  It  is  reported  that  more
than 50 per cent of the youth leaving school are unemployed.  About  65  per
cent of black youth leaving school is reported to be  unemployed.   To  this
end the provincial grant aimed at  sport  and  recreation  was  seen  to  be
inadequate. The HSRC noted that this  grant  could  be  critical  pre-labour
market intervention in the context where youth was  marginalised  from  most
social organisations. In addition, the HSRC recommended the introduction  of
a youth transitional jobs scheme. It is  of  the  view  that  commitment  to
further education and training  is  critical.  However,  the  budget  set  a
target of 350 000 enrolments by  2014  which  was  a  third  of  the  HSRC’s
expectations.

The Department of Public Works (DPW) plays a leading role in the job
creation initiatives through the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) and
other infrastructure projects. It has received an additional budget of R9.7
billion over the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) period.  This
includes R3.5 billion for EPWP and R4.4 billion for infrastructure budget.
The Department has been allocated additional allocation of R835.8 million
in the 2010/11 financial year to strengthen the EPWP incentive scheme. This
scheme will be extended to such sectors as the social sector, environmental
sector and community work programmes. Labour intensive methods are enforced
through this scheme with ongoing monitoring done to ensure that empowerment
is attained. Of the additional budget for infrastructure, R451.1 million is
allocated for the 2010/11 financial year. This goes to Border Control
Operational Coordinating Committee (BCOCC). The DPW is the custodian of
immovable assets at 54 land ports of entry. This budget goes for
infrastructural development at the land ports of entry by 2010 and beyond.
The implementation of this programme is expected to be labour intensive and
pro-Black Economic Empowerment (BEE).

An additional budget also provides for R771.6 million in 2010/11 for the
construction of a new Parliamentary precinct, construction of parking bays
and a multipurpose centre. This project is expected to cost R2 billion and
the feasibility study has been completed.  The budget also provides for
additional R16.2 million in 2010/11 financial year for accessibility to
State-owned buildings and R214.8 million to address the problem of old and
inefficient water works systems in State-owned buildings. The DPW indicated
its challenges in attracting strategic and technical skills, and the
budgetary constraints make it more difficult to retain skills and create
the necessary capacity needed to maintain and manage immovable property.

The DPW indicated that it is still enhancing the asset register and the
valuation of State-owned buildings will not be done in the 2009/10
financial year. It also indicated that the chief directorate was
established within the Department to focus on the asset register. However,
the Committee is concerned about the slow progress in the development of
the asset register. The department continuously receives qualified audit
outcomes as a result of the outstanding asset register. The Committee calls
upon the department to capacitate itself in this respect in view of the
fact that it is responsible for all other departments’ asset registers.

The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs plays a crucial role in
the job creation initiatives of government. For the period ahead the
Department plans to contribute in job creation, particularly in rural
areas, through its construction programmes. It intends to fill vacant
positions in its regional offices and to be less dependant on consultants.
The Department values the role of the Small Medium and Macro Enterprises
(SMMEs) in creating jobs and stimulating economic growth, and as such will
appoint SMMEs for its work. The Department contributes to the EPWP through
the Working for Fire and Working for Water programmes. The Working for Fire
programme is allocated R184.4 million in 2010/11 which increases to R254.6
million in 2012/13. The Working for Water programme is allocated R579.9
million in 2010/11, which increases to R855.5 million in 2012/13. For its
capital expenditure, the Department proposed an additional budget of R4.8
billion, R10.9 billion and R8.1 billion in 2010/11, 2011/12 and 2012/13
financial years, respectively. The proposed additional budget was scaled
down to R2.4 billion, R4.1 billion and R8.4 billion in 2010/11, 2011/12 and
2012/13 financial years, respectively. The Department indicated that no
allocation was made for other projects after the scaling down. These
include Mooi–Mngeni Transfer Scheme, Komati Water Augmentation Project and
Mokolo and Crocodile River Water Augmentation Project. The Department
indicated that the National Treasury was of a view that these projects can
be funded off-budget through the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority (TCTA).
Part of the mandate of the TCTA is to fundraise for bulk water
infrastructure through loans from the commercial water users that benefit
from these projects.

The Committee views rural development as one of the urgent priorities of
government, and notes that some of the water scheme projects that are not
funded are in rural areas. Their funding from the fiscus would support
government’s commitment to develop rural areas, since farming activities
are expected to be at the centre of rural development. These farming
activities would create self employment and create more job opportunities
that are much needed by rural youth. It is the Committee’s view that funds
should have been directed to these programmes in support of government
priorities and to ensure participation of rural communities in the
country’s economic activities. Furthermore, in interacting with the
Department, it became evident that additional funding for the refurbishment
of water infrastructure might not adequately cover the maintenance needs of
infrastructure. The lack of sufficient funding in this area introduces new
risks of collapse in infrastructure. If funds are not made available for
the maintenance of water infrastructure this might lead to challenges
similar to those experienced during the electricity crisis.

The Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs recognises
that the role of municipalities is important in job creation through
programmes aimed at building infrastructure. Its role in this regard is to
provide support to municipalities to ensure prudent management of funds
earmarked for infrastructure development and to ensure that they achieve
the desired objectives. It undertook to increase its monitoring activities
to ensure value for money.

5.2   Improving the Quality of Education and Skills Development

Over the next three years, government intends to improve literacy and
numeracy by providing workbooks to children in poorly-resourced schools.
The target of learners who will benefit from workbooks will increase from
3.5 million in 2010/11 financial year to 5.5 million in 2011/12 financial
year. Improving access and quality of education will be prioritised and
additional funds are allocated to building of schools and teacher training.
Furthermore, a new conditional grant will be introduced to provide
additional resources for the improvement of the education system.
Government intends to increase the coverage of the national schools
nutrition programme to reach more learners and to improve the quality of
meals.

A study conducted by the HSRC showed that there are structures aimed at
improving governance in schools, but these structures are not being fully
utilised. Further, the criterion used for promoting teachers was not known
among teachers. Government needs to be more transparent in this respect.
According to the HSRC, there is a need for universal access to the Early
Childhood Development (ECD) programme and the number of 0-4 year old
children in the ECD should doubled by 2014. This will reduce the number of
grade 1 learners who start school without adequate foundation and
preparation at ECD level.

The Committee supports the prioritisation of resources to improve the
quality of education and the development of skills. The education system is
an important factor in producing skills that are much needed by the
economy. Many government departments have always under-spent over the years
in personnel budget as a result of lack of skills, particularly in the
engineering sector. The Department of Public Works indicated during the
public hearings that, technical skills remain a challenge that impedes the
execution of its projects. The national education system coupled with other
skills development institutions play a crucial role in providing social
cohesion and skilled human resources in the developmental state. The
requirements of the economy always play a central part in determining the
output of the education and training systems. In order for government to
deliver appropriate skills to the workplace, strong controls over the
institutions responsible for education and training and investment of
resources to education are important.

During the public hearings, the Department of Education was requested to
attend to the concerns raised about the moral of teachers at schools with a
view to address the causes thereof. Notwithstanding the fact that the
Further Education and Training colleges now resided with the newly
established Department of Higher Education, the Department was requested to
ensure that service delivery is not compromised in the process of
restructuring the Education Department and the transfer of functions in
this regard. The Department was also requested to ensure the improvement of
the quality of education, the provision of adequate Learner Teacher Support
Material (LTSM) and adequate provision of the National School Nutrition
Programme to all the relevant beneficiaries as well as to ensure that the
workbooks distributed by the Department reached all the targeted learners.

5.3   Enhancing the Quality of Heath Care

It was reported that the Department of Health has developed a 10-point plan
to improve the quality of health services. This plan includes overhauling
the management and operation of public hospitals, improving human resource
planning, enhancing staffing levels and ensuring efficient procurement of
medicine and medical drugs. These are seen as initiatives that lay
foundation for a national health insurance system. In order to stabilize
the health sector and to ensure the implementation of the ten-point plan a
resolution was taken to:
    • Request the National Treasury to ensure that there is no budget
      shortfall for the Occupational Specific Dispensation (OSD);
    • Request full funding for personnel where the posts were filled;
    • Request full funding for the ARV treatment programme; and
    • Ensure that there is funding for priority health services such as
      blood services and the laboratories.

The fight against HIV and Aids is a key priority for the Department of
Health and the target for new entrants to the treatment intake is expected
to be more than 300 000 a year and more than 900 000 people are expected to
receive antiretroviral treatment by 2011/12 financial year. Additional
funds were made available over the medium-term period for expansion of the
treatment programme to accommodate a higher number of people on
antiretroviral treatment. On the target of 900 000 people who are expected
to receive treatment by 2011/12, the HSRC argued that this target would be
reached earlier. This conclusion was based on a study it conducted which
showed that 800 000 people with HIV/AIDS are already on ARV treatment.

The HSRC noted that, according to a study conducted by the University of
Cape Town, service conditions in the public sector were not vastly
different from those in the private sector. But, the HSRC reported that
there are problems in the public health sector and funds are needed to
address these problems. The HSRC also noted that the 2009 MTBPS did not
provide adequate funding to address the quality of service in the public
health sector. Another challenge was the skills flight as doctors and
nurses leave South Africa for other countries. The amount allocated for the
Occupational Specific Dispensation was welcome with the understanding that
it would retain the health professionals in the public sector. However, the
HSRC indicated that there has always been under-funding of the public
health sector and this has resulted in the poor quality of health services.
The 8.6 per cent increase in the health budget is insufficient given the
under-funding that has happened over a long time.

The Department of Health received a total increase of R1.4 billion. Of the
R1.4 billion, an amount of R231.1 million is for roll over funds for the
2008/09 financial year resulting in an increase of 17 per cent. An amount
of R160 million is earmarked for the H1N1 Influenza pandemic. A further
R900 million has been allocated for the comprehensive HIV/AIDS care, R20
million for countrywide measles and polio immunization campaign and R30
million for the 2010 World Cup Health Preparation Strategy Grant. While it
seems as if no allocation was made in the 2009 MTBPS for the National
Health Insurance (NHI), the Department indicated that the ten-point plan
relates to the NHI. The funds for various programmes within the ten-point
plan are funds for the NHI. The details of the NHI would be made available
once the Minister of Health has gone through the relevant processes at the
Cabinet level.

New salary scales for doctors, dentists, pharmacists and emergency medical
personnel will be phased in over the two years. An amount of R400 million
was requested for the OSD of doctors for the respective financial years
over the MTEF. The different categories of health professionals were being
dealt with in phases. It was reported that the doctors and pharmacists have
been catered for and a review of their OSD would be reviewed in 2010.

5.4 Rolling out a Comprehensive Rural Development Strategy

The comprehensive rural development programme aims to raise rural income,
increase food production, improve the viability of small farms and draw on
the economic potential of rural areas. A two-year pilot project was
launched in Limpopo and will inform the rollout of the programme. Support
to the beneficiaries of land will be stepped up to properly skill and equip
these beneficiaries. An additional number of 1000 extension officers will
be recruited over the next three years and their skills level will be
enhanced and necessary tools will be provided. An amount of R4.1 billion is
allocated to provinces through respective grants to support emerging
farmers. Agricultural starter packs will be provided to 140 000 households
per year. A total spending on rural development is expected to rise from
approximately R6 billion in 2009/10 financial year to approximately R8
billion in 2012/13 financial year.
The HSRC is of the view that rural areas have been neglected for many
years. Poor conditions in respect of water and land are among the
challenges experienced in these areas. About 40 per cent of the South
African population lives in rural areas and less than 10 per cent are
economically active, mostly in agricultural activities. This was noted as a
sign of lack of support and channelling of resources. Growing spending on
rural development from R6 billion to R8 billion by 2012/13 financial year
was noted to be a large increase but still very small relative to the
challenge and levels of neglect in rural areas.

While the HSRC appreciates the dramatic effect of social grants in reducing
poverty and hunger, it noted that approximately 50 per cent of households
still experienced hunger and under-nutrition. Furthermore, 50 to 80 per
cent of households could not afford minimum nutrition at current prices.
Rural households spend 9 to 15 per cent more than urban households for the
same basic food basket. According to the HSRC 51 per cent of all severely
hungry households qualified for grants but did not receive them. To this
end, the HSRC recommended that a policy should be formulated to guide the
urgent rolling out of grants in a more comprehensive way while expanding
the household food production in the form of food gardening. It added that
budgets aimed at improving food security should be ring-fenced and
monitored stating that it is expensive to be poor, but more expensive to be
hungry.

The HSRC was of a view that, the budget as outlined in the 2009 MTBPS is
constraining given the amount of work that the department had to embark
upon. Out of the 18 Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD)
projects that had been initiated by the former Department of Land Affairs,
only two of them are still in place. Others have collapsed and the land was
sold back to its original white owners. The HSRC noted that, for the
Department of Rural Development to successfully carry out its mandate, more
funding and human resources are required.
The programmatic budget structure of the Department of Rural Development
and Land Reform has been condensed from 7 to 5 programmes to reflect the
new rural development mandate. The Department requested an additional
budget of R18.3 billion over the medium term. Rural Development and
Restitution programmes together requested R16.5 billion (90 per cent) of
the Departments total request. There is no baseline budget over the medium
term for the rural development programme and the department indicated that
the indicative baseline for the Restitution over the MTEF (R2.2 billion) is
less than the 2007/08 level. The Department of Water Affairs (DWA)
indicated that it will support rural development through investing in water
resource infrastructure in rural areas to make water available for economic
growth and development. Furthermore, the Department of Water Affairs
intends giving employment preferences to the people from rural areas where
DWA project exists.

The Committee is of the view that one of the key priorities of government
is rural development, which the country cannot afford to postpone any
longer. Rural communities have been marginalised and neglected over the
years through the uneven distribution of resources between rural and urban
areas. This has resulted in a lack of economic activities in rural areas,
thus forcing people to migrate from rural areas to urban areas in search of
employment and better living conditions. A serious burden is put on
government’s social programmes, like housing, water, and electricity as a
result of this phenomenon. The Committee notes the underdevelopment of
rural areas in South Africa and the neglect they have been experiencing
over the years. The lack of infrastructure to support the initiatives of
rural communities is another worrying factor. The Committee is of a view
that budget in this area does not recognise the urgent need and
intervention to deal with the backlog in rural areas. It supports the
HSRC’s recommendations that more funds should be channelled for rural
development.

Another concern of the Committee is a lack of sufficient funding in the
Restitution programme. The lack of sufficient funding in this area
compromises the rural development agenda of government. In some cases, this
problem is worsened by the attitude of land owners who inflate their land
prices.

5.5   Creating a Built Environment to Support Economic Growth

Infrastructure and the service delivery function need to complement each
other in order to promote efficiency, employment and integrated
development. Government continues to prioritise spending on housing with a
goal to eradicate informal settlements. The budget makes provision for an
increase in subsidy and for additional houses to be built. As a way of
investing in infrastructure, the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG)
received an additional budget of R2.5 billion, increasing to R45.9 billion
over the medium term. The Neighbourhood Development Partnership Grant will
receive additional resources over the three-year period. These are for
regeneration of townships projects. A total of R8.2 billion is added to
local government equitable share over the MTEF period to cater for the
increased costs of bulk services.

The Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC) reiterated its previous
recommendation that there should be a link between the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant and the Local Government Equitable Shares (LES). This
is such that, as infrastructure is rolled out through the MIG allocations
to municipalities, and those from the LES reflect the need associated with
the infrastructure that is been rolled out. This would eliminate the
current challenge where municipalities roll out infrastructure without
having the necessary funding to maintain it. Moreover, the performance of
the Neighborhood Development Grant needs to be reviewed given its poor
spending over the years.

The Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA)
initiated alternatives to augment and complement the management of
additional budget over the MTEF period. In striving to achieve clean audits
and good financial management in municipalities by 2014, the department has
launched Operation Clean Audit campaign. A key objective of this campaign
will be that of building and ensuring prudent financial management of
public resources in municipalities. The Department will also launch a
programme aimed at improving revenue enhancement in municipalities.
Presently, municipalities are owed between R50 to R53 billion by residents,
businesses and other government departments. This programme of revenue
enhancement will assist municipalities to become more financially viable as
they seek to accelerate the roll-out of their service delivery programmes.
The Department is also establishing a programme that will allow close
monitoring of funds that are allocated to municipalities for infrastructure
development. The main objective of the latter programme is to ascertain if
government is deriving value-for-money from the scarce funds allocated to
municipalities. CoGTA indicated that the MIG faces some challenges. These
include MIG funds being consumed by bank overdrafts of certain
municipalities, some legislative impediments, poor and weak capacity in
planning, project management and financial management in some
municipalities, and lack of continuity and sustainability in municipal
management.

The Committee commends the initiatives that are provided by CoGTA to
increase capacity in municipalities, particularly the Operation Clean Audit
2014. However, more intervention is needed in the implementation of the MIG
projects. The ability to spend funds that are allocated to the MIG is a
matter of serious concern to the Committee. The Committee views the role
played by the MIG in the development of infrastructure as critical,
particularly for those municipalities who do not have revenue base. The
tendency of under-spending in the MIG is a cause for concern since some of
the service delivery aspects, particularly infrastructure, are linked to
this grant. The Committee recognises the role of CoGTA to be to give
support to municipalities without capacity. Such intervention from CoGTA,
National Treasury, Provincial Treasury and District Municipalities is
required to support municipalities who struggle to implement infrastructure
projects.

5.6   A Broad-Based Approach to Fighting Crime

Government has committed to curbing the high level of crime. The government
understands the fight against crime to be including enhanced partnerships,
strengthened social security and job creation. The aim of government is to
recruit an additional 22 447 police personnel by 2012/13 to strengthen
detective services and crime intelligence. The fight against crime will be
boosted by a proposed allocation for the Directorate of Priority Crime
Investigation, which will increase its investigators to 2 400 by 2012/13.
The additional budget, in this regard, supports the implementation of the
Children’s Act of 2005, the Child Justice Act of 2008 and the Sexual
Offences and Related Matters Act of 2007.

The HSRC is of the view that commendable work has been done in the fight
against crime; however there has been a lot of emphasis in the use of force
and less emphasis on working with communities and raising awareness among
communities. The Committee supports initiatives that seeks to curb crime in
our society.

6.    Key Findings

Having considered and deliberated on the 2009 MTBPS,  the  Select  Committee
on Appropriations notes the following:

6.1   Communities in rural areas are not receiving  serious  attention  they
deserve. Rural communities have been neglected for many years in  the  past.
Given the current economic downturn, life in rural areas is difficult.  This
undesirable situation has led, and continues to lead, to  the  migration  of
people from rural areas to urban areas in search of decent jobs  and  better
living condition; and

   2. The need to contain state expenditure as a percentage of gross
      domestic product and fully supports the strategy of government to ‘do
      more with less’, namely:

           ➢ 6.2.1    Find savings through reduced spending on non-core
             functions and activities, including shifting resources from
             administrative components to frontline services;
           ➢ 6.2.2    Rationalise public entities and agencies to save
             money and improve accountability;
           ➢ 6.2.3    Review public spending to weed out poorly performing
             programmes, low priority activities and ineffective policies;
           ➢ 6.2.4    Reform procurement systems to reduce corruption and
             obtain better value of money, including giving consideration
             to centralising the procurement of selected goods and
             services; and
           ➢ 6.2.5    Change the culture of the public service to reduce
             waste and to prevent extravagant spending, shoddy work and
             corruption.


7.    Recommendations

The Select Committee on Appropriations, having satisfied the requirement of
section 6(8) of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters
Act, recommends that:

7.1   The National Treasury considers  allocating  additional  funds  during
      the 2010 National Budget to the Department of  Rural  Development  and
      Land  Reform  for  economic  development  of  rural  communities.  The
      Committee also recommends that:
       7.1.1     The Department of Public Works extends their Expanded
       Public Works Programme to rural areas in the medium and long term
       with the aim of creating decent jobs and providing much-needed
       infrastructure;
       7.1.2     The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs expands
       their water projects to rural areas in order to provide them with
       water for agricultural and domestic use and providing people in
       rural areas with decent jobs; and
       7.1.3      The Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional
       Affairs develops programmes to assist municipalities in rural areas
       in their development agenda.

7.2   The Committee recommends that the training  layoff  scheme  and  other
      programmes encapsulated in the Framework Response to  Global  Economic
      Crisis  by  the  National  Economic  Development  and  Labour  Council
      (NEDLAC) are implemented within six (6) months to  help  mitigate  the
      effects of the economic crisis;

7.3    The  Committee  recommends  that  government  extend  the  wage-based
      incentive mechanism to other sectors to help drive a massive  increase
      in employment creation;

7.4   The Committee recommends that the Presidency reviews the efficiency
      and effectiveness (outcomes) of education expenditure that is amongst
      the highest, as a percentage of gross domestic product, in the world;

7.5   The Committee recommends that government facilitate the
      implementation of the much-needed National Health Insurance system;

7.6   The Committee recommends that National Treasury, Provincial Treasury
      and the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs
      work together in capacitating under-spending municipalities instead of
      shifting funds from under-spending municipalities to adequately
      spending municipalities as the latter practice will create additional
      backlog in service delivery; and

7.7   The Committee recommends that additional increases in  health  budgets
      are appropriated in 2010 to improve  the  efficiency  and  quality  of
      service in the public sector.

Report to be considered.

CREDA INSERT – PAGES 1690 - 1695

                          TUESDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 17 November
         2009:


          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 77).


          b) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of Canada regarding Mutual Assistance
        between their Customs Administrations, tabled in terms of Section
        231 (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to  the  Customs  Agreement  between  the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government  of
        Canada.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON THE OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NGAKA MODIRI MOLEMA DISTRICT
MUNICIPALITY, DATED 17 NOVEMBER 2009

1.    Background and Overview

1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the request  by  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces (NCOP) to consider and report  on  the  intervention  notice
      invoked in Ngaka Modiri  Molema  District  Municipality  in  terms  of
      section 139 (1)(b)  of  the  Constitution,  the  Committee  report  as
      follows:

1.2   In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or does  not
      fulfil an  executive  obligation  in  terms  of  the  Constitution  or
      legislation, the relevant provincial executive may intervene by taking
      any appropriate steps to ensure the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,
      including assuming responsibility for the relevant obligation in  that
      municipality.

1.3   In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP
      referred  the  notice  of  intervention  by  the  North-West  MEC  for
      Developmental Local Government and Housing in  the  affairs  of  Ngaka
      Modiri  Molema   District   Municipality,   to   the   Committee   for
      consideration and reporting. On 3 November 2009,  the  Committee  then
      took a decision during the proceedings of its meeting  to  conduct  an
      oversight intervention visit to the Municipality  during  13  November
      2009.

2.    Objective of the Oversight Visit

2.1   The main objectives of the oversight visit were to  determine  whether
      procedural requirements have been met and also to verify  whether  the
      provincial executive has used its discretion appropriately before  the
      Committee  can  approve/disapprove  the  intervention.   Through   the
      deliberations and interaction with internal and external stakeholders,
      the Committee wanted to determine how the provincial executive intends
      to restore the fulfilment  of  the  relevant  obligations  and  ensure
      fulfilment in the long-term. The aim being to ensure intergovernmental
      checks and balances aimed at guarding the integrity and efficiency  of
      the intervention process.

3.    Composition of the Delegation

3.1    The  Committee  Delegation  composed  of  the  following  Members  of
      Parliament and officials:  Hon  MH  Mokgobi,  Limpopo  (ANC);  Hon  AG
      Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon JM Bekker, Western Cape (DA); Mr TM Manele,
      Committee Secretary (Committee Section); Mr N Mfuku,  Content  Adviser
      (Committee Section); Mr L Ngqameni, Intern (Committee Section) and  Mr
      D Mokoena, Committee Researcher (Research Unit).

4.    Introduction

4.1   On 16 July 2009 the Provincial Executive Council (PEC)  in  North-West
      Province resolved to invoked section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution in
      the Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality. Subsequently the Office
      of the Chairperson of the NCOP was informed of the PEC’s  decision  to
      intervene in the affairs of the Municipality, by  the  North-West  MEC
      for Developmental Local Government and Housing.

5.    Problems Identified at the Municipality by the PEC

5.1   The main issues which led the PEC to invoke the provisions of  section
      139(1)(b)   of   the   Constitution   and   assuming   the   executive
      responsibilities at Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality,  was  a
      result of a thorough  eight months assessment of the situation by  the
      provincial Department of Local Government and Housing, as well  as the
      national  Department  of  Co-operative  Governance   and   Traditional
      Affairs. During the assessment period, a ministerial task team led  by
      the Minister of Co-operative Governance and  Traditional  Affairs  was
      established to identify areas and  sources  of  conflict  than  impact
      negatively on service delivery and governance in the Municipality.



5.2   The findings of the ministerial task team relates  to  performance  of
      functions  by  the  Municipality   beyond   its   constitutional   and
      legislative mandate; dysfunctional   political  governance  structure;
      approval of salary adjustment agreement was  in  breach  of  the  main
      collective agreement; non–compliance with the legislative provisioning
      governing local government sphere; irregular, fruitless  and  wasteful
      expenditure; breakdown of service delivery and instability  caused  by
      mismanagement of union strike; dismissal of the Municipal Manager  and
      allegation of fraud, corruption and mismanagement.



5.3   Subsequent to the ministerial task team findings, the MEC  responsible
      for  Developmental  Local  Government   and   Housing   appointed   an
      Administrator to execute all executive obligations  and  functions  of
      the Municipality, with effect from 1 July 2009.

6.    Oversight Visit at Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality

6.1   On  the  13  November  2009,  the  Delegation  of  the  Committee  had
      interactive and robust engagements  with  the  internal  and  external
      stakeholder of the Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality. The main
      internal  stakeholders  the  Delegation   interacted   with   in   the
      Municipality included the Speaker, Mayor, Chief Whip,  Ward  Committee
      Members and Councillors. Since the Administrator was in  Bloemfontein,
      he delegated the Acting Municipal Manager to table his progress report
      on  his  behalf.  The  main  external  stakeholders   the   delegation
      interacted  included  members  of  the  community  forums   and   non-
      governmental organization.
6.2   For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both  internal
      and external  stakeholders  are  structured  based  on  the  five  key
      performance  areas  of   local   government   which   are:   Municipal
      Transformation; Basic Service Delivery;  Local  Economic  Development;
      Municipal  Financial  Viability  and  Management  as  well   as   Good
      Governance and Public Participation.

(A).  Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

6.3   Municipal Council: The submissions made  by  the  Executive  Mayor  on
      behalf of  the  Mayoral  Committee  indicated  that  the  Municipality
      welcomed the intervention in its affairs by the PEC of the North  West
      Province. The Executive Mayor indicated that prior to the  29  October
      2009, there was confusion by the Municipal Council on  the  roles  and
      responsibilities of  the  appointed  Administrator,  as  well  as  the
      process and the manner in which the intervention was  handled  by  the
      provincial Department of Local Government  and  Housing.  Furthermore,
      there was political infighting in the Municipality  which  contributed
      to the revoking of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution, as a result
      of the  former  Executive  Mayor  (The  new  Executive  Mayor  assumed
      responsibility from September 2009). In essence, it was reported  that
      the former Executive  Mayor’s  management  style  contributed  to  the
      failure of the Municipality.

6.4   Some of the Municipal transformation  and  organisational  development
      challenges highlighted by the Municipal Council included higher  level
      of vacancies in critical positions; manifestation of  strikes;  salary
      agreement which has not yet been finalised with organised  labour  and
      the salary agreements reached outside the bargaining  council  entered
      into by former Municipal Manager without Council approval.

6.5   Administrator: The Administrator’s report to the Committee  Delegation
      reflected inherent gaps identified in areas of organogram; performance
      management systems; pending labour related cases and  lack  of  proper
      record systems in the operation of the  Municipality.  However,  since
      the intervention there are regular  engagements  with  the  unions  to
      resolve the labour disputes on salaries.  Furthermore,  a  performance
      management system has been put  in  place,  and  was  aligned  to  the
      strategic plan of the Municipality as well as the IDP.

6.6    Provincial  Department:  The  Provincial  Department  reported   that
      Municipal Manager was dismissed in January 2009. Since then there were
      labour unrests  due  to  salary  adjustment  and  differences  between
      employer and workers (SAMWU workers embarked on  a  strike  since  May
      2009 till August 2009). In addition, the IDP  processes  not  properly
      executed as well as the organizational policies of  Municipality  were
      not implemented e.g. the appointment of personnel.

6.7   Organized Labour: The organized labour, as led by  the  South  African
      Municipal Workers Union (SAMWU) submitted to the Committee  Delegation
      that corruption has led to the invoking of section 139 (1)(b)  of  the
      Constitution.  Since  the  provisions  have  been   invoked   in   the
      Municipality, proper administrative systems should be  put  in  place.
      SAMWU identified that  there  was  no  clear  and  decisive  political
      leadership in the Municipality, as a result, many Council  resolutions
      were unlawful. That Management did subsequently advise  the  Municipal
      Council  on  those  resolutions,   however   the   Municipal   Council
      implemented them  irrespectively.  That  therefore,  the  intervention
      process should be extended since there was much work that needs to  be
      addressed and cohesion amongst stakeholders  within  the  municipality
      still existed.

6.8   SALGA: The provincial SALGA official, Advocate Yawa, reported  to  the
      Committee Delegation that he  assisted  the  Municipality  during  the
      confusion  by  clarifying  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of   the
      appointed Administrator, as well as the implication thereof during the
      intervention process.
(B).  Basic Service delivery

6.9   Municipal Council: The key service delivery challenges highlighted  in
      the Mayoral Committee report related to water shortages  and  reliance
      on underground supply of water and the lack of water to be provided to
      the community.

6.10  Administrator: The Administrator’s report  indicated  that  water  and
      sanitation provisions in all local municipalities under  the  district
      (Ditsobotla,  Ramotshere  Moila,  Ratlou  and  Tswaing)   were   being
      investigated  and  assisted  on  budget,  planning  as  well   as   on
      maintenance issues.

6.11  Provincial  Department:  Reported  that  there  were  huge  water  and
      sanitation backlogs in the District, that there  were  also  community
      protests over water provision in Dinokana and acute water shortages in
      Tswaing and Ditsobotla. Furthermore, there were also services delivery
      disruptions due to the strike action  by  SAMWU  workers,  e.g.  water
      tankering and servicing of septic tanks in rural areas.

6.12  Community Forums and Organised Labour: Some of  the  service  delivery
      concerns  raised  by  the  members  of  the   community   forums   and
      representatives  from  organised  labour  related  to  lack  of  water
      provision; lack of roads construction projects; lack of refuse dumping
      sites; inaccessible roads and general lack of youth facilities.

(C).  Local Economic Development (LED)

6.13   Administrator:  There  were  challenges  with  regard  to  the  local
      economic development in the Municipality, this  was  observed  through
      the haphazard implementation of LED projects.  The  Administrator  has
      since stopped all new LED  projects  and  investigated  and  evaluated
      existing projects. This exercise involved  local  municipalities;  the
      national  Department  of  Rural  Development  and  the  Department  of
      Agriculture and Fisheries to try and salvage LED projects.

6.14  Community Forums: The concerns raised by  the  stakeholders  pertained
      to lack of business opportunities, lack of job opportunities, lack  of
      access to land, lack of equity in the awarding of  municipal  tenders,
      and lack of economic financial support  to  small  businesses  in  the
      Municipality.

(D).  Municipal Financial Viability and Management


6.15  Municipal Council:  The Municipal Council submitted to  the  Committee
      Delegation that there were  illegal  virements  done  by  the  Finance
      Department, non–adherence  to  supply  chain  management  regulations;
      wasteful expenditure on projects (Brazil Soccer Academy, Belgium  trip
      and goat and  cattle  projects);  the  Municipal  oversight  Portfolio
      Committee on  Finance  failed  to  provide  financial  oversight;  the
      municipal budget was not  aligned  with  Integrated  Development  Plan
      (IDP); withdrawal of  Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG)  by  the
      national Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
      as well as the  failure  to  provide  allowances  to  the  traditional
      leaders during Council sitting. Despite the  above-stated  challenges,
      the Municipal Council appreciated the  support  from  the  Development
      Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) with regards to  financial  management,
      as well as the interns provided by the provincial Department of  Local
      Government and Housing.

6.16   Administrator:  Reported  on  possible  fraud  related  to  endowment
      policies; no adherence to supply chain management regulation;  payment
      of creditors as well as reporting as per regulations  on  finances  of
      Council. Since then, the Municipality has now developed an  investment
      register and investment policy. The  Supply  Chain  Manager  has  been
      suspended and all municipal purchases have  since  been  audited.  The
      DBSA  was  currently  assisting  the  Municipality  in  developing   a
      reporting system, and Gobodo Auditors were  reconciling  the  previous
      years’ balances.

6.17  Provincial Department: The Provincial  Department  reported  that  the
      status  of  the  Municipality  prior  to  the  intervention  reflected
      procurement processes in terms of the  requirement  of  the  MFMA  not
      being adhered to; financial management practices of  the  Municipality
      were not sound and lastly, the service delivery grants were  used  for
      other purposes (Disaster Management Grant was part of it).

(E).  Good Governance and Public Participation

6.18  Municipal Council: Despite the allegations of  political  interference
      in  the  administration  and  high  political  contestation   in   the
      municipality, the report of the Mayoral Committee highlighted progress
      in respect  of  public  participation,  convening  of  regular  public
      meetings.

6.19  Provincial Department: On good governance, the  Provincial  Department
      reported that prior to the intervention,  Municipal  Council  meetings
      were not  properly  convened;  the  relations  amongst  the  Municipal
      Councillors  were  not  sound  and  lastly,  the   Municipal   Council
      prioritized non-core functions over basic service delivery.
6.20   Community  Forums:  Some  of   the   good   governance   and   public
      participation concerns raised by the members of  the  community  forum
      and organized  labour  included  lack  of  transparency  in  municipal
      decision making processes, failure by the municipality  to  facilitate
      public participation in 2009/2010   Integrated  Development Planning.

6.21  Traditional Leaders: The concerns raised by  the  traditional  leaders
      in respect of good governance related to  lack  of  communication  and
      proper consultation by the Municipality on matters related to  service
      delivery.

7.    Committee Observations and Opinion

   1. The Committee Delegation expressed the opinion that the While Paper on
      Local Government identified performance management  as  one  of  local
      government’s tools for the implementation of its developmental mandate
      in terms of the Constitution.  Chapter  6  of  the  Local  Government:
      Municipal Systems  Act  (Act  No.  32  of  2000)  provides  the  legal
      framework for performance management and linked it squarely  with  the
      IDP. The Committee Delegation further expressed that the  drafting  of
      the Municipal IDP should provide appropriate mechanisms; processes and
      procedures;  for  consultation  with  and   participation   of   local
      communities,  organs  of  state,  traditional  authorities  and  other
      stakeholders.

7.2   The Committee Delegation is of the opinion that there  is  a  need  to
      pay greater attention on service delivery issues, and the Municipality
      must be responsive and address the problems raised  by  the  community
      with the necessary speed. The Municipality should treat every  service
      delivery problem with the necessary seriousness it deserves. That  all
      stakeholders  in  the   municipal   jurisdiction   must   assist   the
      transformation  process,  within   the   framework   of   co-operative
      government work.

7.3   The Committee Delegation emphasized that one of the objects  of  local
      government in terms of section 152 (1)(e) of the Constitution was  the
      need  to  encourage  the  involvement  of  communities  and  community
      organizations in local government.  The  Committee  further  expressed
      that the need for participation in the Municipality should take  place
      through the structures (ward committee) established in  terms  of  the
      Municipal Structures Act (Act No. 117 of  1998).  It  must  also  take
      place through mechanisms, processes and procedures that exist in terms
      of the Systems Act (Act No. 32 of 2000) that have been established  by
      the Municipal Council (section 17).

   8. Acknowledgement

   1. The Committee Delegation acknowledged the varied contributions of  the
      parliamentary staff who participated in the oversight visit  in  their
      various capacities.

9.    Recommendations

9.1   Having conducted the oversight visit to Ngaka Modiri  Molema  District
      Municipality and interacted with internal and  external  stakeholders,
      the  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs recommends as follows:

      9.1.1 National Council  of  Provinces  approves  the  intervention  as
           issued by the Provincial Executive  Council  of  the  North-West
           Province in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.


      9.1.2  That   National   Council   of   Provinces   further   approves
           recommendations to the Provincial Executive Council of the North-
           West Province to extend the intervention period by three months,
           in order to ensure that during the extended intervention period,
           minimum standards of service delivery will be  achieved  in  the
           Municipality.



      9.1.3 The Administrator should fast-tract the  process  of  appointing
           and filling of  section  57  Managers  and  further  assist  the
           Municipality to ensure that  the  Service  Delivery  and  Budget
           Implementation Plan (SDBIP) and the IDP  are  aligned  with  the
           Municipality budget, and has the support and confidence  of  the
           whole community.

      9.1.4 The  North-West  MEC  for  Developmental  Local  Government  and
           Housing to table  quarterly  progress  report  to  the  National
           Council of Provinces on the status of the  intervention  in  the
           Municipality; including challenges encountered.

      9.1.5 The South African Local Government Association  (SALGA)  in  co-
           operation with Local Government Sector  Education  and  Training
           Authority to  facilitate  training  and  capacity  building  for
           Municipal Councillors; to further deepen their understanding  of
           their oversight role; legal framework and policies  that  govern
           the activities of the Municipality.

      9.1.6 The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
           Affairs in co-operation with the relevant  North-West  Portfolio
           Committee in the Provincial Legislature, to conduct a  follow-up
           oversight visit to the Municipality  in  order  to  monitor  and
           evaluate progress made in respect of  the  intervention  in  the
           Municipality.

Report to be considered.

2.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON THE OVERSIGHT VISIT TO MKHONDO LOCAL MUNICIPALITY,
DATED 17 NOVEMBER 2009

1.    Background and Overview

1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the request  by  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces (NCOP) to consider and report  on  the  intervention  notice
      invoked in Mkhondo Local Municipality in terms of section  139  (1)(b)
      of the Constitution, the Committee report as follows:

1.2   In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or does  not
      fulfil an  executive  obligation  in  terms  of  the  Constitution  or
      legislation, the relevant provincial executive may intervene by taking
      any appropriate steps to ensure the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,
      including assuming responsibility for the relevant obligation in  that
      municipality.

1.3   In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP
      referred the notice of intervention by  the  Mpumalanga  MEC  for  Co-
      operative Governance and Traditional Affairs in the affairs of Mkhondo
      Local Municipality, to the Committee for consideration and  reporting.
      On 3 November 2009, the Committee then  took  a  decision  during  the
      proceedings of its meeting to conduct an oversight intervention  visit
      to the Municipality during 12 November 2009.

2.    Objective of the Oversight Visit

2.1   The main objectives of the oversight visit were to  determine  whether
      procedural requirements have been met and also to verify  whether  the
      provincial executive has used its discretion appropriately before  the
      Committee  can  approve/disapprove  the  intervention.   Through   the
      deliberations and interaction with internal and external stakeholders,
      the Committee wanted to determine how the provincial executive intends
      to restore the fulfilment  of  the  relevant  obligations  and  ensure
      fulfilment in the long-term. The aim being to ensure intergovernmental
      checks and balances aimed at guarding the integrity and efficiency  of
      the intervention process.

3.    Composition of the Delegation

3.1    The  Committee  Delegation  composed  of  the  following  Members  of
      Parliament and officials:  Hon  MH  Mokgobi,  Limpopo  (ANC);  Hon  AG
      Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon JM Bekker, Western Cape (DA); Mr TM Manele,
      Committee Secretary (Committee Section); Mr N Mfuku,  Content  Adviser
      (Committee Section); Mr L Ngqameni, Intern (Committee Section) and  Mr
      D Mokoena, Committee Researcher (Research Unit).

4.    Introduction

4.1   On 01 July 2009 the Provincial Executive Council (PEC)  in  Mpumalanga
      resolved to invoked section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution in  Mkhondo
      Local Municipality. Subsequently the Office of the Chairperson of  the
      NCOP was informed of the PEC’s decision to intervene in the affairs of
      the  Municipality,  by  the  MEC  for  Co-operative   Governance   and
      Traditional Affairs in Mpumalanga.

5.    Problems Identified at the Municipality by the PEC

5.1   The key problems which  led  the  PEC  to  invoke  the  provisions  of
      section 139(1)(b) of  the  Constitution  and  assuming  the  executive
      responsibilities at Mkhondo Local  Municipality  relates  to  systemic
      problems,  whereby,  the  Municipality  as  a  whole  has  failed   to
      effectively deliver  on  its  constitutional  mandate.  There  was  no
      alignment and integration of the IDP (Integrated Development Plan) and
      SDBIP (Service Delivery and Budget  Implementation  Plan)  within  the
      municipal system.  The IDP and its related  SDBIP  appeared  to  exist
      outside of the normal functioning of the system and were  not  adhered
      for compliance, and not used as a  management  tool.  The  performance
      management measures were largely activity centred, and not  linked  to
      the actual delivery of services.

5.2   Furthermore, monitoring and evaluation was not  integrated  throughout
      the Municipality. The service delivery system problems often  resulted
      in duplication and wasted effort, contributing to the difficulties  in
      coordination  and  management   of   large   scale   interdepartmental
      programmes and  projects.   This  exacerbated  the  silo  approach  to
      delivery and the limited flexibility, innovation and  optimisation  of
      resources, especially  in  the  areas  of  effective  human  resources
      deployment and  overheads  minimisation.  This  in  turn  resulted  in
      serious challenges around issues such as poor service  delivery,  loss
      of governance control, poor  management,  anomalies  in  supply  chain
      management, corruption and internal squabble that undermined effective
      service delivery.

5.3   The MEC of Co-operative Governance and Traditional  Affairs  appointed
      Mr Misabeni Khosa as an Administrator at Mkhondo  Local  Municipality,
      to  assume  responsibility  of  the  day-to-day  operations   and  the
      maintenance of essential service delivery standards. In  addition,  to
      plan and roll-out a structured turn-around strategy that  will  create
      sustainable improvement of the ongoing management of the Municipality.
      It was envisaged that the above process will take a minimum period  of
      six months full-time involvement of the Administrator  and  his  team,
      before they  commence  withdrawal.   The  work  of  the  Administrator
      commenced on 1 August 2009 and is anticipated to end on January  2010.



6.    Oversight Visit at Mkhondo Local Municipality

6.1   On  the  12  November  2009,  the  Delegation  of  the  Committee  had
      interactive and robust engagements  with  the  internal  and  external
      stakeholder of the  Mkhondo  Local  Municipality.  The  main  internal
      stakeholders  the  Delegation  interacted  with  in  the  Municipality
      included the Speaker, Mayor, Chief Whip, Ward  Committee  Members  and
      Councillors and the Administrator. The main external stakeholders  the
      delegation interacted included members of the community forums and non-
      governmental organization.

6.2   For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both  internal
      and external  stakeholders  are  structured  based  on  the  five  key
      performance  areas  of   local   government   which   are:   Municipal
      Transformation; Basic Service Delivery;  Local  Economic  Development;
      Municipal  Financial  Viability  and  Management  as  well   as   Good
      Governance and Public Participation.
(A).  Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

6.3   Municipal Council: The submissions  made  by  the  Speaker  and  Mayor
      indicated  and  reflected   that   the   Municipality   welcomed   and
      acknowledged the intervention  in  its  affairs  by  the  PEC  of  the
      Mpumalanga Province. Some of  the  transformation  and  organisational
      developmental challenges highlighted lack of human resource  capacity;
      challenges on the recruitment of skilled personnel to enhance  service
      delivery; high vacancy rate  in  key  positions  and  lack  of  labour
      retention strategy.  Some  of  the  internal  developments  since  the
      deployment  of  staff  from  Provincial  Department  of   Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs highlighted, included the  auditing
      of all existing municipal policies and evaluation of their  relevance.
      This process entailed the development of new rules of order,  registry
      of delegation and legal compliance. The Municipal Council reported  to
      the  Committee  that   the   intervention   process   has   synergised
      communication  linkages  between  the  community  and  the   Municipal
      Council.

6.4   Administrator:  Some  of  the  organisational  development  challenges
      indicated in the report  pertained  to  the  lack  of  human  resource
      capacity;  fragmented  and   inadequate   fleet   management   policy;
      resignation of the Chief Financial Officer  (CFO)  and  Town  Planner;
      filling of critical positions of  section  57  Managers  and  lack  of
      approved human resource development policies. A  total  number  of  14
      officials  have  been  suspended   and   were   currently   undergoing
      disciplinary hearings.

   5. Despite all the challenges indicated, the  Administrator  reported  to
      the Committee that progress has been made in respect of developing  28
      organizational policies which are aimed at strengthening and improving
      the  technical  ability  of  the  organization.   The   organizational
      structure has been redesigned to fulfill public participation  mandate
      and legislative roles of Councilors, furthermore,  those  disciplinary
      hearings on suspended officials will be finalized  in  December  2009.
      Since the clinic was burned down in the township, two  mobile  clinics
      have been put in place to ensure health services are rendered  to  the
      community.

(B).  Basic Service delivery

6.6   Municipal Council: The key service delivery challenges highlighted  in
      the Mayoral Committee report related to huge  infrastructure  backlogs
      (ageing  infrastructure,  repairs,  maintenance  and  rehabilitation);
      withdrawal of  the Development Bank of South Africa  (DBSA)  technical
      support (Engineers  and  Young  Professionals);  lack  of  proper  and
      effective service delivery including service delivery projects such as
      the main water pipeline on the Wakkerstroom road; housing  development
      in Eziphunzini; bus and  taxi  route  in  Thandukukhanya  and  streets
      rehabilitation not completed on time. Despite  these  challenges,  the
      Mayoral Committee reported that the  intervention  on  July  2009  has
      taught the Municipal  Council  the  importance  of  consolidating  the
      powers and responsibilities of the  Mayor  and  Municipal  Manager  in
      order to ensure implementation of decisions and political oversight on
      service delivery matters.

6.7   Administrator: Some of the service delivery challenges highlighted  in
      the report of the administrator related to lack of planning on service
      delivery projects across all the 15 wards of the municipality, lack of
      efficient  and  effective  monitoring  and  evaluation   systems   and
      mechanisms, lack of  funding  for  critical  infrastructure  projects,
      projects were implemented and  did  not  form  part  of  the  IDP  and
      community participation processes.


6.8   The Administrator reported to the Committee  that  progress  has  been
      registered in some areas in speeding up service delivery. A number  of
      emergency water supply projects have  been  initiated  in  partnership
      with a company called Mondi including  the  erection  of  JoJo  tanks;
      supply of Lister Pumps and purifying  systems;  repair  of  boreholes;
      connection of pipelines  and  taps;  supply  of  bulk  drinking  water
      reaching communities of Witkop Mission  Village;  Iswepe  Villages  of
      Jabulani; Spring Valley; The Bends and New Compound.  Mondi has kindly
      committed R750, 000 to this initiative.

6.9   The Municipality is partnering with the  National  Minister  of  Rural
      Development and Land Reform to launch a pilot  project  in  Donkerhoek
      and  neighbouring  farms,  KwaNgema  and  Madlangempsi.    This   will
      supplement  the  Municipalities  own  sustainable  rural   development
      programme. In addition, the Municipality in conjunction  with  various
      government departments has embarked on the above programme and  is  in
      the process of establishing a Local Poverty War Room.  A  door-to-door
      programme has been actioned for profiling household’s needs  in  order
      to ensure that  the  poorest  household  members  are  captured  on  a
      database, in order to provide  shared  intervention  for  co-ordinated
      assistance across departments (Ward 2, 6 and 8 are the priority  wards
      in the initial phase).

6.10  In addition, a  project on electricity has been commissioned  in  line
      with the  supply  chain  management  policy;  fencing  of  schools  in
      accordance  to  rural  development  programme;   assistance   in   the
      implementation  of  rural  development  programme  has  been  provide;
      engagement with the Department of Energy on universal access in  order
      to ensure implementation and community benefits of electricity project
      has been secured; financial estimation of  possible  service  delivery
      projects has been designed and engagement with the Department  of  Co-
      operative Governance on the Municipal Infrastructure Grants (MIG)  are
      underway on matters related to service delivery.

6.11  Ward Committees: Although there was much dissatisfaction on the  snail
      pace of service delivery in the municipal jurisdiction, however, there
      was acknowledgment on the  continuation  of  the  electricity  project
      especially in Ward 15.

(C).  Local Economic Development

6.12  Members of Community Forums: The concerns raised by  the  stakeholders
      pertained  to  lack   of   business   opportunities;   lack   of   job
      opportunities; lack of access to land; lack of equity in the  awarding
      of municipal tenders; and lack of economic financial support to  small
      businesses and non-functionality of  the  Local  Economic  Development
      Unit in the Municipality.

6.13  Administrator: The Administrator reported that  the  Municipality  has
      now partnered with Mondi in  the  training  of  at  least  600  youth,
      unemployed and women across all communities in the municipal  area  in
      woodwork,  carpentry,  welding  and  painting.   The   Mkhondo   Local
      Municipality is providing assistance on the Premier’s  2010  programme
      aimed at benefitting 300 children and an additional 200 volunteers  to
      mark the 300 day countdown to the launch of the 2010 FIFA  World  Cup.
      The Mkhondo  Municipality  is  also  partnering  with  the  Provincial
      Departments of Roads and  Public  Works  to  devise  projects  in  the
      “Decent Work Programme”, which will facilitate the  prioritisation  of
      “decent work” for residents of Mkhondo.  In  addition,  the  potential
      establishment of a Development Agency is being reviewed  in  order  to
      provide an appropriate vehicle to manage the commercial activities  of
      the Municipality, especially the 3,000 hectares of forestry land.

(D).  Municipal Financial Viability and Management

6.14  Municipal Council: The  report  presented  by  the  Mayoral  Committee
      indicated that in terms of  rural  development,  the  municipality  is
      faced with the challenges of supplying new areas and  households  with
      municipal services, and reliance on equitable  share  and  conditional
      grants. Despite these  challenges,  the  Mayoral  Committee  expressed
      appreciation  of  the  assistance  provided  by  the  district,   some
      Provincial  and  National  Government  Departments  on  provision   of
      boreholes,  toilets,  access  roads,  schools  and  clinics   in   the
      community.

6.15   Administrator:  A  number  of  activities  are  taking  place  on   a
      continuous basis to “clean up” on anomalies in the short  term.   Some
      of the key activities include the use of municipal  credit  cards  has
      been stopped to avoid the continuance of abuse. A number of  anomalies
      have been identified such as the contract of R14, 7 million rand for a
      roads project where only a letter of appointment can be found  and  no
      formal contract. The entire municipal supply chain management is under
      review and anomalies addressed appropriately.  Some of  the  anomalies
      are under formal investigation by the investigators.

6.16  The Administrator further reported that the 2008/2009  financial  year
      budget  has  not  yet  been  closed  due  to  a  number  of  anomalies
      discovered, including the fact that bank reconciliations have not been
      properly completed since 2006, clearing of  audit  queries  and  stock
      adjustment queries.  This issue was receiving priority attention.  The
      Administrator will shortly be engaging a  debt  collection  agency  to
      collect and reduce the current outstanding debt of R69  million.   The
      costs of this are self funding since the agencies fees are funded from
      a  percentage  of  the  debt  that  they  will  recover.  Lastly,  the
      Administrator has signed a letter  of  engagement  with  the  Auditor-
      General to address audit queries of the Municipality.

(E).  Good Governance and Public Participation

6.17  Municipal Council: Despite lack of regular communication feed back  to
      the community and stakeholders, the report of  the  Mayoral  Committee
      acknowledged that the intervention  has  revealed  the  importance  of
      communication with the public.

6.18   Administrator:  Some  of  the  major   progress   reported   by   the
      Administrator in respect of good governance and  public  participation
      included clarification of the  roles  to  the  internal  and  external
      stakeholders; clarification of the roles and responsibilities  of  the
      Mayoral Committee and the office bearers; scheduling  of  the  Council
      meetings; improving communication system and co-ordinating the meeting
      of Ward Committees and ensuring the consideration and approval of  the
      IDP process plan by the Council. Furthermore,  the  Administrator  has
      had several meetings with the members of the Community Concerned Group
      to update them on a weekly basis on the affairs of the Municipality.

7.    Committee Observations and Opinion

   1. The Committee Delegation expressed the opinion that there is a need to
      pay greater attention on service delivery issues, and the Municipality
      must be responsive and address the problems raised  by  the  community
      with the necessary speed. The Municipality should treat every  service
      delivery problem with the necessary seriousness it deserves. That  all
      stakeholders  in  the   municipal   jurisdiction   must   assist   the
      transformation  process,  within   the   framework   of   co-operative
      government.

   2. The Committee Delegation emphasized that one of the objects  of  local
      government in terms of section 152 (1)(e) of the Constitution was  the
      need  to  encourage  the  involvement  of  communities  and  community
      organizations in local government.  The  Committee  further  expressed
      that the need for participation in the Municipality should take  place
      through the structures (ward committee) established in  terms  of  the
      Municipal Structures Act (Act No. 117 of  1998).  It  must  also  take
      place through mechanisms, processes and procedures that exist in terms
      of the Systems Act (Act No. 32 of 2000) that have been established  by
      the Municipal Council (section 17).

   8. Acknowledgement

   2. The Committee Delegation acknowledged the varied contributions of  the
      parliamentary staff who participated in the oversight visit  in  their
      various capacities.

9.    Recommendations

9.1   Having conducted the oversight visit  to  Mkhondo  Local  Municipality
      and interacted with internal and  external  stakeholders,  the  Select
      Committee  on  Co-operative   Governance   and   Traditional   Affairs
      recommends as follows:

      9.1.1 National Council  of  Provinces  approves  the  intervention  as
           issued  by  the  Provincial  Executive  Council  of   Mpumalanga
           Province in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.


      9.1.2  That   National   Council   of   Provinces   further   approves
           recommendations  to  the   Provincial   Executive   Council   of
           Mpumalanga Province to extend the  intervention  period  by  six
           months, in order to ensure that during the extended intervention
           period, minimum standards of service delivery will  be  achieved
           in the Municipality.

      9.1.3 The Administrator should fast-tract the  process  of  appointing
           and filling of  section  57  Managers  and  further  assist  the
           Municipality to ensure that the SDBIP and the  IDP  are  aligned
           with the Municipality budget, and has the support and confidence
           of the whole community.

      9.1.4 The MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional  Affairs  in
           Mpumalanga to table quarterly progress report  to  the  National
           Council of Provinces on the status of the  intervention  in  the
           Municipality; including challenges encountered.

      9.1.5 The South African Local Government Association  (SALGA)  in  co-
           operation with Local Government Sector  Education  and  Training
           Authority to  facilitate  training  and  capacity  building  for
           Municipal Councillors; to further deepen their understanding  of
           their oversight role; legal framework and policies  that  govern
           the activities of the Municipality.

      9.1.6 The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
           Affairs in co-operation with the relevant Portfolio Committee in
           Mpumalanga  Provincial  Legislature,  to  conduct  a   follow-up
           oversight visit to the Municipality  in  order  to  monitor  and
           evaluate progress made in respect of  the  intervention  in  the
           Municipality.

Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate N E
Ndamase, dated 17 November 2009:

Introduction

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
considered the report on the provisional suspension from office of
Magistrate N E Ndamase, an additional magistrate at Pretoria, pending the
outcome of an investigation into her fitness to hold office as a
magistrate, as required in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates
Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

Background

   1. The Select Committee notes from the report tabled by the Minister for
      Justice and Constitutional Development that the Magistrates Commission
      resolved on 29 and 30 July to recommend that Ms NE Ndamase be
      provisionally suspended from office in terms of section 13(3)(a) of
      the Magistrates Act, 1993.

   2. On 09 October 2009, the Magistrates Commission briefed the Select
      Committee on the contents of the report: The Commission decided to
      charge Ms Ndamase with misconduct in terms of Regulation 26(1) of the
      Regulations for Judicial Officers in Lower Courts, 1994. It is of the
      opinion that there is enough prima facie evidence to support the
      charge(s). There is an ongoing process to obtain further evidence. On
      29 and 30 July 2009, the Commission resolved to recommend that Ms
      Ndamase be provisionally suspended, pending the outcome of the
      misconduct inquiry. The report and supporting documents give reasons
      for this recommendation.

   3. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993, Parliament
      must, as soon as is reasonably possible, pass a resolution as to
      whether or not the provisional suspension of a magistrate is
      confirmed.

   4. The Select Committee is of the view that the issues raised by this
      matter are complex, pointing to problems of transformation within the
      judicial system. It is not helpful to look solely at an individual’s
      conduct, while ignoring the broader context. Of particular concern to
      the Select Committee is the ‘gatekeeping’ role that language
      proficiency plays within the justice system, and the frustration this
      engenders. The Select Committee is aware that there are no ‘quickfix’
      solutions but believes that much needs to be done, and urgently, to
      address this problem.

   5. As part of its oversight function, the Select Committee intends to
      embark on regular visits to our courts to gain insight into the
      problems they grapple with daily. In the first quarter of 2010 the
      Select Committee will arrange to visit the Pretoria Magistrates Court.



   6. The Select Committee also intends to engage more closely with the
      Magistrates Commission to better understand its role, as well as the
      systemic challenges facing our judicial system and possible solutions
      to these. It would be particularly interested in the Commission’s
      views on whether it has a mediatory or conciliatory role in matters
      such as these. It urges the Commission to explore this possibility in
      this particular matter.

Recommendation

   7. Having considered the Commission’s report on the provisional
      suspension, the Select Committee recommends that the Council does not
      confirm the provisional suspension of Magistrate NE Ndamase.

Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development on the Draft Notice and Schedule submitted in terms of section
2(4) of the Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act
No 47 of 2001), determining the rate at which salaries are payable to
Constitutional Court judges and judges annually, dated 17 November 2009

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the Draft Notice and Schedule submitted in terms of section  2(4)
of the Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act,  2001  (Act  No
47 of  2001),  determining  the  rate  at  which  salaries  are  payable  to
Constitutional Court judges and judges annually with  effect  from  1  April
2009, referred to it, recommends that the Council  approve  the  said  Draft
Notice and Schedule.

Report to be considered.

5.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development on the Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section 12(3) of
the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining the rate at
which salaries are payable to magistrates annually, dated 17 November 2009:

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section  12(3)  of  the
Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining  the  rate  at  which
salaries are payable to magistrates annually with effect from 1 April  2009,
referred to it, recommends that the Council approve the  said  Draft  Notice
and Schedule.

Report to be considered.

6.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development on the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
Certain Laws Amendment Bill, dated 17 November 2009:

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the Repeal of the  Black  Administration  Act  and  Amendment  of
Certain Laws  Amendment  Bill  [B15-2009]  (National  Assembly  –  sec  75),
referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill without amendments.

Report to be considered.

