---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 11 November 2009'
layout: debate
year: 2009
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2009/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2009-11-11
---

WEDNESDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2009
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:00.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                          CALLING OF JOINT SITTING

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, the President has called a Joint Sitting of the
National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces in terms of section
42(5) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, read with Joint
Rule 7(1)(b) of the Joint Rules of Parliament, in order to bid farewell to
former Chief Justice Pius Langa, and to welcome Chief Justice Sandile
Ngcobo.

 FAREWELL TO CHIEF JUSTICE PIUS LANGA AND WELCOMING OF CHIEF JUSTICE SANDILE
                                   NGCOBO
The SPEAKER: Hon members, it is important to note that we have today,
represented in the House, the three branches of government, namely the
executive, the judiciary and the legislature. They nevertheless work
together to give effect to the constitutional provisions that underpin our
democracy. The President, political parties and the two Chief Justices will
participate in the Joint Sitting. I now call upon the hon President to
address the Joint Sitting.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker of the National Assembly Max Sisulu,
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces Mninwa Mahlangu, Deputy
President Kgalema Motlanthe, former Chief Justice Pius Langa, Chief Justice
Sandile Ngcobo, hon members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it
is an honour and a privilege for me to say a few words on this important
occasion.

We gather here in this august House to bid farewell to Chief Justice Pius
Langa and to welcome the new Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo. [Applause.] It
is rare that we have an opportunity for members of all three arms of
government to address this House. This is an indication of the importance
that we attach to this moment in the life of our democracy. It is also an
indication of the critical role of the judiciary as a pillar of our
constitutional order.

This occasion is also testimony to the high regard in which retiring Chief
Justice Pius Langa is held. Justice Langa has served our country and its
people for many years. He was one of the first 11 judges appointed by
former President Nelson Mandela to serve in the Constitutional Court when
it was established. He has, therefore, been a vital part of the birth and
development of constitutional jurisprudence in a democratic South Africa.

In all his time in the Constitutional Court, he has served our country and
our people in an outstanding and remarkable manner, with dedication and
commitment. [Applause.] It was because of his commitment and dedication
that he was appointed as Chief Justice of the Republic and head of the
Constitutional Court in June 2005, taking over from Chief Justice Arthur
Chaskalson. We applaud the exceptional contribution that Justice Langa has
made to the Constitutional Court during his tenure as its head.

Today we are also paying tribute to Justice Langa for the role that he has
played in the struggle for democracy in our country. For many years he has
been a champion and defender of people’s rights. He represented many of our
people in the courts of apartheid South Africa. His clients were the
underprivileged, the marginalised, workers and people charged for political
offences.

We especially remember his role as one of the progressive lawyers who
fought for justice in the face of apartheid’s laws. He was a founding
member of the National Association of Democratic Lawyers, Nadel, and served
as its president. He also participated in the major campaigns of the United
Democratic Front and was part of the Release Mandela Campaign. Justice
Langa was deeply involved in the process of negotiating the end of
apartheid, participating in the work of Codesa and the Multiparty
Negotiating Forum.

Justices, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, in a long and distinguished
career, it is Justice Langa’s time at the helm of the Constitutional Court
that will stand out for years to come. He inherited a vital state
institution in a young democracy. He worked to ensure that justice was
strengthened through the Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court is
today one of the most respected institutions in our country. Our people
have confidence that it is able to rule on critical and controversial cases
without fear, favour or prejudice. Throughout his term of office, Justice
Langa has ensured that the independence of the judiciary is not
compromised.

As he leaves the Constitutional Court, we thank him most sincerely for his
exceptional contribution.

We know that Justice Langa leaves the court in the hands of another capable
judge, Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo. [Applause.] We wish to take this
opportunity to welcome Justice Ngcobo. [Applause.] We wish to thank him for
taking on this huge responsibility. We believe that his credentials and his
extensive experience will stand him in good stead for the tasks that lie
ahead. Our judiciary is in good hands indeed.
Justice Ngcobo has an outstanding track record in defending the
marginalised and in upholding human dignity and human rights. We are
confident that he will oversee the application of justice in a fair and
balanced manner. In this task, Justice Ngcobo is assisted by many capable
colleagues, both in the Constitutional Court and in the judiciary more
broadly.

As Justice Ngcobo assumes office, the country continues to face a number of
challenges in its efforts to ensure access to justice for all. Our
government must ensure that even the poorest of the poor have access to the
courts, that they receive quality justice and that they obtain relief
speedily.

The issue of the transformation of the judiciary remains one of the central
challenges that we must continue to address. We know that transformation is
not an event, but a prolonged struggle. This struggle must further entrench
the independence of the judiciary, for which so many of our people fought.
This struggle must promote human rights, social justice and dignity for
all.

This must be reflected in the manner in which justice is dispensed. We must
realise the right of equal access to justice for all South Africans, rich
or poor, black or white, urban or rural, educated or illiterate.

The task of the women and men on the Bench is to ensure that the supremacy
of the Constitution and the rule of law prevail at all times. In doing so,
they can be assured of the support and co-operation of all South Africans.

These are some of the issues that the courts have been grappling with in
the past and will continue to tackle as we move forward.

Justices, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, before I finish, I would like
to take this opportunity to applaud the decision of the United Nations
General Assembly to declare July 18 “Nelson Mandela International Day”.
[Applause.] The resolution, which was adopted by consensus, calls for
commemorations every year, starting in 2010, to recognise Madiba’s
contribution to resolving conflicts and promoting race relations, human
rights and reconciliation. We wish to thank the countries of the world for
responding favourably to the request we made at the UN General Assembly in
September.

In conclusion, ladies and gentlemen, I wish Justice Pius Langa a well-
earned and restful retirement. [Applause.] I wish Chief Justice Sandile
Ngcobo a successful and productive tenure as the head of our judiciary.
[Applause.]

As government, we are committed to working together with all components of
the justice system to realise the rights contained in our Constitution. We
are committed to safeguarding the independence and integrity of the
judiciary. Working together, we can achieve the cherished goal of justice
and equal rights for all. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Speaker of the National Assembly Max Sisulu,
hon President of the Republic of South Africa Mr J G Zuma, retired Chief
Justice Pius Langa, Chief Justice of South Africa Sandile Ngcobo, members
of the judiciary, provincial Premiers and Speakers, Members of Parliament,
distinguished guests, it is an honour to participate in a debate to bid
farewell to the retired Chief Justice of South Africa, Pius Langa, and to
welcome the new Chief Justice of South Africa, Sandile Ngcobo.

The occasion serves as evidence that our democracy is maturing. Now we have
a balance between the number of former and current judges of the
Constitutional Court. Today, 11 November 2009, the number of former judges
stands at 11, which is the same for the current ones. By any measure, we
are indeed maturing. With such a balance, there is no doubt that the change
of leadership at the Constitutional Court last month is going to be a
simple one.

As we celebrate the leadership of the retired Chief Justice, Pius Langa,
and welcome the new Chief Justice, Sandile Ngcobo, we appreciate the
opportunity to reflect on the meaning of an independent judiciary in a
democracy. We also reaffirm the notion that South Africa is a
constitutional state. In terms of section 165 of the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa, the judicial authority in our country is vested
in the courts, which are independent and subject only to the Constitution
and the law.

In his paper entitled An Independent Judiciary: The Core of the Rule of
Law, Justice F B William Kelly, a justice of the Supreme Court of Nova
Scotia in Canada, notes the evolution of the modern concept of judicial
independence. He cites, amongst other things, an influential English
philosopher, John Locke, who stated that established laws, with the right
to appeal to independent judges, are essential to a civilised society, and
that societies without them are still “in a state of nature”.

He further states that at the core of this and more modern concepts of
traditional independence is the theory of separation of powers - that the
judiciary should function independently of the legislative and executive
arms of government. This is an important test for the judiciary in any
democracy - whether judges are able to perform their duties for the good of
our society, without interference.

These principles are entrenched in the 1985 document of the United Nations
on The Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary. This seminal
document states that:

  The judiciary shall decide matters before them impartially, on the basis
  of facts and in accordance with the law, without any restrictions,
  improper influences, inducements, pressures, threats or interferences,
  direct or indirect, from any quarter or for any reason.

The document further notes that:

  The principle of the independence of the judiciary entitles and requires
  the judiciary to ensure that judicial proceedings are conducted fairly
  and that the rights of the parties are respected.

It goes further to state:

  In accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, members of
  the judiciary are like other citizens entitled to freedom of expression,
  belief, association and assembly; provided, however, that in exercising
  such rights, judges shall always conduct themselves in such a manner as
  to preserve the dignity of their office and the impartiality and
  independence of the judiciary.

Since 1994, our judiciary has enjoyed the freedom to make decisions without
outside influence. As we have observed, even when certain sections of
society are not happy with the outcome of judicial processes, we have
always expressed respect for the principle of judicial jurisprudence in a
democracy.

The judicial independence we are talking about does not, however, mean that
the judiciary cannot work with other arms of state, which is why we have,
for example, the Judicial Service Commission which comprises members of the
executive and the legislature. As a member of the JSC, I was humbled by the
leadership that Justice Langa provided to this body. He had exceptional
qualities and was impartial to the core. As a judge and later as the Chief
Justice of the Constitutional Court, he displayed a great sense of
commitment, honesty and high integrity - a judicial officer par excellence.
We are confident that Justice Ngcobo will provide similar if not better
leadership under new circumstances.

There are still challenges, though, with regard to transformation. One such
challenge that still needs to be fully addressed, regarding the
transformation of the judiciary, is the fact that women in general, and
particularly black women, are few. Section 174(2) of our Constitution
enjoins us to consider the need for the judiciary to reflect broadly the
racial and gender composition of South Africa. This is very important, and
I think this is an issue we need to attend to because it is a
constitutional obligation. We can’t run away from it. [Applause.]

Another challenge that we have is the issue of access to justice itself,
particularly the issue of the use of other languages in the courts. In many
of our courts, proceedings are primarily conducted in English and
Afrikaans.
It is common knowledge that these are not easy issues to deal with in the
first 15 years of our democracy, especially given the challenge of the
triple oppression of women in the past and the marginalisation of
indigenous languages.

Retired Chief Justice Langa’s view is that transformation envisages a
society that will always be open to dialogue and contestation and guards
against self-congratulatory complacency when it ceases to imagine that
things could be better.

As we bid farewell to a man of the calibre and stature of the eminent Chief
Justice Langa, it is fitting for Parliament to offer the same tribute to
the other three judges who have retired with him. They are Justice Albie
Sachs, Justice Kate O’Regan and Justice Yvonne Mokgoro, as well as Justice
Tholakele Madala, who retired last year. [Applause.] These are the founding
judges of the Constitutional Court; we must not forget that. Their records
speak for themselves. Parliament wishes all of them a long and happy
retirement.

I have never retired in my life; I don’t know how retirement feels. During
lunch I consulted with Justice Langa. After a few days he must share with
me what it means to retire - whether you forget in the morning and pick up
your briefcase, open the gate and go out thinking that you are going to
work! Then, when you are ten kilometres away, you start remembering, “By
the way, I’m retired!” [Laughter.] I don’t know.

These judges have written the history of our country through transforming
jurisprudence. We ought to be kind to them as they enter into retirement as
veterans of the law. I hope they will continue to assist some of us who
would like to be like them. One day I would also like to be on the Bench.
Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen. Go well. Justice Ngcobo, we wish
you well in your new job. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, hon President, Chief Justice
Langa and Chief Justice Ngcobo, it is with regret that this event has been
tainted to a small degree by the controversies surrounding the nomination
process to announce Chief Justice Pius Langa’s successor. Nevertheless, I
trust that we have all learnt some salutary lessons from this.

The people that we are honouring today are the custodians that hold the key
to a prosperous and progressive South Africa. Our Constitution provides
that the Bill of Rights applies to all law, and binds the legislature, the
executive, the judiciary and all organs of state. Our Constitution also
provides that everyone is equal before the law and has the right to equal
protection and benefit of the law.

Regarding the courts, our Constitution says, in Chapter 8, section 165:

   (1)      The judicial authority of the Republic is vested in the courts.


   (2)      The courts are independent and subject only to the Constitution
         and the law, which they must apply impartially and without fear,
         favour or prejudice.


   (3)      No person or organ of state may interfere with the functioning
         of the courts.


   (4)      Organs of state, through legislative and other measures, must
         assist and protect the courts to ensure the independence,
         impartiality, dignity, accessibility and effectiveness of the
         courts.


   (5)      An order or decision issued by a court binds all persons to whom
         and organs of state to which it applies.

This debate is, therefore, a most apposite occasion for this Parliament and
the executive to recognise the quality of the judicial leadership
represented here today, and formally to hand over the management and
custody of the courts, with their constitutional obligations, to those in
whose hands they should reside: the judiciary under the leadership of Chief
Justice Ngcobo.

Our Constitutional Court is one of the most illustrious courts in the
world. It ranks with the American Supreme Court, the House of Lords and the
German Constitutional Court. Our erudite and esteemed judges’ judgments are
read and quoted in these and many other courts around the world.

Since the inception of the democratic dispensation in our country, we have
been blessed by having exceptional and wise judicial leadership: Chief
Justices Michael Corbett, Ismail Mahomed, Arthur Chaskalson and Pius Langa.
They have proven to be progressive and talented judges of whom we can be
exceptionally proud.

The appointment of Judge Sandile Ngcobo not only coincides with a new
presidency in South Africa, but also with the departure of many other
esteemed judges from the first Bench appointed by the venerable former
President Nelson Mandela. We are thus entering a new, challenging and
exciting judicial era in which you, Judge Ngcobo, will be expected to show
the same leadership as, if not more impressive leadership than, your
predecessors.

Judge Langa, your ascent through the ranks of the legal profession has been
inspiring and embodies the essence of the open-opportunity society.
[Applause.] All the citizens of this country now know that one can overcome
the most daunting obstacles, endure unimaginable personal suffering and
sacrifice, and progress from being a court messenger to being a court
interpreter, to the highest judicial office in the land. [Applause.]

Many of your thought-provoking judgments have embodied the ethos and spirit
of our Constitution and its admired Bill of Rights. Your jurisprudence has
not only ensured an inimitable domestic reputation, but an international
one too, where you have served in many foreign nations with distinction.

Judge Langa is a jurist of unimpeachable integrity and wisdom. Even in
times of political tension, and judicial turmoil and controversy, he has
retained his inherent and coherent dignity and has been cool under fire.
[Applause.] We are all indebted to him for his inordinate contribution to
our society and democracy, for his professionalism and for his caring and
compassionate spirit.

Siyabulela kakhulu, bawo, ngegalelo lakho. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [We thank you,
sir, for your contribution. [Applause.]]

The incoming Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo is held in the highest regard. In
addition to South African legal qualifications, he holds an LLM degree from
Harvard University, where he was a Fulbright Scholar and a Harvard Law
School Fellow. He also worked with the legendary Chief Justice of the third
circuit Federal Court of Appeals in the United States of America, the late
Justice Leon Higginbotham.

As a justice of the Constitutional Court, he delivered 44 judgments and in
three of these he gave dissenting judgments. As such, he has contributed in
no small measure to the formative stages of South Africa’s exciting and
innovative jurisprudence.

Judge Ngcobo, you are faced with enormous challenges, chief of which is
surely the transformation of the judiciary and legal system in South
Africa. Transformation, however, is a complex issue and not merely one of
numbers and race. It involves the independence and legitimacy of the
judiciary, and the accessibility of the courts and justice to all the
people of South Africa.

All these issues are interrelated and explained well by Lord Denning, who
said:

   Independence is all very well, but if it is not backed by justice, it
   turns obstinacy into recalcitrance, and as for impartiality, you can be
   impartial in distributing injustice as well as justice.

We have a rich and indeed, in a sense, incomparable legal and
jurisprudential heritage spanning more than 200 years in South Africa. This
includes Roman Dutch law, English law and indigenous law. We rejoice in
this wealth of legal diversity involving the idea of natural law, the
wealth of English common and case law, and the inherent wisdom of
indigenous law. The latter, with its underlying philosophy of ubuntu, in
which Judge Ngcobo has displayed particular interest, needs to be developed
and preserved for the benefit of future generations.

From the past we must take that which is good, noble and just and build
future jurisprudence on this, in accordance with the spirit and ethos of
our Bill of Rights and its universal values.  This will require the wisdom
of Solomon and a fierce determination not to be dictated to by anyone’s
self-interest.

The example that you set will determine the success of the seminal role
that the judiciary must play in the further unfolding of our democracy and
attainment of social justice and human dignity for all people.

There has been an example of this, Chief Justice, in the Eastern Cape,
where Judge Somyalo led through respect and integrity, and united a Bench
that had been notoriously divided. Unfortunately, in the Western Cape we do
not have that. Racial myopia, name-calling and lack of leadership have left
an incoherent Bench in the Western Cape, and these are issues that we have
to look at fixing.

Therefore, Chief Justice Ngcobo, in this regard the Constitutional Court,
with you at its head, has a crucial role to play. And in the words of the
great Roman bard, Virgil: “Carpe diem!” We wish you well in this great
quest in which you may not fail. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Ningakhala nithini; andiyi ndawo. [You may interject all you
want; I am here to stay.] [Laughter.]

Hon Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon members, hon Chief
Justice Langa and hon Chief Justice Ngcobo, in a democratic South Africa
the champions of justice are those who faithfully and unswervingly serve
the Constitution. Today, in this Joint Sitting, in the presence of their
fellow justices from the Constitutional Court, the Labour Court, the Land
Claims Court, the Competition Appeal Court, the Supreme Court of Appeal,
and the Judges President from all divisions, we express our heartfelt
appreciation to Chief Justice Pius Langa for his singular devotion to
upholding the Constitution. For the judges of our land, the executive and
the members of the legislature, there is no other master but the
Constitution, and only the Constitution.

In life, people can make one of two choices: making a sacrifice for a noble
cause or sacrificing that noble cause on the altar of expediency and its
baser desires. In our world, society venerates the truth, and faithful
judges, among their colleagues and peers, find sincere acknowledgement and
deep respect. This is what is worth living for; all else is a sham.
When former President Mandela paid tribute to Chief Justice Corbett in
1996, he identified the following four tests for every judge in South
Africa to pass: “Passion for justice”, “sensitivity to racial
discrimination”, “intellectual rigour”, and “clarity of thought”. Chief
Justices Mahomed and Chaskalson passed these tests with flying colours and,
in our view, so has Chief Justice Pius Langa. He made shirts as a young
man; now he is making history without creases or soiling. It is very hard
to be true to oneself, to one’s calling, to the struggle, to the people of
the country and to the oath one takes. That is why, when exceptional people
such as Chief Justice Langa remain true and unblemished, we take them to
our hearts and prize their life’s worth. [Applause.]

You have done us proud, Chief Justice Langa. You have protected our
Constitution, and therefore our freedom. For us in Cope, the defence of the
Constitution merits the highest consideration and, therefore, we’ll
unfalteringly place the highest premium on it and give the highest honour
to those who will preserve its integrity. Even at the practical, down-to-
earth level, you have worked ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your speaking time has expired.

Mr M E GEORGE: I am sorry, Chair, I still had only to say, “Good luck!” to
Chief Justice Ngcobo. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Speaker, I am deeply privileged to have served on
the Judicial Service Commission for the past 13 years. In that capacity I
served under the chairmanship of four chief justices: Chief Justices Ismail
Mahomed, Arthur Chaskalson, Pius Langa and now Sandile Ngcobo. Colleagues,
you will understand when I say that to me as a lawyer that is an
unspeakable privilege.

Each of the four chief justices had his own distinct style and I pay
tribute to them. They had excellent humour, profound wisdom, judicial and
personal independence, an iron will and - this is important – determination
to protect the independence of the judiciary. They were ideally endowed to
lead the many thousands of lawyers in our country - judicial role models. I
pay tribute to the former chief justices.

Aan regter Langa wil ek graag sê, u finale bydrae tot die regspleging het
maar pas begin, want u het nou kosbare tyd tot u beskikking. U eretaak,
regter Langa, is om u diepgaande wysheid en omvangryke regterlike ervaring
met ons, die regsgeleerdes van ons land, te deel sodat die gehalte van ons
regspleging nog hoër kan styg. Ons maak op u staat daarvoor. Maar ons wens
u ook ‘n welverdiende oudag toe met u kleinkinders, en regter Langa, u moet
asseblief onthou, dit is u regterlike plig om u kleinkinders vreeslik baie
te bederf! [Gelag.] U moet mooi loop. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[To Justice Langa I would like to say, your final contribution to the
administration of justice has only just begun, because now you will have
precious time at your disposal. Justice Langa, your honorary task will be
to share your in-depth knowledge and extensive judicial experience with us,
the jurists of this country, in order to raise the standard of the
administration of justice even higher. We rely on you for this. We also
wish you a well-deserved old age with your grandchildren and, Justice
Langa, please remember, it is your judicial obligation to spoil your
grandchildren rotten! [Laughter.] Go well.]

Speaker, to Chief Justice Ngcobo, welcome to the judicial hot seat. I
wanted to say the job is going to give you grey hair, but then I realised
you are already grey! [Laughter.] You have already demonstrated your own
distinct style. You are a very fine humorist, I must admit. Above all, you
are the ideal father of your judiciary, blessed with profound judicial
wisdom, as well as patience - which I have experienced with you - insight
and compassion. Thank you for the judgment you gave for the government,
where you granted us costs! Thank you for that. [Laughter.]

Chief Justice, I agree with the Chairperson of the NCOP, sitting right in
front of me, about language. I think one of your primary challenges will be
to ensure that the languages of litigants in this country are respected and
protected. We offer you our unconditional support and we wish you well.
In conclusion, I wish to say a few words in isiZulu.

Somlomo, abehluleli bobabili bangamaZulu, ngakho ke ngifisa ukubingelela
ngesiZulu nokubafisela ukhisimusi omuhle nonyaka onezibusiso. Bahlonishwa,
nginifisela impilo ende. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Mr Speaker, both Chief Justices are Zulus. Therefore I want to greet them
in isiZulu and wish them a joyous Christmas and a blessed New Year. Your
honours, I wish you long life. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Mr Speaker, hon President, Deputy President, Chief Justice
Pius Langa and Chief Justice Ngcobo, it would be impossible for me to
mention all the achievements of Chief Justice Langa, nationally and
internationally. I can only encourage you, Justice Langa, to write a book
that we can have for future generations. However, what I can attest to is
that you are a true son of the soil and that you have contributed immensely
to the struggle against apartheid and to the development of our new
democracy.

I would briefly like to mention just one of the judgments from your
illustrious career. In the matter of Bhe and others v The Magistrate,
Khayelitsha and Others, Judge Langa declared the African customary laws
relating to the inheritance of property unconstitutional, because they
discriminated unfairly against women and illegitimate children and violated
their rights to equality and human dignity. This is just one of the many
reported judgments that have helped to shape our new democracy.

I would also like to say that I have, I think wisely, decided not to
mention the judge’s record when it comes to the judgments that directly
involve me in the Constitutional Court. This is, Judge Langa, because, like
you, I believe in the independence of the judiciary.

I came to know the judge a lot better while serving on the Judicial Service
Commission, JSC, and I would like to thank him for giving us the guidance
we needed to achieve our goal of transforming the judiciary. I would also
like to thank him for being so tolerant of me, because sometimes I behave
as if I were in Parliament. [Interjections.]

Judge Langa, we wish you all the best for your retirement. We are very sad
that your late wife, Thandekile, is not here to share this time with you,
but I think all of South Africa will agree that this is a good time to
thank Thandekile and your children for sharing you with us and the rest of
the nation for all these years. [Applause.]

In closing, I would like to welcome Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo. We will
definitely be on your side to protect and promote the independence of the
judiciary. I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr N M KGANYAGO: Mr Speaker, President, Deputy President, Ministers, Deputy
Ministers and members, I greet you. May I have a glass of water, because I
am going to speak until my throat is very dry! [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. My point of
order is: Is this hon member allowed to use the name “Koos”? [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Continue, hon member.

Mr N M KGANYAGO: I am “Koos”.

The SPEAKER: Disregard the interruption.

Mr N M KGANYAGO: The UDM bids farewell to Chief Justice Langa. During his
tenure, the judiciary went through a number of challenges. While Chief
Justice Langa may have expected that the duties of office would be a heavy
burden, he certainly could not have expected what storms would rage around
the judiciary and the Constitutional Court.

Nonetheless, today we can look back on those events and pay tribute to the
outgoing Chief Justice’s steady hand and steadfast principles. If it had
not been for his quiet determination and subtle approach, we may well have
stood here today lamenting the destruction of the judiciary. Thank you,
sir. Calmness under duress is not a function of skill or intelligence, but
rather springs directly from character. We have been fortunate that in
these trying times the Bench has been led by a man of character.

Still, damage was done to the credibility of the judiciary and certain
aspects of past fiascos are yet to be resolved. These issues will now be
inherited by incoming Chief Justice Ngcobo.

The UDM welcomes the new Chief Justice. His credentials as a South African
and jurist are impeccable. We wish him well and we are confident that he is
thoroughly aware of the difficult path that lies before the judiciary. It
is now his responsibility to lead the judiciary down that path. He will
require every ounce of the courage, leadership and wisdom that he
demonstrated earlier in his life.

Sepela gabotse, Chief Justice Langa. Re go tšolela mongatse. Re go amogela
ka matsogo a mabedi, Mopresidente wa Kgorotsheko ya Molaotheo Ngcobo. Ke a
leboga. [Go well, Chief Justice Langa. We honour you. We welcome you with
open arms, Chief Justice of the Constitutional Court Ngcobo. Thank you.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mr Speaker, the Bible says:

   For with the judgment you pronounce you will be judged, and with the
   measure you use it will be measured to you.

On behalf of the FF Plus I wish to express our gratitude to Chief Justice
Pius Langa for his courageous and unbiased implementation of the rule of
law. He embodied the founding principles of our Constitution, which clearly
states in section 165(2):

   The courts are independent and subject only to the Constitution and the
   law, which they must apply impartially and without fear, favour or
   prejudice.

As you yourself said earlier this year, judges should have a thick skin,
and politicians should as well! I would add to this, all the more should
judges have a thick skin when unpopular decisions have to be taken.

In defending the integrity of the Constitutional Court and the judiciary,
you adhered to these principles and specifically to the principle in
section 165(3) of the Constitution:


   No person or organ of state may interfere with the functioning of the
   courts.

You stood firm in the face of political criticism and personal attacks, and
protected the integrity of the judiciary. You did not allow one of the
pillars of our democracy to be weakened, and we want to thank you for that.


Namens die VF Plus, dankie vir die uitspraak oor die buitelandse stem. Ek
dink ons moes gewen het, en baie dankie daarvoor asook vir die kostebevel
wat u aan die regte kant gegee het.

Namens die VF Plus wil ek ook van die geleentheid gebruik maak om regter
Sandile Ngcobo geluk te wens met sy aanstelling as Hoofregter. U erf ‘n
nalatenskap van u voorganger wat baie hoë standaarde stel, spesifiek sover
dit gaan oor die onafhanklikheid van die howe. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[On behalf of the FF Plus, thank you for the verdict on the foreign vote. I
thought we should have won and many thanks for that, as well as for the
order as to costs that was awarded to the right party.

On behalf of the FF Plus I would also like to make use of this opportunity
to congratulate Judge Sandile Ngcobo on his appointment as Chief Justice.
You inherit a legacy from your predecessor, who set very high standards,
especially concerning the independent status of the courts.]

We hope that South Africa will experience your dedication to the
advancement of justice for all and the protection of human rights, not only
through the leadership you will have to display but also through the steps
you take to put the Constitution first. This you will have to do without
regard to yourself and the criticism you may have to endure.

In conclusion, I want to address both judges when I quote Enid Bagnold who
said, ”Judges don’t age; time decorates them.”

Dankie vir alles en baie mooi loop. [Applous.] [Thank you for everything
and go well. [Applause.]]

Mr T E CHAANE: Hon Speaker and hon Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, your Excellencies President Jacob Zuma and Deputy President
Motlanthe, Justices of the Constitutional Court and other members of the
judiciary, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon Premiers, hon members,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen ...

... ha e ne e le ka sehaeso ke ne ke tshwanetse hore ha Mopresidente a se a
buile tjena, ebe ke ema mona ke boloka nako ka ho re feela “le dumme!” ke
ntano dula fatshe. Empa ka hore ke morongwa ... (Translation of Sesotho
paragraph follows.)

[... if this was in my culture, when the President had finished talking, I
was supposed to stand here and save time by just saying “It’s final!” and
then sit down. But because I am just a messenger ...]
... let me start by saying today is a happy day. It marks the end of a long
relay marathon of freedom and the beginning of a new journey. We are
gathered here today to pay tribute to one of our own and witness as he
passes the baton to another son of the soil.

It all started from humble beginnings when, in 1956, at the age of 17, a
young man from Bushbuckridge became a T-shirt maker at a T-shirt factory.
Driven by determination and commitment, the fact that he could not finish
his schooling years was never a curse or deterrent. Through private
studies, he equipped himself with the necessary skills and knowledge for
the tough journey ahead. After becoming a messenger in the Justice
Department, the sky was the limit, and there was no turning back.

He worked his way through the “snakes and ladders” of the legal fraternity
to the highest court in the land in 2005. That achievement, to those who
clearly understand the difficulties he had to go through in reaching the
top, and the sufferings he endured along the way, added to the many
miracles that our country is renowned for in the world. That young man has
grown old today, he is amongst us as I speak, and he is none other than
Chief Justice Pius Langa. [Applause.]

Hon Speaker, allow me to be direct and say this. Chief Justice Langa,
throughout your life you have demonstrated high levels of commitment and
determination, driven by a selfless God-given talent, to serve with honesty
and integrity. You have been a beacon of hope to the hopeless, a pillar of
strength to the weak, a saviour to the oppressed, a voice of reason to the
voiceless and those without reason, a giver of hope to those whose views
were suppressed, an advocate for and defender of those whose rights were
violated, and a messenger and deliverer of good news to those who were
robbed of their livelihood, criminalised and terrorised in their land of
birth. You have laid a strong and solid foundation for transformation in
the judiciary. You have always emphasised the fact that judges should lead
in an exemplary way and display the traditional values expected of judges,
those being integrity and impartiality.

In the midst of high tensions and flaring tempers, when patience wore thin
and intolerance of slow transformation and allegations of racism, bias and
lack of impartiality in the judiciary crept in and took centre stage in
public debates, you became a good example of how judges should behave. You
provided leadership even during such trying times. In your own impartial
way, you kept your eyes on the ball and refused to be influenced to act in
a manner detrimental to the independence of the judiciary. You never feared
anything, for as the son of a reverend God, you knew that the Lord had
given us a spirit not of fear but of power, love and self-control.

You fearlessly and tirelessly continued to give proper authoritative
judgments. In your own way you continued to lead, reprove, rebuke and
exhort, teaching with complete patience. Against all odds, you held your
head high and refused to be distracted from your mission, and you
championed the cause of our struggle for total emancipation of our people
from all forms of oppression. You steered the ship into safe waters amidst
heavy, undeniable turbulence.

All these praise songs are not just because you are one of our own. The
many honorary awards you have received for the advancement of justice from
various reputable organisations - honorary doctorates bestowed upon you by
reputable universities - both in the country and abroad, attest to these
views. I make special mention of one of the many such awards, Supreme
Counsellor of the Order of the Baobab (Gold), bestowed upon you by the
President of the Republic of South Africa.

As you begin a new journey and enter into retirement, it is only fair and
fitting that we thank God for your life. It is even more fitting and
relevant that I borrow some words of wisdom from the scriptures written by
Paul and say: Hon Justice Langa, you have run the race:

   (You) have fought the good fight, (you) have finished the race, (you)
   have kept the faith.

Ha se bohle, ntate, ba qetang lebelo. Ba bang ba a wa, ba bang ba se ba
hloma mekhukhunyana ka thoko. [Ditsheho.] [It is not everyone who finishes
the race, sir. Some fall; some give up along the way. [Laughter.]]
Furthermore:

   Henceforth there is laid up for (you) a crown of righteousness, which the
   Lord, the righteous judge, shall give you at that day: and not to (you)
   only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

Hon Speaker, may I take this opportunity to conclude by wishing Chief
Justice Langa well, as he eases the pace and enters retirement. While we
bid him farewell as he leaves the active life of legal eagles, we welcome
as our new Chief Justice, taking over the baton from Justice Langa, another
super eagle in the legal fraternity, Chief Justice Ngcobo. [Applause.]

To him I wish to say that the foundation is laid and you are our hope to
run this race with the integrity and impartiality expected of a judge. It
is my wish that you fast-track the process of transformation in the
judiciary. With the support you will get from all and sundry, victory is
certain.

Your appointment as Chief Justice of the Constitutional Court is by no
means a reward or favour, but recognition of your academic qualifications
and standing, a vote of confidence and demonstration of trust in your
capabilities. God bless you. Thank you, sir. [Applause.]
Mrs C DUDLEY: Speaker, hon President and Deputy President, the ACDP shares
the sentiments expressed by other speakers in paying tribute to former
Chief Justice Pius Langa for his dedicated 15 years on the constitutional
Bench and for his leadership of the judiciary during a period of turmoil.
We also say farewell to Justices Kate O’Regan, Yvonne Mokgoro and Albie
Sachs.

The Constitutional Court has developed an impressive body of jurisprudence
and precedents during the former Chief Justice’s tenure, maintaining its
independence whilst still showing respect for the executive and Parliament.
It has also had to grapple with issues that rocked it to the core, such as
having to lodge complaints against the Western Cape Judge President.

Even closer to home, the former Chief Justice’s commitment to
constitutionalism and multiparty democracy was illustrated when, under his
guidance, the court agreed to hear an ACDP urgent application after hours
and provided urgent relief, enabling us to contest the local government
elections in Cape Town in 2006. We join others today in honouring you, sir,
and wishing you well in your retirement.

We also welcome the new Chief Justice, Justice Ngcobo, who has
exceptionally broad legal experience, gained here and in the United States
of America.

In many respects, the judiciary and its public reputation are facing very
serious challenges, particularly following ethical lapses and questionable
conduct by some judges. Judicial legitimacy is grounded in the perception
of fairness, impartiality and trust - which takes years to build. There are
also serious issues relating to transformation, as well as institutional
and administrative challenges, which include making justice accessible to
the most vulnerable.

We appreciate the fact that the Chief Justice views being a judge as a
higher calling. He will no doubt need the wisdom of Solomon as he seeks to
meet these challenges.

The ACDP has no doubt that, considering his track record, the new Chief
Justice will lead the judiciary in a manner that not only preserves its
independence, but also restores its reputation in the eyes of the broader
public. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Mr Speaker, hard work and dedication have played a big
role in Chief Justice Langa’s success. His dignity, intelligence and
dedication spurred former President Mbeki to select him to take over from
Chief Justice Chaskalson when he stepped down.

The UCDP hereby wishes Chief Justice Langa everything of the best for the
future. We hope that he will enjoy his deserved rest with his family and
loved ones, and we thank his family for allowing him to be of service to
his country. Your golden footprints are forever embedded in our nation.

To the new Chief Justice, the baton in the relay will be handed over to
you. Moreover, the soil has been well prepared and yours is to plant the
seed. Welcome and good luck. We wish you everything of the best in your
position. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Hon Speaker, hon President and Deputy President, hon Pius
Langa and hon Sandile Ngcobo, we are indeed proud of our Bench, and
particularly of outgoing Chief Justice Pius Langa, for continuing with the
very high standard that was set by his predecessor. It is a pity that,
because of our unfortunate history, both the retiring and incoming Chief
Justices were not ble to serve before 1994.

To Chief Justice Pius Langa we say: We are proud of you for being fair,
courageous and independent. Your dedication in serving all South Africans
undoubtedly makes you a wonderful person, a remarkable individual and an
astounding personality. The pivotal role you played in bringing about
equality and justice for all, even though it was simply your duty and
responsibility, attest to your professionalism.

Chief Justice Pius Langa, a beautiful life is built daily on peace, rest,
goodwill and humility. The MF prays that this beautiful life will belong to
you.

When we look at the CV of incoming Chief Justice Ngcobo, we are overjoyed
at his impeccable record. True leaders indeed add value to society, and we
have no doubt whatsoever that Justice Sandile Ngcobo will be equal to the
task. The entire country can relax now that our judiciary, at the highest
level, is in very good and safe hands.

We are indeed proud that KwaZulu-Natal, our province, has produced great –
I repeat, great – legal minds. [Laughter.] The MF takes this opportunity to
congratulate Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo and wishes him resounding
success. May God bless you! [Applause.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Mr Speaker and hon members, society respects and accepts
court judgments, not because they are always right, but because society
assumes the integrity, honesty and fair-mindedness of judges and other
court officials. Therefore, the appearance, deportment and dignity of
judges are important elements of the administration of justice in any
society.

Apart from a little wobble in the recent past, in which judges were
involved in an unseemly public spat – and we hope and trust that it will
not happen again – our judiciary still commands immense respect and support
from our society.
The fact that many in our country turn to the courts for the adjudication
of their disputes is evidence of the confidence they have in the judicial
system. The Constitutional Court in particular is looked upon with awe and
pride. This is priceless, for a lack of confidence in the justice system in
any country leads to anarchy, chaos and extrajudicial settlement of
disputes.

The two Justices in our midst today have played a huge role in dispensing
justice in our country and in maintaining the integrity and efficacy of our
courts. We thank Mr Justice Langa for his distinguished service to our
country and we wish Chief Justice Ngcobo strength and fortitude as he
assumes his new responsibilities. We hope that under his watch, the
judiciary will continue to enjoy the confidence of all our people.

Mr Justice Langa, sir, may you now go fishing with the blessing and love of
all of us. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Mr Speaker, Comrade President, comrades and hon members, the
APC joins the House in bidding farewell to outgoing Chief Justice Pius
Langa and in welcoming his successor, Chief Justice Sandile Ngqobo.

Justice Langa, it was in this House that we welcomed you as Chief Justice,
and here we are today bidding you farewell. It is our conviction as the APC
that you have held your office with distinction and dignity. Our judiciary
matured and weathered storms under your stewardship. It was your guiding
hand that ensured that our democratic institutions stood the test of time.
A lot has been achieved under your leadership to entrench and advance
within the judiciary the values enshrined in our Constitution. The APC
thanks you for that.

Hamba uye kuphumla nawe, mfo kaLanga; kudala uzabalaza. [Enjoy your
deserved retirement, descendant of the Langa family; you have been in the
struggle a long time.]

As the baton is passed to Chief Justice Ngqobo, the APC wishes to emphasise
that the transformation of the judiciary is necessary, urgent and non-
negotiable. Transformation should not only mean bean-counting, but a
fundamental change in the ideology that guides the judiciary.

The justice system, in its practice and content, must not be foreign to the
majority in this country. Why must a Shangaan-speaking magistrate,
prosecutor, accused and witness be addressed in English in a 100% Shangaan-
speaking area? [Applause.] I’m sure we have all read Ngũgĩ wa Thiong’o’s
book, Decolonising the Mind.

Chief Justice Ngqobo, I’m sure you’ll agree with the APC ...

HON MEMBERS: Ngcobo!
Mr N T GODI: Ngcobo? Oh yes. I’m sure you’ll agree with the APC that there
is a need to enhance access to justice by all, especially poor and rural
folks. Justice must be decommodified.

The APC would like to see a people-centred judiciary that protects the
vulnerable in a system that functions properly. The APC wishes you well,
Chief Justice Ngcobo. The struggle continues! [Applause.]

Mr N A RAMATLHODI: Hon Speaker, Your Excellency the President and Your
Excellency the Deputy President, it is indeed a great honour and rare
privilege for me to take part in this august debate on the occasion of
bidding farewell to our former Chief Justice Pius Langa.

The ANC takes this opportunity to thank you most sincerely, and with
boundless pride, for a sterling job, priceless work well done.

As a country, we owe you and your two predecessors, former Chief Justice
Chaskalson and the late Chief Justice Mahomed, tons of gratitude. Like you,
Chief Justice Langa, our late Chief Justice Mahomed stood out as
affirmation of the fact that black people, given equal opportunity, are
capable of carrying out some of the most difficult and complex tasks with
an astonishing degree of success. We take pride in the fact that you have
affirmed us as worthy citizens, who can be entrusted with the future of the
country without someone’s having to spend sleepless nights wondering
whether the sun will rise again tomorrow or not.
Yours might be a single footprint in a vast desert, but in historic terms
it represents a giant leap forward in collective efforts to build our
nascent democracy into a formidable and proud member of the community of
nations. For this we are deeply indebted to you, sir, and to the galaxy of
Constitutional Court justices who have served the country in your hallowed
company. These men and women have left an indelible mark on the
jurisprudence of a democratic South Africa. We acknowledge the sterling
contribution to the nation-building project by the justices you were
privileged to captain.

As was to be expected in a transition, there have been extremely
uncomfortable moments when it looked like we were heading for a
constitutional crisis in our country. At the hour of madness, the political
landscape was coloured by a rising tide of uncertainty, principally as a
result of fierce contestation within the ruling party, my party, the ANC.
In that hour, it must be said, we were wrestling with a festering sore that
had to be opened up so that we could move forward. Each birth has its own
pains, or to each birth its blood. Happily, those bleak, dark days have
passed.

Chief Justice Langa, you steered your ship with tremendous courage and
fortitude, as a good judge would do. The verdict is that you leave a
judiciary where “the centre is holding” to paraphrase WB Yeats, in spite of
the many challenges we still have to overcome. A solid foundation has been
laid.
The baton is being passed on to our new Chief Justice, Chief Justice
Ngcobo. In Sepedi we would call you “Nnobo”, because we can’t say Ngcobo!
Allow me to take this opportunity to join millions of my fellow citizens in
conveying our heartfelt congratulations to you, Chief Justice Ngcobo, on
your elevation to the highest judicial office in the land.

Our expectations are high. Our hope is even firmer that under your
stewardship the judiciary will witness the opening of new and bright
horizons and ever-expanding frontiers in the never-ending journey of
transformation.

In this regard, the goal must be nothing less than the creation of a
people’s judiciary, as envisaged in our Constitution. The judiciary must be
broadly representative of the community it serves; so instructs our
Constitution. This is not a plea which some of us have the latitude either
to ignore or implement, depending on the mood of the day. In judicial
language, the requirement for the judiciary to be broadly representative is
peremptory.

This provision is not in the Constitution by accident; it is there in order
to redress the historic exclusion of black people and women from the
judiciary in our country. In transforming the judiciary, we must ensure
that black people - Africans in particular - and women are appointed to the
Bench without hesitation. [Applause.]

Where there are technical deficiencies, it is our collective obligation to
expand the training programmes already in place, as well as to introduce
new programmes. The position of acting judges may have to be regularised so
that deserving candidates are not missed by the system. Another area
meriting attention is the exclusion of possible candidates on the basis of
language. Our Constitution recognises 11 languages, in case we need
reminding.

It is not enough, though, for the judiciary to be broadly representative.
We must, in addition to changing the form, perhaps more importantly, ensure
a change of mind-set. In this regard, we have to accommodate the moral
values and ethos of the majority of South Africans in this country. For
example, the “reasonable man” in the law of contracts should not be
confined to the “reasonable man” of the London Stock Exchange. This
“reasonable man” could also be one who believes in a verbal contract, as
they do in Segole, the small village where I come from.

To achieve the envisaged paradigm shift, it is suggested that sitting
judicial officers may need to attend courses studying other cultures in
order fully to understand the nature of the people they seek to serve. I
rest my case. [Applause.]

CHIEF JUSTICE P N LANGA: Hon Speaker, hon Chair of the National Council of
Provinces, Your Excellency the President, Your Excellency the Deputy
President, hon members, members of the judiciary that I see are present,
Chief Justice, leaders of the courts sitting up there, heads of courts,
ladies and gentlemen, this is a unique occasion. In my recollection, apart
from those occasions when the Chief Justice performs functions prescribed
by the Constitution, members of the third arm of the state, the judiciary,
in South Africa have never addressed a Joint Sitting of the Houses of
Parliament. [Applause.]

Today, the three arms of the state have gathered and participate together,
not to fulfil the usual function of checking upon one another and balancing
conduct and activities, but rather to acknowledge one another. It is a
positive development, because all three are critically important to our
democracy. Although they have separate roles, they are complementary and
not mutually exclusive.

I thank the President of the Republic of South Africa for requesting this
Joint Sitting of the two Houses of Parliament and for his kind words on the
occasion of my retirement. My thanks also go to the Speaker of the National
Assembly and to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces for
making this occasion possible. I’m also grateful to the representatives of
political parties for what they have said and the sentiments they have
expressed.

I have worked with some of them in various forums and can testify to the
fact that I have always received courteous and willing co-operation,
support and respect from them. I mention in particular the Judicial Service
Commission, which I have had the privilege of chairing since the year 2005.


Of course, I have encountered others in my previous life as a legal
practitioner, and I’ve seen them go to jail ... [Laughter.] ... and,
fortunately, I’ve also seen them come out of jail ... [Laughter.] ... and
become hon members of this House!

I have had a wonderful relationship with all the Ministers of Justice and
Constitutional Development. It has been a relationship of mutual respect,
courtesy and co-operation. I thank them for their unceasing encouragement
and support. The current Minister, Jeff Radebe, has been a tower of
strength, always looking for ways and means to make my work and that of all
judicial officers not only manageable, but also pleasant.

I have been working in the Constitutional Court. The Deputy Chief Justice,
Justice Dikgang Moseneke, together with the other judges of the
Constitutional Court, have been veritable towers of strength. They,
together with those colleagues who are retiring with me, have given me
immense support in my functioning ... [Applause.] ... as Chief Justice of
this country. Each one of them has always been exceptionally collegial,
helpful and burden-sharing. I could not have asked for a better team to
work with.

The foundations were laid during the pioneering days, first by Chief
Justice Mick Corbett, then by Chief Justice Ismail Mahomed, and then during
the incumbency of my predecessor, Justice Arthur Chaskalson, the former
President of the Constitutional Court and later Chief Justice of South
Africa. They stood firm, and I’m grateful to all of them, in particular to
my predecessor, former Chief Justice Arthur Chaskalson - a great South
African in his own right - for laying the groundwork ... [Applause.] ... of
this great institution.

An important institution of the judiciary is that of the heads of courts,
that is, the President of the Supreme Court of Appeal and the Deputy
President of the SCA, as well as all the Judges President and their
deputies in all the divisions and special courts. We have worked well, and
I thank them.

I would like to pay tribute to them for their industry, co-operation and
support; to pay tribute to the entire magistracy, which is actually at the
cutting edge of the legal system in South Africa; and to pay tribute to the
legal profession and everyone else who has touched my life and my work in
the administration of justice. I thank them all and would like each one of
them to know how appreciative I am of the cordiality of our relationship.

Of course, I thank my family as well, who have given me the inspiration to
trudge along these few years, first as a judge of the Constitutional Court,
and lately as Chief Justice of this country. Without the inspiration and
support they gave me, I would not have been able to do anything or to last
the distance. [Applause.]

Let me extend my thanks to the people of South Africa for having afforded
me the opportunity to serve as a judge of the Constitutional Court from
October 1994 to October 2009. It is a period of 15 years, a momentous
period in my life and that of my family. I have been richly rewarded
through all these years. It is not possible to tabulate and rank all of
these rewards, but it is safe to mention that they include the following:
seeing my country and my nation emerge victorious from the bondage of
apartheid ... [Applause.] ... to be counted among the free nations of the
world; the setting up of democratic structures, namely Parliament, the
courts, Chapter 9 Institutions and other institutions; and the fact that in
spite of numerous challenges, these institutions have not only survived,
but are functioning. I also add the vibrancy of organs of civil society,
and so on.

I have enjoyed the comradeship of many of my fellow South Africans and
members of the international community who believe, as I do,  that the
responsibilities that cleave to the very essence of the soul of this nation
are, as the Preamble to the Constitution states, to:

  Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on
  democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights;
  Lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government
  is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected
  by law;


  Improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of
  each person; and


  Build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful
  place as a sovereign state in the family of nations.

I have subscribed, and will continue to proudly and assiduously subscribe,
to these ideals. I will also uphold the foundational values of equality and
human dignity, and the advancement of human rights and freedoms,
nonracialism, nonsexism and the supremacy of the Constitution and the rule
of law.

As I leave centre stage as Chief Justice of South Africa and look for other
work ... [Laughter.] I mentioned that this is a position I’ve been
immensely honoured and privileged to serve in. I’m acutely aware that the
work I’ve tried to do on the Bench, together with my colleagues, is far
from done. There is a long way to go - still. As long as poverty,
homelessness, disease and illiteracy ravage our people and are still
features of the lives of many who exist side by side with those who are
privileged and who have everything before them, our job - yours and mine -
will not have been accomplished.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to congratulate my colleague,
Justice Sandile Ngcobo, the new Chief Justice of South Africa, on his
appointment to this position. I have no doubt that he will receive all the
necessary support and co-operation to carry out the onerous
responsibilities entrusted to him, in particular in presiding over the
Constitutional Court and in leading the entire judiciary of this country.
It is still very much a time of transition, requiring the gifts of wisdom,
diligence and diplomacy. I have no doubt that he will prove equal to the
challenges that lie ahead. I wish him all the best. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: We thank Chief Justice Pius Langa. It is my pleasure and
honour now to invite Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo to address the House.
Chief Justice. [Applause.]

CHIEF JUSTICE S NGCOBO: Mr Speaker, one of the fundamental principles that
underlie my judicial philosophy is respect for other branches of
government, which means you must never intrude into the domain of other
branches of government. And look at where I am today! [Applause.] I have
intruded into the domain of Parliament! But it is an intrusion which is
mandated by the Constitution.

Hon Speaker of the National Assembly and Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, hon Mr President Msholozi, hon Deputy President,
Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly and Deputy Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces, former Chief Justice Langa, hon Ministers,
Deputy Ministers and Premiers present, my colleagues in the judiciary, hon
members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I thank the President
and members of this House so much for the kind words of welcome. I consider
myself especially privileged to receive this historic welcome as the new
Chief Justice of the Republic of South Africa, and also to be present today
to say farewell to my distinguished colleague, Justice Pius Langa. Justice
Langa’s service to the nation and to the judiciary is justly respected and
I hope that my own service will match the tradition of excellence that my
predecessors have established.

Let me begin by expressing my deepest appreciation to you, Mr President,
for appointing me Chief Justice. I am indeed humbled by the confidence you
have shown in me, and I shall strive to the best of my ability to be worthy
of that trust.

Of course, reaching this position has been a product of a long journey
through life. So many people have helped me along the way. I would not be
standing before you today without the unseen support of my family, friends,
teachers, mentors, and colleagues in the judiciary. I owe them all a
tremendous debt. I regret, though, that some to whom I owe so much,
particularly my parents, have not lived to witness this occasion.

Moreover the recognition of the contribution of others to my appointment
reinforces my view that the judiciary’s role must always be characterised
by a certain humility. Judges, after all, are servants of the law, and not
the other way round.

The Office of the Chief Justice is a great honour, but it carries with it a
huge responsibility. Judicial humility is particularly important in South
Africa. We are still very much a nation in transition. Our Constitution is
the bridge that carries us from the injustices of the past to a society
based on democratic values and fundamental human rights that is our future
and, increasingly, our present.

Our judiciary has been given wide powers to uphold our constitutional
democracy and bring the law into line with our new Constitution. In
exercising these powers, our courts must appreciate the role of other
branches of government in our constitutional democracy. They must also
recognise the difficulties inherent in governing a country with a history
such as ours, stained by injustice, where resources are limited and the
demands are huge.

Judges must ensure that other branches of government play by the rules, but
they, too, must observe the vital limits on their power. They are bound by
the Constitution and the principle of the separation of powers. Above all,
judges must remain vigilant to the fact that the breadth of judicial power
must always be matched by the real depth of judicial responsibility.

Like our nation, our courts have accomplished much over the past 15 years.
However, our justice system faces serious challenges. Perhaps the first
challenge is the improvement of access to justice. Section 34 of the
Constitution enshrines the right of access to courts, yet the cost of
litigation and the complexity of legal procedures deter many potential
litigants, particularly those who most need and deserve the protection of
the justice system.

In a constitutional democracy, founded on the rule of law and the
protection of human rights, everyone must be able to have his or her day in
court, not just those with the resources to hire expensive counsel, to pay
mounting court fees and to bear the escalating costs of litigation that may
last for years.

A closely related challenge is improvement in the efficiency of the
administration of justice. Justice may be denied when parties wait for
months or even years to be assigned a trial date or an appeal hearing, or
to have judgment handed down. Justice may also be denied when the
fragmentation of our court system means that like cases are not always
decided alike.

Ultimately, we must have a court system that is more efficient and more
rationally structured. The transformation of a judiciary dominated by
minority ward to one that reflects the beautiful diversity of our nation is
another challenge. We have made significant progress, yet great distances
remain to be traversed.

There is also the challenge of managing the tensions between the judiciary
and the other branches of government. Tension is natural, and even
desirable. After all, it stems from the vital yet differing constitutional
roles assigned to each branch. Too much tension, however, threatens the
ability of each to do its duty. Courts may end up thwarting the legitimate
political goals of the executive and the legislature, and, by the same
token, unbridled legislative and executive criticism can weaken public
confidence in the judiciary.

Together these challenges contribute to another challenge, which is
fundamental, which the the maintenance of public confidence in the
judiciary. Without confidence in the ability of the courts to dispense
justice, there can be no faith in the rule of law, and without faith in the
rule of law valuable relationships of trust within society begin to break
down. Citizens can no longer be assured that their rights can be protected.
Businesses can no longer be assured that their contracts will be honoured.
Victims of crime can no longer be assured that justice will be served in
court. And so, ultimately, courts must not only be independent and
effective, they must also be seen to be independent and effective.

As Chief Justice I am responsible for providing leadership to the judiciary
as a whole. In that capacity I shall be spending the next few weeks
consulting with my fellow members of the judiciary, to better understand
the challenges that I have just described. That consultation will help to
develop a programme of action to address these challenges.

That programme of action will, in turn, be informed by my vision of the
judiciary, which is underpinned by the following fundamental principles:
The judicial system must function efficiently; the justice system should be
accessible to all; judicial integrity is crucial to the delivery of
justice; there must be a healthy constitutional dialogue among the branches
of government, consistent with the principle of the separation of powers;
and there must be transformation of the judiciary and the legal system
consistent with the demands of our Constitution.

I expect to devote all my energy and every moment of my tenure to giving
effect to this vision.

I am mindful of the enormous task that lies ahead. Indeed, I am mindful of
the many and difficult challenges that face our courts. Yet, I am also
aware of the capability of my colleagues in the judiciary, and I am also
aware that the President, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development and all Members of Parliament share my deep commitment to a
strong and healthy democracy. That is why I am confident that together we
will rise up and meet the many and difficult challenges that face our
courts and thereby preserve for the next generation a judicial system that
promotes the rule of law, promotes and protects the rights of all, and
dispenses justice to the strong and the weak alike.

Mr Speaker, thank you so much for this very warm welcome which I have
received in this House. Thank you so much. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: We thank the honourable Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Speaker, Mr
President, Mr Deputy President, Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, Chief Justice Ngcobo, Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke,
former Chief Justice Pius Langa, President of the Supreme Court of Appeal
Justice Mphathi, judges president and other judges present, fellow Members
of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, it is an honour for me to address this
Joint Sitting of the two Houses of Parliament since our country transcended
apartheid to democratic rule 15 years ago today. It is also an honour to
bid farewell to Chief Justice Pius Langa and to welcome Chief Justice
Sandile Ngcobo as the fifth Chief Justice since the dawn of a democratic
South Africa.

It is remarkable that the changing of the guard in the judiciary is
occuring during the same year in which the Fourth Parliament was
inaugurated. This immediately brings into sharp focus the need to emphasise
the common understanding of the separation of powers without the
debilitating effects of the overlaps that might have occurred had one arm
of the state attained incumbency earlier than the other. Had there been
overlaps between the dawn of the Fourth Parliament and the changing of the
guard in the judiciary, the residual effects of one on the other could have
lingered and the relationships going forward would have been characterised
by one arm trying to assert its space over the other.

In this, we are one with Montesquieu who proclaimed, about three centuries
ago, the sanctity of the separation of powers, when he aptly observed, and
I quote:

   Were the executive power not to have a right of restraining the
   encroachments of the legislative body, the latter would have become
   despotic; for as it might arrogate to itself what authority it pleased,
   it would soon destroy all the other powers.

As the judicial guard changes, we as government reiterate this noble
sentiment and further recommit to the upholding of the ideals of the
separation of powers.

Members will recall that the era of former Chief Justice Ismail Mahomed
ushered in a transition from parliamentary sovereignty to the supremacy of
the Constitution. Under the leadership of Chief Justice Chaskalson, and
later Chief Justice Langa, the Constitutional Court established itself as
the fortress of our constitutional jurisprudence.

The judgments of the Constitutional Court, as our apex court, not only
constitute legal precedents for all our courts in this great republic, but
also provide a treasure trove of points of reference to many judgments of
the courts in other world democracies. This was acknowledged by over 63
judiciaries who attended the first World Conference on Constitutional
Justice, held in South Africa in January 2009.

The tributes and accolades showered on former Chief Justice Langa by his
colleagues, chief justices across the globe, at this conference and by our
own President Jacob Zuma today, in this august House, signify the immense
contribution that Justice Langa has made in the transformation of our
judiciary and society at large.

I have personally known Chief Justice Langa since the tough years of our
struggle for democracy in South Africa. He has come through the ranks in
the judicial sector, having started as a court interpreter and exiting at
the highest office of the judiciary in our land. [Applause.]

He and his family members used to visit us in exile, and he was there to
receive me when I was released from prison, having accompanied me to
prison! [Laughter.]

He also shaped my earlier career as a young lawyer by employing me as a
projects co-ordinator while he was the president of the National
Association of Democratic Lawyers. I want to assure Chief Justice Langa
that his efforts were not in vain, as I have found that my pupillage in his
employment has been useful in my current portfolio! [Applause.]

I therefore wish to thank former Chief Justice Langa and the three justices
of the Constitutional Court who retired with him, Justices Sachs, O’Regan
and Mokgoro, for a journey well travelled. We wish the former Chief Justice
well in his retirement, and I do trust that we will continue to seek his
judicious wisdom and counsel. It is, Chief Justice Langa, not a worn-out
phrase that judges, like good soldiers, never retire.

Sothole, Madevu, nina bakwaKhanyile, onhliziyo zimhlophe, elal’ ezaleni
kuse beyiconsa ngokusasa. Bhukuda kwesinengwenya! Ngwane! Gudukazi! Lala
mbijana nogwaja ozikhundlakhundla, esinye esokulala esinye esokwethamela;
Mncwayo! Sothole! [Ihlombe.] [Clan names.] [Applause.]

I have also known Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo for a very long time, as a
fellow combatant during the dark ages of apartheid. He was detained between
1976 and 1977 for fighting against the unjust system. He later went on to
practise as a legal practitioner to defend those who were victims of this
very system. We graduated from the same university in 1976, the same year
that the young students dared to lay down their lives for a better South
Africa.

I remember that in 1973 he created a sensation when he became the first
student I knew at the university who once enjoyed a flight from Durban to
Johannesburg! [Laughter.] I was able to enjoy a flight for the very first
time in 1977, when the ANC, incidentally President Zuma, sent me from
Maputo to Dar es Salaam. [Laughter.]

Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo has been part of the judicial machinery since
April 1996, having first been appointed as Acting Judge of the Cape of Good
Hope and then appointed Acting Judge President of the Labour Appeal Court
in 1997. He taught at highly acclaimed institutions such as the University
of Pennsylvania, and Harvard and Stanford Law Schools. He served on the
Constitutional Court during the eras of both Chief Justice Chaskalson and
Chief Justice Langa.

His strong leadership qualities, impeccable judicial track record and clear
foresight will not only strengthen and enhance the judiciary as one of the
three branches of the state, but also contribute to the realisation of a
truly transformed and accessible justice system that this country has
yearned for for years.

Even before the President could nominate him to his judicial leadership
position and before the Judicial Service Commission could find him to be a
suitable, fit and proper person for the highest office within the judicial
sector, all judges of the Republic of South Africa and his peers had,
during the judges’ conference held in July 2009, recognised his leadership
qualities and attributes by entrusting him, together with Justice Mogoeng
Wa Mogoeng who was recently appointed to the Constitutional Court, with the
responsibility of overseeing the implementation of the judges’ conference
resolutions.

As has been acknowledged by most of the speakers during this debate, Chief
Justice Sandile Ngcobo assumes office at a critical time, when the
judiciary is facing numerous challenges, some of which have been mentioned
in this debate. I have no doubt in my mind that Chief Justice Sandile
Ngcobo will be equal to all those challenges. He has, as his second in
command, Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke, who also has profound leadership
qualities. I’m confident that through their leadership, the public’s
confidence in the judicial system will be restored.

I have trust that under their stewardship, the judiciary will continue to
complement the other two branches of the state in the quest to build a
nonracial and nonsexist society in which every citizen enjoys fundamental
rights and freedoms.

I have assured the Chief Justice and all the heads of courts of my
unwavering support for the judiciary in the realisation of this goal, and
will do so within the confines of the independence of the judiciary and the
rule of law, which underpin our constitutional democracy. [Applause.]

As you pick up this baton to steer the judiciary to greater heights, Chief
Justice Ngcobo, it will always be useful to remember that you are ...

... Fuze! Ndawonye! Mashiy’ amahle sengathi azoshumayela. UnguMapholoba
owavuk’ ekuseni wancinda umunwe, wakhomba phezulu, lakhanya bha ilanga.
Sibhebhe kaSilwane, Nkodoma wakoNjilo ibinda langalakhe. Kuthiwa inkosi
kayiqedwa. [Ihlombe.] [Clan names.] [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The Speaker of the National Assembly adjourned the Joint Sitting at 15:59.


