---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 November 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-11-01
---

TUESDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2005
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The SPEAKER: We now come to notices of motion. Does any member wish to give
a notice of motion?

Mr M J Ellis: Madam Speaker, apparently the Chief Whip of the ANC would
like me to do one but I have to inform him that I haven’t got one.
[Laughter.]

                   CONGRATULATIONS TO PROTEAS CRICKET TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

    That the House –


    (1)     congratulates the Proteas cricket team on their victory in Port
         Elizabeth on Sunday against New Zealand;


    (2)     notes that this third victory against New Zealand clinched the
         one-day cricket series for South Africa; and


    (3)     wishes the team well in the remaining one-day matches.


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, may we engage you on
just a little aspect of that motion?

The ANC had the intention to move that motion but by agreement we gave it
to the opposition. Our only hang-up is that if we say they have clinched
the series it might suggest that they can’t lose the remaining two matches.
We want them to win those two matches as well.

Agreed to.

                   THE PASSING AWAY OF MRS HUBERTE RUPERT

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes with regret the passing away of Mrs Huberte Rupert, wife
         of the founder of the Rembrandt Corporation, Dr Anton Rupert, and
         mother of the industrialist Mr Johann Rupert;


    (2)     further notes that the late Mrs Rupert played a major role in
         supporting and cultivating arts and culture in South Africa,
         classical music in particular, also in formerly disadvantaged
         communities;


    (3)     acknowledges that this prominent South African heroine will be
         remembered for her quiet strength and determination in support of
         her family and so many others in our country; and


    (4)     expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences to her family and
         loved ones.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: The condolences will be conveyed to the Rupert family.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion as printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, as follows:


   That Rule 253(1), which provides, inter alia, that the debate on the
   Second Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working
   days have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended
   for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Diamonds
   Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2005 (Reintroduced)] (National Assembly – sec 75)
   today.


Agreed to.

                     PREVALENCE OF SUICIDE AMONG SA YOUTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P BHENGU (ANC): Today more than ever before South African children are
faced with challenges that require them to step into adult shoes at a very
early age. In too many households children have to become the breadwinners
to ensure that there is food on the table and in some instances roles have
been reversed for children.
  It is of great concern to the ANC that the suicide rate among children is
 on the increase. Reports of children taking their own lives have become all
 too common. The death of one child is one too many. Our children form part
     of the most fragile sections of our society and they look to us for
 guidance and protection. It is our duty to ensure that they have the right
                to grow up in a safe and secure environment.

    The youth of South Africa is our greatest asset. Our children are the
    custodians of our future. If we fail our children the future of South
                         Africa will be very bleak.

 The Minister of Social Development has stated that parents and communities
 need to be empowered to take care of their children and that the wellbeing
   of each child should be our everyday business. Therefore we call on all
  community leaders, teachers, parents, non-governmental organisations and
  all other role-players to assist us so that we can ensure that a support
  system is in place that will allow our children to enjoy their right to a
  carefree childhood. Let us give expression to the saying that every child
                           is my child. Thank you.

                      PROVISION OF HOUSING FOR THE POOR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Housing’s demand that the
private sector devote 20% of all future housing developments to low-cost
housing is naïve if she believes it will solve the housing crisis. The
provision of housing for the poorest of the poor is primarily government’s
responsibility and they are failing the poor.

A cursory glance at her annual report shows underexpenditure of R367
million, with the North West, Limpopo, Free State and Western Cape the
biggest failures when it comes to delivery. If we look at the number of
houses delivered we find that the Eastern Cape spent R572 million to
produce 37 000 houses. By contrast the Western Cape spent R511 million but
only produced 11 000 houses, less than a third of the number of houses with
90% of the Eastern Cape’s expenditure.

I call upon the hon Minister to get her own house in order before she
intervenes in the private sector. She should ensure the cost-effective
delivery of houses by government first before passing the responsibility to
the private sector. [Applause.]

              CRIMINAL INCIDENTS INVOLVING MEMBERS OF THE SAPS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Speaker, members of the SA Police Service are,
in general, working hard and doing their best with the resources at their
disposal under difficult conditions. It is therefore very unfortunate that
there always seems to be an incident involving criminal behaviour of
members of the SAPS.

We heard last week that a police officer was arrested after paternity tests
revealed that he was the father of a child born while the mother was still
in detention. The woman, who was held in a police cell for two years, was
allegedly raped repeatedly by three police officers.

In a separate incident police are investigating a case of rape after a 25-
year-old woman laid a charge after being detained in a Kraaifontein police
station cell. She alleged that she was raped by two civilian employees.

We urge the relevant authorities to investigate thoroughly not only the
above two cases but all cases involving SAPS officials. Corrupt and
criminal members of the SAPS must be weeded out as they are tarnishing the
good name of all the honest men and women of the SAPS who work so hard.
They must be made to realise that they are not above the law and must not
use their position to conduct their criminal activities.

                         VOTER REGISTRATION WEEKEND

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W M SKHOSANA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Independent Electoral Commission
has set aside the weekend of 19 and 20 November as a registration weekend
to give the people who have not yet registered an opportunity to register
for the forthcoming municipal elections.

Our Constitution guarantees every adult citizen a right to participate in a
free, fair and regular election, voting in an election for any legislative
body established in terms of the Constitution. The Freedom Charter declares
that the people shall govern.

The forthcoming municipality elections give voters an opportunity to ensure
that they vote for representatives that are dedicated to serving the people
and are committed to creating a better life for all. Therefore the ANC
urges all voters who have not yet registered to make use of this
registration opportunity on 19 and 20 November to register so that they can
exercise their right to vote so that the will of the people can be heard.
[Applause.]

          OPERATION BEAR’S CAPE TOWN TO LONDON FUNDRAISING PROJECT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, the ACDP would like to wish Operation Bear’s
Cape Town to London fundraising project a safe and fruitful trip. This
venture commenced outside Parliament this morning.

Steve Heath and Rob Bedeman of Operation Bear will be travelling in a beach
buggy from Cape Town to London via Africa and Europe. The trip will involve
travelling 60 000km through 22 countries over a period of approximately 16
months.

 The aim of the project is firstly to raise public awareness of the horrific
 increase in the number of child rape and sexual abuse cases taking place in
    South Africa, Africa and the world and to find solutions to stop this
       scourge. A further aim is to raise much needed funds for three
    organisations providing support services to victims of child rape and
  sexual abuse. These organisations are the Teddy Bear Clinic in Parktown,
 Operation Bobbi Bear in Winklespruit and the Tygerbear Clinic at Tygerberg
                                  Hospital.

    It is significant that Operation Bear commenced outside the gates of
 Parliament where we as elected representatives grapple with the challenges
 of sexual abuse of children. The special parliamentary task team on sexual
    abuse of children confirmed the widespread abuse, particularly sexual
 abuse, of children and stated that, “the intensity of the spiral of sexual
   abuse of children in South Africa demands that certain interventions be
        effected to eradicate this pervasive problem in our society”.

  The ACDP has been at the forefront of this fight and has welcomed certain
 clauses in the proposed Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Amendment Bill, such
 as the broadening of the definition of rape, the criminalisation of harmful
     HIV-related behaviour and the inclusion of the paedophile register.

  We have, however, as the ACDP taken a very strong stance urging that the
 age of sexual consent should be raised to 18 years. Age of consent offences
  offer the best legal protection for boys and girls from adult predators.
 This will prevent adult abusers from claiming that their victims consented.

 There is no doubt that there is much to be done to support the exceptional
    work of these volunteer organisations. The ACDP calls upon all South
         Africans to support the Operation Bear fundraising project.

              UN INVESTIGATION REGARDING OIL-FOR-FOOD PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)


Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Agb Speaker, in opdrag van die Verenigde Nasies
het ‘n onafhanklike ondersoekspan, onder leiding van mnr Paul Volcker,
ondersoek ingestel na ongerymdhede in die Irakse olie-vir-voedselprogram
tydens Saddam Hoessein se regeringstyd.
Verskeie Suid-Afrikaanse maatskappye en Suid-Afrikaanse burgers, soos mnr
Sandi Majali, se name word prominent in die VN-verslag genoem. Mnr Majali
het die bewerings as ongegrond en kwaadwillig beskryf en het gedreig met
regstappe teen die VN.

Die vraag is, wat gaan die Suid-Afrikaanse regering aan die saak doen? Die
Australiese en Jordaniese regerings het reeds kommissies van ondersoek
ingestel na die maatskappye van hierdie lande wat in die VN-verslag genoem
word.

As alternatief maak die Suid-Afrikaanse korrupsiewet ook voorsiening vir ‘n
ondersoek na sulke bewerings. Die VF Plus glo dat ‘n kommissie van
ondersoek aangestel behoort te word wat eens en vir altyd dié bewerings kan
ondersoek. Dit is die enigste manier hoe by die waarheid uitgekom sal word.

Aangesien mnr Majali die bewerings as totaal ongegrond en kwaadwillig
beskryf, behoort hy so ‘n kommissie te ondersteun. Dit gee aan hom die
geleentheid om al die bewerings as vals en verkeerd te bewys. Terselfdertyd
sal so ‘n ondersoek die Suid-Afrikaanse regering se erns om saam met die VN
te werk, én om alle vorme van korrupsie uit te roei, verder bewys.

Die Suid-Afrikaanse regering het destyds die VSA, Amerika, heftig
gekritiseer toe president Bush besluite geïgnoreer het en op sy eie Irak
binnegeval het. Die VF Plus het die regering in dié stadium gesteun. Die
Suid-Afrikaanse regering gaan sekerlik nie die VN se verslag ignoreer nie.
Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Hon Speaker, on the instructions of the United
Nations, an independent investigating team led by Mr Paul Volcker has
investigated irregularities in Iraq’s oil-for-food programme while Saddam
Hussein was in power.

The names of several South African companies and South African citizens,
like Mr Sandi Majali, are mentioned prominently in the UN report. Mr Majali
has described the allegations as unfounded and malicious and has threatened
to take legal action against the UN.

The question that arises is, what is the South African government going to
do about the matter? The Australian and Jordanian governments have already
appointed commissions of enquiry to investigate the companies from these
countries that are mentioned in the UN report.

Alternatively, the South African Corruption Act also makes provision for an
investigation into such allegations. The FF Plus believes that a commission
of enquiry should be appointed to investigate these allegations once and
for all. This is the only way to get to the truth.

Considering the fact that Mr Majali describes the allegations as entirely
unfounded and malicious, he should be in support of such a commission. It
gives him the opportunity to prove that all of these allegations are false
and incorrect. At the same time such an investigation will serve as further
proof that the South African government is committed to co-operating with
the UN, as well as to eradicating all forms of corruption.

The South African government criticised the USA, America, vehemently when
President Bush ignored decisions and invaded Iraq unilaterally. The FF Plus
supported the government at that stage. Surely the South African government
is not going to ignore the UN report. I thank you.]

                         RENEWAL OF FIREARM LICENCES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me A VAN WYK (ANC): Mevrou die Speaker, volgens berigte het meer as ‘n
halfmiljoen vuurwapeneienaars nog nie aansoek gedoen om hul
vuurwapenlisensies te hernieu nie. Dit beteken dat sodanige eienaars die
gevaar loop om na 31 Desember in hegtenis geneem te word, én vervolg kan
word vir die onwettige besit van ‘n vuurwapen.

Diegene wat die Wet op Beheer van Vuurwapens veronagsaam, kan tot 15 jaar
tronkstraf en boetes opgelê word. Wapeneienaars moet ook daarop let dat
indien hulle skuldig bevind word aan die onwettige besit van ‘n vuurwapen,
‘n hof dergelike persoon as onbevoeg kan verklaar om ooit weer ‘n wapen te
besit.

Landwyd is daar nog net 32 000 aansoeke om hernuwings ontvang. Volgens die
Sentrale Vuurwapenregister is daar sowat 2,5 miljoen mense wat wapens
besit. Dit beteken dat daar jaarliks ‘n gemiddeld van 625 000 mense
lisensies moet hernieu. Die huidige getal aansoeke wat ingehandig is, skiet
duidelik te kort en dit beteken dan dat duisende wapeneienaars onwettig in
besit van ‘n vuurwapen gaan wees.

Aansoeke om die hernuwing van vuurwapenlisensies is ‘n baie belangrike
proses wat die regering in staat sal stel om beter vuurwapenbeheer uit te
oefen. Derhalwe wil die ANC ‘n dringende beroep doen op alle
vuurwapeneienaars om nie te sloer met aansoeke om hul wapenlisensies te
hernieu nie, om sodoende te verseker dat hulle nie strafregtelik vervolg
word nie.

Verder versoek ons alle wetsgehoorsame burgers om hulle nie te laat mislei
deur doemprofete en teenstaanders van die wetgewing nie, en aktief deel te
neem om die getal wapens in die land te verminder. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Ms A VAN WYK (ANC): Madam Speaker, according to reports, more than half a
million firearm owners have not yet applied to renew their firearm
licences. This means that such owners are running the risk of being
arrested after 31 December, and they could be prosecuted for the illegal
possession of a firearm.

Those who ignore the Firearms Control Act can be sentenced to up to 15
years’ imprisonment and be fined. Firearm owners should also note that if
they are found guilty of the illegal possession of a firearm, a court may
declare them unfit to ever own a firearm again.

Only 32 000 applications for renewal have been received countrywide thus
far. According to the Central Firearms Register approximately 2,5 million
people own firearms. This means that an average of 625 000 people have to
renew  their licences annually. It is obvious that the present number of
applications handed in is too low, and this therefore means that thousands
of firearm owners will be illegally in possession of a firearm.

Applications for the renewal of firearm licences constitute a very
important process that will enable the government to exercise better
control over firearms. The ANC therefore wants to make an urgent appeal to
all firearm owners not to delay in renewing their firearm licences, thus
ensuring that they are not criminally prosecuted.

Furthermore, we request all law-abiding citizens not to be misled by
prophets of doom and opponents of the legislation, and to participate
actively in decreasing the number of firearms in the country. [Applause.]]

                LACK OF CAPACITY BUILDING AT MUNICIPAL LEVEL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (UPSA): Madam Speaker, the interest shown by South Africans in
general to join the UPSA is a clear indication that the UPSA will be a
force to be reckoned with in the coming local government elections. The
UPSA will strive to address the serious shortcomings with regard to poor
levels of service delivery by local governments due to a lack of proper
capacity building by those currently in power at municipal level.

The UPSA further believes that competence should be the ultimate criterion
when public servants are appointed. We believe that when applying
affirmative action for the purpose of transformation, the demographics of
the region or the province in question should be the deciding factor in
rectifying imbalances of employment equity and not national demographics,
as is currently the case. This will ensure a greater level of fairness and
justice for all South Africans.

Finally, the UPSA bases all its policies and related decisions on Christian
principles, norms and standards. I thank you.

          URGENT NEED FOR GOVERNMENT TO DISTRIBUTE ANTIRETROVIRALS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Madam Speaker, the UN envoy, Stephen Louis, who
has been banned from entering this country by the Minister of Health,
researched that there are 800 0000 South Africans who are in urgent need of
antiretroviral treatment. The DA was shocked to read the latest figures
from the Department of Health, showing that fewer than 10% of this number
are actually receiving these drugs through the public health system.

On the other hand, countries like Brazil, Kenya and Uganda have shown that
when the national leadership throws its weight behind an anti-Aids campaign
it is possible to achieve miracles. Well, there are problems in South
Africa with adequate staffing levels and facilities, but these problems are
not unique to South Africa and have been overcome by other countries. The
key problem in our country is the ongoing lack of enthusiasm on the part of
top levels of government when it comes to confronting Aids, despite the
deaths of almost 1 000 people a day.

As a result of this lack of enthusiasm, the government’s antiretroviral
roll-out has been an astounding failure. If the lives of South Africans
with Aids are to be saved, then President Mbeki and the Minister of Health
must recognise the damage they are doing to South Africa and inject more
energy and more commitment into this programme.

            APPOINTMENT OF EXPERTS TO INVESTIGATE TRAIN ACCIDENT
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S E ASIYA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC welcomes the appointment of 80
technical experts by the Railway Safety Regulator to probe the collision
between the Blue Train, South Africa’s premium luxury train, and the
Shosholoza Meyl, the flagship Cape to Gauteng train. Transnet and Spoornet
have also launched a joint investigation into the accident.

It is imperative that the cause of the accident is established as soon as
possible and that steps are taken to put the necessary preventative
measures in place to ensure the safety of all future passengers.
Fortunately, there were no fatalities but dozens of passengers suffered
injuries and four people were critically injured.

In view of that, we as the ANC want to urge the Railway Safety Regulator to
complete the Enquiry as soon as possible. We also want to express our
gratitude to all rescue workers, police, doctors and other role-players who
assisted at the scene of the accident and we wish all the injured
passengers a speedy recovery. I thank you.

          PROPOSED GOLF COURSE DEVELOPMENT NEAR SA LARGE TELESCOPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Speaker, Sutherland in the Northern Cape was
selected as the site for the largest telescope in the southern hemisphere
because it has clear skies and is far from the electric light pollution of
cities and towns.

This telescope, which is extremely sensitive to light, could be
detrimentally affected by the proposed 500-unit golf course estate, which
would increase the electric light in the skies. Golf course  developments
might generate money for their investors and provide a few jobs for the
surrounding communities, but they can also have many negative effects,
including the amount of water that they can consume.

Although we do understand that development has to take place, we must be
very careful not to pursue development at all costs. We therefore hope that
a thorough environmental impact assessment study is conducted, including
the effect that the proposed estate would have on the telescope, as well as
the real and sustainable benefits that would accrue to the surrounding
communities. I thank you.

             TITLE DEEDS TO BE HANDED TO DISTRICT SIX CLAIMANTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J D ARENDSE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the decision by the ANC-led Cape Town
Council on 26 October 2005 to vote in favour of handing over the title
deeds of land to 15 remaining District Six claimants of the first pilot
project and to 100 claimants of the second claim, is welcomed. The
beneficiaries are claimants identified by the District Six Beneficiary
Trust and the Land Claims Commissioner.

District Six, one of many areas where communities were forcibly removed by
the apartheid government, is a scar on the landscape of Cape Town as much
as it is a scar on the conscience of the nation. The fact that the City of
Cape Town is trying to right the wrong that was done is commendable.

The ANC urges all the spheres of government to speed up the process of land
reform. I thank you.

               STATE OF CAPE TOWN METRO SINCE ANC TOOK CONTROL
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Madam Speaker, the standard knee-jerk response of the
ANC-controlled councils to lack of delivery is to attribute these problems
to a lack of capacity or of skilled staff. The Deputy President has even
suggested that career local government officials are leaving because they
cannot take the pressure. It is perhaps now an opportune moment to analyse
the facts.

Since the ANC took full control of the Cape Town Metro a process of ethnic
cleansing of the top categories of staff has been raging unabated. In a
survey conducted by the DA, and confirmed by the city manager this morning
in the media, it has been established that this year alone 586 top-level
officials resigned and 89 professional career local government officials in
the City of Cape Town have taken the so-called voluntary separation package
at a cost of R30 million.

The City of Cape Town has budgeted some R340 million for the current
financial year for restructuring. The 18 sewerage treatment plants in Cape
Town, for example, are in dire need of upgrading but the ANC claims there
is a lack of funds.

President Mbeki agreed that parties should discipline their councillors in
order that they behave and perform. This should also include the policies
they pursue and the misdirection of ratepayers’ money. Therefore the ANC
should take responsibility for what is happening in Cape Town. [Applause.]

             SUBSIDIES ON AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES BY EU AND USA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr M SEFULARO (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC notes the international debate
on the reduction of subsidies on agricultural commodities by the USA and
the EU that is now linked to the requirement that developing countries open
up access to their services in their own countries.

We believe that the proposed requirements would have serious implications
for developing countries. That developed countries already enjoy undue
advantage in the global trade arena is a fact. Giving them access
concessions to industrial products and other services in developing
countries as a trade-off for the removal of agricultural subsidies will
impede the export of services from developing countries, especially
African, to developed countries.

We should discourage this trade-off from happening at the next round of the
WTO talks in Hong Kong in December 2005. The matter of access to services
should not be linked to the reduction of agricultural subsidies in the EU
and the USA. Thank you.

                 BORDER DISPUTE BETWEEN ERITREA AND ETHIOPIA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv Z L MADASA (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ANC notes with great
concern the latest developments during the last two weeks on the border
between Eritrea and Ethiopia. According to reports emanating from UN
officials and the UN Secretary General’s office Eritrea has banned UN
peacekeeping flights over its territory.

Lately Eritrea has also restricted UN peacekeeper movements on the ground,
restricting them to the main roads only. The report further says that both
Eritrea and Ethiopia are amassing troops near the border between the two
countries.

The ANC is concerned that these developments do not accord with the peace
agreements and guidelines set out by the UN to solve the long-standing
border dispute between the two countries. Eritrea and Ethiopia have fought
over this and thousands of lives have been lost.

The ANC, once more, reiterates the AU position that without lasting peace
and security, proper development cannot take place on the continent.
Therefore the ANC calls upon the two countries to show restraint and adhere
to the UN guidelines in order to solve the border dispute. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                    GOLF COURSE DEVELOPMENT AT SUTHERLAND

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Speaker, we would like
to thank the hon member from the IFP for bringing to our attention the
proposed golf course development at Sutherland. I must say that I was not
aware of that proposed development.

The site is very important to us, as the hon member pointed out. The
telescope will be formally launched on 10 November 2005. This is the
largest telescope of its kind in the southern hemisphere and one of the
largest in the world. It is South African designed and it really will make
a big impact in the world of astronomy, and so we cannot afford to have
developments jeopardise the potential success and the potential activities
of this telescope. So thank you for bringing that to our attention.

Similarly, the same member mentioned some very important points, which we
would support regarding golf course developments. Our water resources are
very precious to us and, although the game of golf might be important to
many people, we cannot afford to jeopardise our precious water resources.
And so we do have to undertake careful environmental impact assessments in
every case of a golf course development. Thank you, hon member. [Applause.]

            CORRUPT MEMBERS OF SAPS; RENEWAL OF FIREARM LICENCES

                            (Minister’s Response)

 The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Speaker, I wish to respond to
    two issues raised, and the first one was raised by uBaba uNdlovu [Mr
                                  Ndlovu].

Not all our policemen and policewomen are as bad as it would seem. Yes,
there are those who do commit some of these terrible crimes. It is
therefore imperative for the public to come forward and report this
criminal behaviour.

Those who are found guilty, whether they are policemen or policewomen, must
be dealt with severely by the courts. We agree that some of these incidents
seem to happen quite regularly now. However, as the JCPS cluster we will
definitely look into that.

The second response is, as follows: As the JCPS cluster we support the call
that was made by our organisation, the ANC, to the owners of firearms to
renew their licences in order not to be on the wrong side of the law. I
appeal to the public not to listen to any of the misleading anarchists who
tell you not to renew your licences. Go and renew your firearm licences;
it’s the right thing to do.

  PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN DELIVERY OF HOUSING TO POOR; ROLL-OUT OF
                       ANTIRETROVIRALS BY GOVERNMENT.

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, the commitment of the Minister of
Housing to the delivery of housing to the people of our country is
undoubted. I think that in the short time since her appointment, one only
has to look at the various developments she has supported: The very visible
N2 Gateway project, which is growing apace, as well as the enhanced
delivery that we are seeing in many local communities.

I think that there is nothing wrong with the Minister of Housing calling
for private-public partnerships and for participation of the private sector
in the delivery of housing to the poor in South Africa. The delivery of
housing to the poor in our country would be of great benefit to business as
well, and therefore it is important that business plays a role.

The commitment of our government to housing delivery is undoubted. The
Minister of Housing has committed herself to ensuring that we accelerate
the provision of housing and that we address some of the gaps that the hon
member from the DA referred to. However, I think that private-public
partnerships are an accepted model throughout the world and it is
absolutely necessary that in South Africa we also have those models.

With respect to the matter of the person referred to by the hon Kohler-
Barnard, I think that the hon member should study our immigration laws.
According to our laws the hon Minister of Health cannot bar any person from
entering South Africa as long as they have the appropriate instruments to
enter our country, that is a passport or visa, whatever the requirement may
be. Therefore the person referred to by the hon member has not been barred
from entering the country. So I really think that the member should study
the law and ensure that when statements are made, they are made
appropriately.

Our programme of providing treatment and care in South Africa, particularly
the provision of antiretrovirals, is recorded as one of the largest and
most significant interventions of many programmes throughout the world.
Certainly, the take-up of ARVs is increasing and we are certainly, as
government, through providing public finances, responding to the challenge
and plight of the pandemic in our country.

Finally, to the UPSA, we would remind them of the fate of many who began as
they did, and we will see at the jousts, what happens. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                     PLIGHT OF CHILDREN IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to add to
the statement of Ms Phumzile Bhengu, to the effect that the death of one
child is one death too many. I want to agree with her on that, and I think
that the motion is timely and it should affect all the members of this
House.

The issue of children is not Mrs Bhengu’s alone, or that of government
alone; it is an issue that all South Africans should be concerned about. We
expect, basically, each and every member, in his or her constituency, to be
the voice that speaks on behalf of all children.

More importantly, no household should be headed by a child. The powers that
all of us have been given as parliamentarians should be used to ensure that
those children become part and parcel of South Africa and receive what we
promise each and every child: a brighter future and the heightening of
their hope for a better South Africa.

On the issue raised by the ACDP, of raising money for children, we
sincerely believe that that is the correct approach. Throughout Africa that
issue cannot be left to governments alone; it is an issue that all of us
individually, the private sector, all non-governmental organisations and
the whole of civil society should be part and parcel of. Thank you.

             WORLD TRADE ORGANISATION NEGOTIATIONS IN HONG KONG

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, I want to respond
to a statement that was made on the World Trade Organisation negotiations.
What we have, in fact, seen is an extremely modest offer by the United
States on domestic support and a wholly inadequate offer by the European
Union on agricultural market access, coupled with highly ambitious demands
directed at what’s called advanced developing countries, not just in the
area of services as was mentioned in the statement, but also, critically,
in the area of industrial tariffs, the so-called non-agricultural market
access negotiations.

We need to recall that Doha was supposed to launch a development round.
Dealing with the issue of unfair trade in agriculture was quite central to
the promotion of anything that could credibly be called “development”. We
would also expect the development round to produce an outcome in other
subjects, including in non-agricultural market access, Nama, and in
services in which the main focus should be the asymmetrical promotion of
opportunities for increased access to developed country markets for goods
and services of export interests of developing countries.

The principles of development and proportionality require that this should
not come at the price of huge adjustment costs, which impede development in
developing countries. The House can rest assured that South Africa, in
partnership with other developing countries, has been working and will
continue to work to do all that we can to ensure that Hong Kong takes a
step towards a development outcome, and also can rest assured that we will
do all that we can to prevent the present negotiations resulting in a
situation in which we trade huge adjustments in services and the Nama
negotiations for only modest or non-existent gains in agricultural trade.
Thank you. [Applause.]

                           DIAMONDS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, Deputy
Ministers, colleagues and members of the industry seated in the gallery
who, I am informed, have come here in full support of this legislation, I
table before you the most important Bill that my department has introduced
in the mining sector since the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development
Act of 2002, namely the Diamonds Amendment Bill. Allow me to introduce to
you the core issues of the Bill we are debating this afternoon.

Most of us are aware of the important role that mining has played in South
Africa in all respects, be it political, social or economic. Diamond
mining, as the pioneer of organised mining in South Africa, was the
forerunner of other forms of mining, and its role in our country has
therefore been significant. Through this Bill we intend to increase the
contribution that diamonds will make to our economy by increasing
downstream activity.

The problem of being over-reliant on resource mining is typified by what we
see in Kimberley today. Kimberley is internationally recognised for its
contribution to diamond production, and yet we see how the community of
Kimberley suffers once lucrative mines are decommissioned because of low
quantities of diamonds or because the deposits have become inaccessible.
There was little meaningful development that took place in Kimberley when,
by all accounts, it had the potential to become one of the wealthiest
cities in the world.

While we still have the resources in the ground, we need to ensure that we
maximise the benefits that they can bring. This legislation seeks to create
a framework for downstream value addition and investment in the diamond-
manufacturing sector.

It is clear from my interactions with Ministers of mining from other
African countries that we are not alone in our frustrations with the
divorce of diamond mining from the other more lucrative aspects of the
industry. The positive changes taking place on the African continent allow
us to find ways of exploring the downstream side of the diamond industry.
There are many synergies to be gained from co-operation with other African
diamond producers in areas such as aggregation, developing of a unique
regional brand and style, and specialisation, as well as the marketing of
our diamonds.

It is necessary for these countries to also look at transforming this
industry by passing relevant legislation that will enable them to thrive
not only in cutting and polishing African diamonds in Africa, but also to
see diamonds moving from the mine to the fingers of consumers. Indeed, hon
members were here when we all heard President Mogae of Botswana last week
on the importance of us co-operating in this sector, and requesting our
support in making aggregation of diamonds possible in Botswana.

I can say today that, through this Bill, by way of a notice in the Gazette,
we can exempt any person or category of persons from offering their rough
diamonds for purchase to the State Diamond Trader or the Diamond Export and
Exchange Centre. It would therefore be possible to cater for such a request
from the President of Botswana in order to increase regional economic
activity and co-operation in this regard.

During the public hearings and through the media, we had a number of
concerns being put forward with regard to this Bill. Some of them included
the fact that South Africans do not have the ability to cut, polish and
manufacture jewellery from the diamonds that we mine. We heard that it is
not economically viable to cut and polish diamonds in South Africa and that
diamond-producing countries should not become polishers and manufacturers,
but should only concentrate on mining activities, which produce the
diamonds, leaving the downstream activities to the developed countries.

I have already alluded to the problems of focusing only on mining and
therefore I do not need to elaborate on the dangers of pursuing an approach
that actually does not encompass the entire value chain. On the issue of
the skills and abilities of South Africans to effectively engage in the
downstream side of this industry, we recognise where we come from and know
that training will need to take place, as well as that greater levels of
investment will be required in this regard.

We are committed to ensuring that our people receive the required training
and skills development so that the necessary competencies that are required
by this legislation can be acquired. Fortunately, as a department, we have
been in discussions with players from major diamond centres to support our
skills development. We are also fortunate that some major players in the
diamond industry have been watching our developments here in Parliament
with great interest, with a view to investing in downstream processing.
Such investments, be they from India, Israel, New York, Antwerp or
wherever, will bring with them the latest technology in cutting and
polishing diamonds.

We have also been informed, during the hearings on this Bill, about the
possible loss of thousands of jobs on the production side should
beneficiation be encouraged. I am pleased to hear that the hon members of
the portfolio committee did question this position and asked whether
assurances could be given that these jobs would be sustained if the Bill
were not passed. The response was “no”. There are no guarantees on this
front. What we can guarantee, though, is that through the successful
implementation of this legislation there will be a number of jobs created
in the downstream.

Some of the concerns raised were valid while others were nothing but myths
that were created by people who do not want to see the status quo changed.
We have listened to these concerns, and many have been dealt with in the
amendments that followed the tabling of this Bill.

One such view that we would like to challenge is the distinction being made
between “cuttables” and “noncuttables”, as we believe that this is a
nonissue for now. We have yet to be convinced that certain categories of
rough diamonds cannot be cut in South Africa. We would like to allow
ourselves to compete with Antwerp and even with the Indian centres.

With investors bringing in their technology and expertise, I believe that,
in time, we will be able to compete successfully with established players
in the industry. We have seen that the Indian companies in the sector have
followed diamonds where they are, and I do not think there is anything
stopping them from following diamonds to cut and polish here in South
Africa. Therefore until we have proof that some of our diamonds are
“uncuttable”, we are not going to discriminate.

The objectives of the Diamonds Amendment Bill are for us as a country,
which is one of the largest producers of diamonds in the world, amongst
other things, to be able to drive the beneficiation of diamonds; to be able
to provide for the local supply of diamonds to ensure that diamonds are
beneficiated here in South Africa; to ensure that cutters and tool-makers
obtain a regular supply of unpolished diamonds, and to create more jobs in
the beneficiation industry.

In this regard, the Bill establishes what we call the State Diamond Trader,
who will acquire and supply unpolished diamonds to local diamond
beneficiators and promote the industry through the necessary research,
support and development as deemed necessary from time to time. I have to
emphasise that the State Diamond Trader will put whatever portion of the
production cycle is deemed to support local beneficiation at competitive
market prices. Because we are confident that we will not compromise the
producers, we have built in mechanisms to resolve disputes in this regard.

The Bill further establishes the Diamond Export and Exchange Centre where
all rough diamonds that are to be exported, for control purposes, will be
channelled so as to allow local producers to buy if they can utilise them.
Here, foreigners will also be able to purchase goods that they want for
export purposes. Under certain conditions like when we have an oversupply
in South Africa, rough diamonds could be exported directly without being
offered for sale at the Diamond Export and Exchange Centre.

The regulator will have the right to declare any place in the country a
diamond export and exchange centre, as it deems fit. These export and
exchange centres need not necessarily be premises in Johannesburg or in
Kimberley, or in Qunu. The regulator will decide, when it deems fit, which
area is going to be the export and exchange centre. We have allowed this in
order to have flexibility so that we do not stifle the industry.

Members will be aware that the export duty that was in the principal Act,
which was supposed to operate as a deterrent to exporting diamonds, will
now be dealt with through the money Bill that is being looked at by the
National Treasury, and they have assured us that this Bill will be
introduced in Parliament early next year.

To conclude, the regulatory function accompanying the above proposed
structures will be done by what we call the Diamond and Precious Metals
Regulator, which structure will replace the present day Diamond Board.

I would like to thank all the members and all the people who participated
in the run-up to this debate. I would also like to thank all the hon
members for their support of this legislation. Of course, I would like to
thank the officials and the department who had to spend endless time,
endless nights, and long weeks in Cape Town, trying to assist the portfolio
committee to understand the provisions of this legislation. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnu E N MTHETHWA: Somlomo, malungu ahloniphekile ePhalamende, maqabane
nesizwe sonke, ngo-1955 emhlanganweni wabantu bakakhogolose i-ANC nezinye
izinhlangano zaqhamuka nombono wokuthi umnotho waleli zwe kumele udliwe
yiwo wonke umuntu. Ngo-2005, ngalo Mthethosivivinywa esiwenzayo sesenza
lelo phupho libe yiqiniso. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr E N MTHETHWA: Speaker, hon members of Parliament, comrades and the
whole nation, in 1955 at the congress of the people the ANC and its allies
came up with the idea that the national wealth of this country should be
shared among all. In 2005, with this Amendment Bill, we are making that
dream a reality.]

The ANC’s strategy and tactics direct us to ensure the redistribution of
wealth and income in favour of those previously excluded from the economic
mainstream. One of the reasons for having this Bill within the parameters
as set out in the Freedom Charter and the ANC’s programme of national
democratic revolution is the equitable access to raw material. So, those
who never had access to wealth will now be afforded an opportunity so that
their businesses flourish as well. Those whose businesses were closed as a
result of having no access will be opened.

The Bill also seeks to maximise value addition, especially in the
downstream industry. With this Bill we want to expel the myth that there
will be job losses. Last year we met the De Beers Group, which informed us
that of seven mines they have, only two were financially viable; the rest
faced possible closure. So this Bill will never be the reason for job
losses.

We also want to create an African mix as opposed to a London mix. As the
Minister said in support of the President of Botswana, His Excellency F
Mogae, South Africa is comfortable with diamonds being aggregated in
Gaborone. In any event, the diamond is Africa’s precious stone not
London’s. [Applause.]

There are mechanisms to achieve these objectives, some of which the
Minister has covered. I will emphasise one point on the restructuring of
the SA Diamond Board in that perhaps the reason for this restructuring is
that beneficiation has never happened under the auspices of the board.
Secondly, not even in its dual role of regulation and promotion has the
board helped us achieve our national target as set out in the Freedom
Charter and government’s economic policy.

In its place we will create the SA Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator,
of which the Minister has spoken, and establish the State Diamond Trader -
SDT, which the Minister has also spoken about. One needs to say that this
institution will be a pillar in the process of sharing this important
mineral wealth. Any South African will be in a position to purchase
diamonds from this institution. The SDT will reserve a certain portion of
the commodity that it deems fit, as was said earlier on.

As far as the issue of noncuttable and cuttable diamonds is concerned,
firstly, we want to inform this House that in our own research we’ve only
come across this term in South Africa and that elsewhere there is no
distinction. People just cut diamonds and create jobs as a result.
Therefore the non-cuttable diamond is not an issue.

We felt it necessary that the democratic state needed to intervene on the
issue to ensure that all shared the mineral wealth of this country. To this
extent, we oppose the prophets of doom such as the leader of the DA, Tony
Leon, who is suggesting that government is nationalising the industry. We
are available here for free political education, because nationalisation is
not equal to sharing. [Applause.] This is unfortunate but consistent with
the reactionary thought of the man and the party.

On the other hand, we have consistently said throughout the public hearings
that we could not fold our arms all the time in the face of rampant
capitalism. This is underpinned by the market forces to which all should
kneel in prayer: Everyone for himself, God for us all and the devil take
the hindmost.

Umnotho waleli zwe oyifa labantwana bengabade kumele kuhlomule kuwo isizwe
sikaLuthuli noTambo. Osozimboni abayizikhondla kulo mkhakha kumele
baliqonde kahle kamhlophe iqhaza okufanele balibambe ekukhulisweni komnotho
wezwe lethu. Leli gxathu libheke ekukhulisenei labo abasafufusa kule mboni
nengumgogodla emnothweni wezwe lakithi. Sithi ubucwebe be-Afrika abudliwe
yisizwe sonkana kungahlomuli abambalwa. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation
of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[The wealth of this country is the inheritance of the South African. The
nation of Luthuli and Tambo must benefit. Giant companies in this sector
must understand very well the role that they have to play in the economic
growth of our country. This step is aimed at those who are emerging in this
industry, which is the backbone of our country’s economy. We are saying
that the diamonds of Africa shall be shared by the whole nation, and not
just a few. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Hon Speaker, this Bill will create a State Diamond Trader
to buy rough diamonds at a volume and value to be determined by the
Minister by regulation. It will also replace the SA Diamond Board, which is
largely made up of industry representatives and funded by levies. It will
replace it with the state-funded and government-dominated SA Diamond and
Precious Metals Regulator.

These two state institutions are introduced under the pretext of providing
more equitable access to diamonds for the local industry. However noble
these objectives are, the interference in the market by compelling diamond
producers to offer a certain fixed percentage of their production to the
State Diamond Trader does not only take away the freedom of choice by the
producers, as to which market and at which price diamonds will be sold, but
it is also subject to the unfettered discretion of the Minister, once again
to be determined by regulation.

This Bill was gazetted on 30 August 2005 and a 21-day period was allowed
for comment from interested parties. As the Bill, in its current form,
differed substantially from previous drafts the 21-day period was totally
insufficient to study and prepare for the possible consequences of the
Bill, indicating the undue haste with which the ANC tried to push this Bill
through Parliament.

The yet-to-be-introduced money Bill will remove the constitutional
objections against the Diamonds Amendment Bill, due to the fact that the
export duty to be levied on all diamonds to be exported will be dealt with
in the money Bill. The money Bill will run concurrently with the
implementation of this Bill. This is important for ensuring that the export
duty is not levied on the export of diamonds upon the date of
implementation of this Bill, before the money Bill has indeed been accepted
by Parliament.

This Bill has caused government to revert to a protectionist stance in
respect of the diamond manufacturing industry, which employs approximately
2 500 workers, at a time when the industry should be globalising and
competing with the diamond manufacturing centres of India, Israel, the
United States and China. Establishing new barriers to trade will not assist
the South African economy in attracting foreign and local investors.
Currently, no export duty is raised on the export of any other precious
metal or mineral, except the current export duty on diamonds from which
producers have been exempted.

The Minister has publicly indicated that the 15% export duty is too high,
but that the five per cent proposed by the industry is too low. What export
duty will be payable is anyone’s guess at the moment. The unfettered
discretion of the Minister in determining whether a producer is to be
exempted from exporting diamonds through the Diamond Export and Exchange
Centre is arguably unconstitutional, in light of the Daewood Constitutional
Court case, which decided that the legislature has to provide guidance to
the Minister when a discretion has to be exercised in terms of legislation.

The important distinction between economically cuttable and uneconomically
cuttable diamonds was removed, with the consequence that all export duties,
at this point in time, should be levied on all diamonds produced in South
Africa, whether such diamonds can be economically cut in South Africa or
not. In short, and I will stand by what the hon leader of the DA has said,
“What the Bill is doing is basically nationalisation through the back
door.”

The Chamber of Mines estimated that the Bill will potentially cause
thousands of existing jobs to be lost in the mining industry - I hope you
heard that. [Interjections.] These losses will far outweigh the jobs that
will be created by investment and beneficiation. Trans Hex a small JSE-
listed diamond company also criticised the Bill and warned against possible
closure of several of its operations – in fact, I think it mentioned 12 out
of 21 operations – should a high export duty eventually be implemented.

The introduction of so many new state institutions to control the purchase
and sale of diamonds represents an unwarranted intrusion of the state into
the market. The government is in effect reverting to the failed economics
of the colonial and postcolonial era in Africa to the great detriment of
private enterprise and popular wellbeing.

In 1998 the department stated that barriers to mineral exports, economic
and otherwise, would be identified and appropriate strategies for their
removal would be devised. All measures that restrict the sale of South
Africa’s minerals on foreign markets would be opposed. That is what they
said in 1998, exactly the opposite of what is happening today.

This legislation will harm BEE investment in the diamond sector despite the
Bill’s stated intentions, because only diamond producers, among all mineral
producers, will be subject to export duties and other restrictions. The
legislation may even violate the constitutional right to equality.

The ANC and its allies, Cosatu and the National Union of Mine Workers,
argue that restricting the export of diamonds and making them more
available to local buyers will increase opportunities for investment and
beneficiation. This, in itself, will not ensure equitable access to rough
diamonds. The government should use export-processing zones and regulatory
relief rather than discriminatory legislation in export duties.

The reality is that rising trade barriers and regulatory costs will not
only hurt primary producers, but will affect local business all along the
production chain. Bulldozing this Bill through Parliament will destroy
jobs, discourage BEE investment and harm economic growth. The ANC
government is not helping the people; it is helping themselves, as we have
said before. The DA will oppose the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP would, firstly, like to take
this opportunity and congratulate Ms Lindiwe Hendricks on her appointment
as Minister of Minerals and Energy. We would also like to thank the Deputy
Minister and the department for their participation in the hearings. The
relevant industries and all shareholders should also be thanked for their
submissions and constructive participation, which contributed to the
meeting being open, although maybe a bit heated at times, but nevertheless
informative.

The diamond industry is a very old one and consists of a few role-players.
We must thank the industry for developing up to the level of what we have
today. There is no doubt that a great deal of marketing had to be done. It
is also important that new entrants into the industry be encouraged.

The divergent roles that diamonds have played in the fortunes of various
African countries cannot be underestimated. On the one hand we have
Botswana, which is a good example of prosperity that can be achieved if
diamonds are handled correctly. At the other extreme we have countries
where blood diamonds are exchanged for weapons, and ultimately fund wars
and conflict which cause such destruction and suffering. The introduction
of the Kimberley process has contributed towards stopping dealings in blood
diamonds.

In order for the diamond industry in South Africa to truly develop and
grow, there has to be beneficiation. We are therefore glad that the Bill
addresses beneficiation, as this has been the driving force in accepting
the Diamonds Amendment Bill. We sincerely hope that the introduction of the
State Diamond Trader will open opportunities for historically disadvantaged
South Africans. It is important that the regulator monitors the process
closely.

Concerns around cuttable and uncuttable diamonds need to be clarified. We
have been led to believe that only India has the necessary skills to cut
very small diamonds. However, at the hearings we were told that there are
dealers in South Africa who are able to do this. It is therefore important
for us to establish the facts, which will certainly influence the cutting
and polishing industry worldwide.

The IFP’s concern around the money Bill still stands. Members will recall
that the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Bill still has the
money Bill outstanding. The difference being that the Department of
Minerals and Energy has assured us that the money Bill will run
concurrently with the implementation of the Diamonds Amendment Bill. I
sincerely hope that Treasury will take into account the submissions made by
the industry at the hearings. The IFP supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the objectives of
the Bill before us are noble, indeed. Any government would want to ensure
that an industry as large and lucrative as the South African diamond
industry is properly regulated and operates with the best interests of
society in mind.

However, these noble intentions have been translated into a piece of
legislation with a very definite Draconian touch to it. The Bill is
peppered with unfettered powers for the Minister, powers which could have
been assigned to the regulator, the board or even Parliament. Whilst the
Bill is clearly named the Diamonds Amendment Bill and deals exclusively
with the diamond industry, it creates a regulator for diamonds and precious
metals. This name has very little to do with the function of the regulator
but coincidentally creates an excellent reason to dilute the representation
of the diamond industry with the inclusion of representatives from the
precious metals industry.

On the whole, the noble objectives of the Bill could have been arrived at
in a far less aggressive manner and definitely with far less centralised
power in the hands of the Minister. South Africa should benefit from its
natural resources. But this legislation would undermine that objective
because, in its current form, it will undoubtedly lead to strained
relations with the industry and even imperil some businesses and jobs. The
UDM does, however, support the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Deputy speaker, hon Ministers,
Deputy Ministers, hon members . . .

 . . . ndithe mandiyifakele isiqholo le ndawo, ndize kukwazi ukuba
namandla. [ . . . let me add more taste in this area, so that I can have
strength.]

Firstly, let me address Adv Schmidt, who is worried about nationalisation.
I want to remind the advocate to perhaps go to the archives of this
Parliament, where he will read that in 1903 the Parliament of South Africa
adopted a proclamation that declared that 50% of all mines in this country
would belong to the government of South Africa. From then to date those
shares have not been seen.

However, what I want to say is that this was not called nationalisation,
perhaps because those diamonds were shipped away to the mother country,
England. Now that we are saying that these diamonds must support the people
of this country, the children of this motherland, it is claimed that we are
carrying out nationalisation. [Applause.]

When Sam Nujoma took over the government of Namibia he declared that 50% of
their diamonds would belong to the Namibian people, through their
government. The government of Botswana, under Sir Seretse Khama, also
declared that 50% of the country’s diamond industry would belong to the
government, and nobody called them Communists – they don’t even look like
Communists. [Applause.]

I want to say that all the DA wants is for South Africa to continue to be
the economic colony of other countries. [Applause.] I also want to remind
the UDM that . . .

 . . . uMphathiswa useza kulawula. UMphathiswa unamandla awanikwe ngama-70
ekhulwini abantu baseMzantsi Afrika.[ . . . the Minister will still manage.
The Minister has power bestowed upon her by 70% of the people of South
Africa.]

All power to the people!

I stand to add my support to the Minister on the Diamonds Amendment Bill,
which she has just introduced to you this afternoon. Our aim with this Bill
is to enhance and protect the diamond trade by making diamonds accessible
to those South Africans who were previously denied opportunities in this
industry, even when they could afford to buy these beautiful stones.

We also want to protect this trade from the threat of synthetic diamonds
being passed off as genuine, legitimate diamonds. To this end, we have made
it mandatory for consumers to be protected by ensuring that they have a
right to know that the diamond they are buying is natural or synthetic, for
pricing reasons.

Ngokucacileyo, idayimani ephekwe kwi-microwave e-laboratory iintsuku
ezintathu yaze yavuthwa, ayinakufana naleyo . . .  [Clearly, a diamond that
has been cooked in a microwave in a laboratory for three days and has
become ready, will not be similar to that . . . ]
 . . . produced by mother nature over three billion years. Failure to do
this will be regarded as deception, and will be punishable. Enhanced
diamonds are also artificially improved and therefore, in the same vein as
synthetic diamonds, they have to be declared as such, as this will also
affect their pricing.

This Bill introduces a new era in the regulation of the diamond trade in
South Africa by combining the diamond trade with the precious metals trade
through the Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator. This regulator will, in
essence, replace the current toothless SA Diamond Board, the SADB, which
had both the promotion and regulation functions. These functions are now to
be split, where the regulator will focus only on the administration of the
law, and the newly established State Diamond Trader, SDT, on promotion.

The board of the regulator will consist of four members from the business
sector, unlike now, where the SA Diamond Board has become a mass meeting or
a branch meeting of businesspersons who make favourable laws to serve their
interests. We are putting an end to this situation.

Wawukhe weva phi ngemeko apho . . .  [Did you ever hear of a situation . .
. ]

 . . . where the players are also referees. To make sure that this happens,
the regulator will be funded through the fiscus, and not from levies, and
we do not apologise for that.

I understand that there were questions as to why it is necessary for the
state to enter the diamond trading industry through the establishment of
the State Diamond Trader. Again, the state had to do this in order to
address a market failure. The state is the only organisation that can
contribute to and ensure equitable access.

Most unpolished diamonds were exported, with the non-site holders, the
majority of whom were black players or black entrepreneurs, unable to
access unpolished diamonds. Many diamond-cutting factories were lying idle.
As I speak to you now, there is a modern precinct in Kimberley that is
lying idle just because no one wants to supply it with rough diamonds.

Unpolished diamonds were also being offered, at a very high price, in large
parcels to avoid their being bought in South Africa, thereby qualifying for
export duty exemptions.

Bebeyibaleka nerhafu le. [They evaded tax.]

South Africa has missed its opportunities, and this Bill gives us the
opportunity of “country of origin branding opportunities”.
Kulo nyaka ndikhe ndaya eJapan naseChina . . . [This year I went to Japan
and China . . . ]

 . . .  where they are crazy about South African diamonds.

Abayazi yonke le nto yokuba kuthiwe iidayimani zaseMzantsi Afrika
ziphelile. [They do not understand the notion that South African diamonds
are depleted.]

They believe that South Africa is the world’s diamond capital.

Ezona dayimani ziphucukile ziphuma apha eMzantsi Afrika. Kungoko kukho le
pasile ekuzanywa ukubhida ingqondo yethu ngayo ngokuba ixutywe, ibe
ingenakuphumelela zingekho iidayimani zalapha eMzantsi Afrika. Kulungile
ke, siza kuzenzela ngokwethu le pasile. [Kwaqhwatywa.]  Asidingi mntu uza
kusixubela yona noza kusiqhatha apha.

UMphathiswa utshilo ukuba nabavela eAmsterdam, eAntwerp, naseYurophu
jikelele, beza kwiiofisi zethu bephethe imali eninzi, bevinjwe iidayimani
ze bagoduke naloo mali baye eYurophu. Nabo bathi: “Mphathiswa, nceda
uphumeze lo Mthetho uYilwayo ukuze nathi size kukwazi ukuza kuqhuba
ushishino apho.” [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The most precious diamonds come from South Africa. That is why there is
this parcel that is used to confuse our minds by mixing it, while it cannot
succeed without South African diamonds. It’s all right, we will create our
own parcel. [Applause.] We do not need a person to mix it for us and
deceive us here.

The Minister said that even those coming from Amsterdam, Antwerp and Europe
as a whole come to our offices carrying a lot of money, and then, without
any diamonds, they return to Europe with their money. They said: “Minister,
please approve this Bill so that we can come and do business here.”]
[Applause.]]

The price of imported diamonds can be inflated because there are middlemen
involved – fortunately no women. [Laughter.] Each time a diamond changes
hands, it changes value.

We know that there are people who are waiting in the wings for this piece
of legislation to be passed so that they can come and polish their diamonds
here in our country.

I also take this opportunity to bid farewell to one of our friends in South
Africa, a person who shared the same vision as us, Mr Charles Bornstein,
the former South African consul in Antwerp, Belgium. His intentions were to
bring Belgian entrepreneurs to bolster this sector in South Africa. This is
a day on which he would have rejoiced with us at seeing the passing of this
piece of legislation, but he passed away only two weeks ago, after a short
illness. However, we will continue where he left off. We will ensure that
his mission becomes a reality. [Applause.]

It is people like him and those who tirelessly write to us about the
unavailability of rough diamonds for manufacturing who forced us to make
these changes, which we believe will give people equitable access to rough
diamonds from our country.

There has been an insinuation that the State Diamond Trader will be biased
towards certain clients, and will be corrupt. Hon members, I can assure you
that the board of the State Diamond Trader will be tasked with ensuring
that the State Diamond Trader fulfils its mandate of equitable distribution
and local beneficiation of unpolished diamonds. The trader will monitor its
clients to ensure that the beneficiaries have access to diamonds, and these
will translate unpolished diamonds into polished diamonds and diamond
jewellery in our country.

Permits to export unpolished diamonds will be strictly controlled and will
be granted on a merit basis. The influence of investors will be minimised
because the domination of government members on the board will ensure that
this does not happen. The trader will have the duty to monitor the market,
both locally and internationally.

To conclude, I believe that this piece of legislation is groundbreaking and
will soon be emulated in our neighbouring countries that are also diamond
producers. Gone are the days when Africans had to supply cheap raw
materials to Europe, where they are beneficiated in the developed countries
and come back to Africa at exorbitant prices as manufactured goods.

This piece of legislation will help us have an African diamond mix, and not
a London mix. By passing this Bill, hon members, you will be allowing South
Africa and Africa to take control of their destiny. Mayibuye iAfrika!
[Bring Africa back!] [Applause.] Ibuyile iAfrika! [Africa is back.]
[Applause.] Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Time expired.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Diamonds Amendment Bill provides
the assurance that the emerging markets in South Africa will have an
opportunity to benefit from the mineral wealth of this country. Against
this positive scenario there are the dire predictions from major
stakeholders in the mining industry.

Government should have addressed these fears by commissioning an urgent
impact analysis study, as has been suggested by the mining conglomerates.
The ACDP takes cognisance of the government’s determination to regain
control of a valuable resource in the interests of local beneficiation.

The proposed export duty aimed at encouraging the big players not to export
and the proposed establishment of the State Diamond Trader do not make it
clear that the government’s intervention in the control of the market is
the means by which it intends to hammer home the transformation of the
mining industry, as envisaged by the Diamonds Amendment Bill. This sudden
shift from free market principles is a matter of grave concern for the ACDP
and we call upon government to clarify the political economic framework
within which it will address the transformation of the industry.

In conclusion, the ACDP supports local beneficiation, but cautions against
interventions that are not guaranteed to realise the objectives and may be
seriously detrimental to the economy. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Speaker, in die beperkte tyd tot my beskikking kan ek
nie veel meer sê nie as dat die VF Plus baie graag wil sien dat Suid-Afrika
se minerale plaaslik verwerk moet word tot voordeel van die plaaslike
gemeenskappe. Die Anglo-Boere-oorlog, ‘n honderd jaar gelede, is juis
daaroor geveg. Ons steun dié beginsel sterk, en sal ook help met enige
poging om dít reg te kry. Die regering se doel is juis om ‘n omgewing te
skep waarin dit moontlik is om juis dít te bewerkstellig.

Die eerste prys is ‘n land wat so goed regeer word dat daar so ‘n aangename
sakeklimaat, woon- en werksomstandighede heers dat dit nie vir die regering
nodig is om wette te maak om sakebedrywighede in die land te hou nie. Die
feit dat dit juis nodig is om hierdie wette in dié verband te maak, dui
reeds op ‘n diepliggende probleem.
Die VF Plus steun die mate waarin die nuwe wette onder bespreking probeer
om deel van die probleem en dan ook die simptome aan te spreek.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Speaker, in the limited time available to me I cannot
say much more than that the FF Plus would very much like to see South
Africa’s minerals being processed locally for the benefit of the local
communities. A hundred years ago, the Anglo-Boer War was fought for this
very reason. We strongly support this principle, and we will join in any
attempt to make it possible. The government aims precisely to create an
environment in which it is possible to accomplish this.

The first prize is a country that is governed so well that a pleasant
business climate, living and employment conditions prevail, making it
unnecessary for the government to make laws to keep business enterprises in
the country. The very fact that  it is necessary to make these laws in this
context already indicates that there is a deep-seated problem.

The FF Plus supports the extent to which the new laws under discussion try
to address part of the problem and the symptoms as well.]

During the public hearings a member of the portfolio committee referred to
the Freedom Charter and its reference to nationalisation of mines and
mineral wealth. She then suggested that when the ANC publicly denounced the
notion of nationalisation of mines and minerals in the 1990s it actually
changed to a more pragmatic approach of redistribution through regulation
and taxation.

In fact, it could be argued that, to the extent that mines were not
actually nationalised, a similar outcome is now being accomplished by the
creation of a legal framework, which effectively places an entire industry
under the effective control of the government of the day, and the Minister
in particular.

The FF Plus is concerned that the legal framework, introduced by the so-
called MPRD last year, and followed by these amendments to the Diamonds Act
are doing just that. I believe that many constructive suggestions were made
during the public hearings by the stakeholders from the industry. Except
for listening to the warning from the Chamber of Mines that the proposed
Bill would constitute a money Bill, which would render it unconstitutional,
the inputs from the industry were largely ignored.

The FF Plus can therefore not support this Bill.

Mr C M MORKEL: Madam Deputy Speaker, our progressive Constitution demands
of us to redress the imbalances of the past. The Diamonds Amendment Bill
extends this principle to give equitable access to cutters, polishers and
manufacturing jewellers, whether they are black or white, who have
historically been denied access to rough diamonds mined in South Africa so
that beneficiation could earn such local beneficiators more revenue, create
more jobs and increase the tax base and foreign reserves to fund
socioeconomic development in other areas of government spending.

The objectives of the Bill are therefore undeniably noble and no single
public submission raised any objection to these objectives. Yet some valid
concerns around the potential unintended consequences of the transformation
mechanisms of the Bill included: the uncertainty around the as yet
undetermined percentage of diamonds produced by South African mines that
would have to be sold to the State Diamond Trader; uncertainty around the
percentage levy on the value of rough diamonds intended for export.

However, the ministry and the department have since allayed some of these
concerns when they gave assurances that the above-mentioned percentages and
exemptions would be adjusted in an agile and flexible manner to maintain a
healthy balance between promoting equitable access to rough diamonds and
the commercial imperatives of the industry according to the principles of
supply and demand.

I am also particularly encouraged by the olive branches extended by
government and the dominant role it plays in the industry. Examples of this
include a signal from the Minister that the export levy could be a single
digit percentage whilst a world-branded leader like De Beers, for example,
has expressed its willingness to give away 50% of its local diamond deal to
achieve transformation.

How is this willing seller, willing buyer approach in any way a form of
nationalisation via the back door or front door? All have committed to
transformation and nurturing the goose that lays the diamond-encrusted egg.
It is up to this and the next generation therefore to build on the ashes
and mine dumps of the past, a new economy that creates more jobs and
entrepreneurs.

After consultation with the stakeholders at the public hearings, especially
those in Namaqualand with whom I have worked over the last 12 months, I
have no other choice but to support this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S K LOUW: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, we are once again reminded
that an artist can change his paintings, but a diamond will retain its
carats. Yes, it’s all about that shiny pebble that was identified as a 21
ct diamond, later named the Eureka, and the next important discovery, the
83 ct Star of South Africa, which was also found in the vicinity of
Kimberley in the Griqualand region. It is needless to mention the Cullinan
that is mounted in the Queen’s crown. This is the wealth of our country
upon which the Freedom Charter principle “the people shall share in the
country’s wealth” is built.

The Bill is a response to the diamond industry’s inability to develop the
downstream part of the value chain and its inability to transform. As the
ANC government we are committed to add value to our natural resources,
implementing broad-based black economic empowerment regulations in the
industry, and the development of local capacity.

The essence of the Bill is to discourage the export of uncut diamonds. The
intended trading process is as follows: Uncut diamonds will first be
offered to the State Diamond Trader or the Diamond Export and Exchange
Centre, and emerging jewellery manufacturers can get rough diamonds from
them.

During our oversight visit we had an opportunity to visit the Trans Hex
operations in Bellville, as well as De Beers in Kimberley. We also went
abroad to India and London to get an understanding of the market dynamics.
During our visit one question continued to emerge, namely why we could not
polish diamonds locally, as technology has improved tremendously and
diamonds as small as 0,05 ct can be polished in our country.

By polishing them in this country we will be adding value and creating
jobs. As a result, masses of our people will be skilled and empowered in
this industry. As the ANC-led government we foresee a bright future for
this industry and this should be attributed to the contemplated impact of
the Bill.

The Bill is intended to unleash the economic potential of this industry in
our country, as we believe that the diamond industry can do more for our
economy. We must not lose sight of the fact that 10 years ago thousands of
our people were retrenched from the diamond cutting industry in Kimberley.
In Limpopo more than 1 500 workers were employed, and because of the
unavailability and inaccessibility of rough diamonds they could not
continue with their operations and were forced to close down. The
unavailability of rough diamonds has led to the closure of many factories
in this country.

The promulgation of this Bill will result in a serious shake-up of the
sector. The implementation of this Bill could lead to the establishment of
industrial development zones in diamond-producing areas. Taking into
consideration that more than 6 000 miners were recently retrenched from the
mines in Buffelsfontein and Hartebeesfontein, and 1 000 in Koffiefontein
and Jagersfontein, this legislative development offers hope to those who
were victims of retrenchments as they can be employed in the cutting and
polishing industry.

This Bill seeks to stimulate more jewellery manufacturing and gem cutting,
especially by the historically disadvantaged groups. It is imperative to
note that globally we are the fourth largest diamond-producing country and
yet we cannot beneficiate. This is what we are told by the so-called
experts.

During our deliberations in the committee our government, especially the
Department of Minerals and Energy, were heavily criticised by major mining
houses. They predicted that job losses and mine closures were imminent if
the Bill were to be processed. We know that they know that this is very far
from the truth and that it is undoubtedly an empty threat. In reality,
mines close because of the depletion of minerals in the mined area.

Their concern and fears emanate from the fact that they will be losing
their grip on a monopoly, especially on the site-holding system that is
currently being used by the major stakeholders in this industry. That also
means uneconomical terms and conditions are set up by the main stakeholders
in order to force the competition out of the market. The processing of the
Diamonds Amendment Bill will bury those operational conditions in the
dustbin of history.

We have also done away with the section 59 process. The Diamond Board was
almost like a lame duck. It could not give a proper account of the number
of rough diamonds being sent out of the country. The Diamond Board is now
being replaced by a state regulator, and the board will consist of two
members of the industry, two from labour, one from the precious metals
industry and nine others at the Minister’s discretion.

The time has arrived for structures to be accountable. The days of
structures not being accountable are over. The new regulator will take
total control of this process. We are often tempted to ask one question:
Why is the South African rough diamond content in the London mix so
important? This is because of the fact that rough diamonds add value to the
London mix. Or are they not devaluing South African goods in that mix?
Should we then not be looking at branding South African rough diamonds? The
answer is yes, our diamonds add tremendously high value to the London mix.
The London mix can hardly be sold without South African diamonds.

One critical issue that reflected negatively on the department from the
producers’ viewpoint was the delay in the issuing of permits to prospect,
yet the producers don’t follow the correct process as set out by the
Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act and the scorecard set up by
the department.

All diamonds and any other mineral producers must comply with the necessary
criteria – mining houses must have a clear environmental plan of how to
rehabilitate the area where mining will take place, a proper social plan in
which they give a clear progress report of community development, and
comply with the mining charter by having a broad-based black economic
empowerment partner. By so doing we believe there can be no delays in the
processing of permits. We will rather welcome them to stimulate our economy
and create jobs.

One issue that is critical that we have to address now is that of the
nationalisation of the mines as mentioned by the opposition speakers. It is
a fact that our people were forcefully removed from the areas where they
lived by “them” because of the wealth of this country, because of the
diamonds in the areas in which we lived; because of that our people were
forcefully removed through the barrel of a gun, and therefore they are the
last to speak. [Interjections.] This is our time. We are transforming and
we have to ensure that things go the right way in our country. [Applause.]
I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I must say I was
surprised at this turnaround by the DA, because since this Bill served
before the portfolio committee I, the Deputy Minister, the DG and the
officials have walked all the way with the committee up to this stage, and
really, Adv Schmidt, at no time when I was sitting in, responding to
people’s concerns, did you raise the issues that you are raising now. All I
can say is that you are here to sing your leader’s song, which I read about
in the newspapers for the first time. [Interjections.]

But let me say that the hon member Schmidt does not understand the notion
of nationalisation and he’s using the term incorrectly.
The intervention by the state in the market in the event of the markets
failing to meet the public good is a tried and tested economic principle.
This, in no way, amounts to nationalisation, as Keynes, who acknowledged
this principle, would not have agreed to nationalisation.

The market has for centuries failed to promote beneficiation of our local
minerals and it is for this reason that the state has intervened in the
market, not as a player, but as a facilitator, through access promotion to
raw materials. The State Diamond Trader that we are talking about will
neither own nor trade in these minerals. Rather, it will make them
available to our local cutters and polishers.

On the issue of the Minister’s unfettered power, which everyone is talking
about, I would like to remind the hon member that there’s not even a single
authority in this country that enjoys unfettered powers. All powers of the
executive are exercised subject to a myriad of legislation, including our
very own Constitution. The Promotion of Administrative Justice Act enjoins
the Minister to exercise executive powers in a manner that is both
reasonable as well as fair.

Furthermore, regarding the exemptions that you think are giving the
Minister unfettered powers; the registration of unpolished diamonds does
not offer me unfettered discretion. This an enabling instrument to regulate
the flow of diamonds, as well as to provide a greater variety of diamonds
to the manufacturers in South Africa. So, this mechanism has nothing to do
with the constitutionality or otherwise of the legislation.

I would like to respond to the issue of the regulator - I think the hon
Louw has dealt with that very well - and would just like to say that this
is not a government-dominated regulator. Government only has four
representatives in the regulator: four will come from the industry, two
will come from Labour; there’s still the CEO, the chairperson and other
people to be appointed by the Minister, so I don’t know what that was
about. [Interjections.] And please stop heckling! [Interjections.]

Unfortunately, most members, including Adv Schmidt, spent too much time on
an issue, which is not before this Parliament today, and that is the export
duty. The export duty is not part of this legislation, but the fact of the
matter is that they need to understand why we had the export duty in to
begin with. The intention, a noble one, is to discourage exports of our
rough diamonds without value addition. We obviously do not also have an
intention of creating illegal trade in diamonds, so when Treasury looks at
this matter we are going to make an input that will ensure that we achieve
our objective, which is to encourage beneficiation and create access to
rough diamonds in this country.

Lastly, it is not correct that this Bill has been bulldozed through
Parliament. We believe that sufficient time has been given to everyone
involved, the industry included, to participate in the process of this
Bill. All standard processes have been followed for the Bill to be debated
by this House today, so I’m happy for the parties that have participated in
the debate that are going to support this Bill, and obviously it will
become law today. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Alliance, Freedom Front Plus and
African Christian Democratic Party dissenting).

                            PRECIOUS METALS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Hon Deputy Speaker, colleagues, hon
members, allow me to introduce to you the critical issues emanating from
the Precious Metals Bill, which, like the Diamonds Amendment Bill, will
have a positive impact on downstream beneficiation of our minerals. These
two Bills from the mining sector complement each other as without these
necessary amendments in the Precious Metals Bill we can never get to a
stage where we are able to have diamonds from “mine to finger” because we
do need precious metals to blend with our diamonds.

During the course of the public debates on these two Bills over the past
few weeks, we have seen this Precious Metals Bill being somewhat
overshadowed by the Diamonds Amendment Bill. I hope hon members will accord
the same status to these two pieces of legislation we are debating this
afternoon.

Even within the precious metals sector there is a different reaction to
this Bill in the sense that those in the gold sector, which has been
regulated for years through other legislative measures, did not have many
concerns, but the platinum group minerals, which was not regulated, were
very vocal about issues that the gold sector has been implementing all
these years. These discrepancies of the past resulted in a situation where
the gold sector had comparatively moved further in the beneficiation route
than their counterparts in the platinum group minerals.

I must also emphasise that these levels of beneficiation, even though they
were happening, are not enough, hence the reason why we are passing this
legislation today. I am confident the hon members will support this Bill,
as an increase in beneficiation, particularly in the platinum group metals,
is very desirable for South Africa, and will make a very important
contribution to our achieving faster economic growth.

South Africa is well endowed with both these minerals with a reserve base
of approximately 87% in platinum group minerals and 40,7% in gold and we
are the number one producer in the world for both these commodities at
approximately 59% and 14% respectively on the supply side. However,
although we have these resources we are not the leading beneficiators. And
you may ask: Why, with all the years of gold’s production in South Africa,
are we not the leading beneficiators? That is the reason why the two pieces
of legislation are before us today, and I see a great potential for us to
become a world leader in beneficiation of platinum, particularly with its
role in industrial applications, as well as its purported role in reducing
carbon emissions.

This Bill will go a long way in addressing this increased contribution. So,
as hon members will be coming here to debate this legislation, I hope we
won’t fail our people and our country and that we will support this Bill.

This Bill will be administered by the Diamond and Precious Metals
Regulator, which was established in terms of the Diamonds Amendment Act
that we have just debated and I will not allude to it further as I think we
exhausted it in the last debate.

The object of the Bill is to provide for acquisition, possession, smelting,
beneficiation, use and disposal of precious metals. The Bill therefore
seeks to bring clarity on the definition of “unwrought precious metals” as
contained in the Mining Rights Act of 1967, as the previous definitions had
some shortcomings. There is now a clear distinction between unwrought
precious metals and semifabricated precious metals. This allows for
legislation that is less stringent on semifabricated precious metals, as
well as less stringent control measures. We believe these less stringent
measures and less stringent control measures will lead to further
beneficiation of this mineral resource.

The reason for determining the percentages of purity in the definition to a
level of three nines is to refine precious metals to a higher level of
purity before they are worked into semifabricated products. Also, the
percentages provide an additional distinction between unwrought and
semifabricated precious stones.

The Bill deregulates the possession of silver as it is mined in very minute
quantities in South Africa, mainly as a by-product and its value has
declined over the years. It is in the order of ten whilst the other
precious metals are in the order of hundreds of dollars. People were
worried, asking why are we deregulating silver, actually not understanding
that we are making it easy for people to work with this resource. So, we
are making it easily accessible for use in jewellery making by deregulating
it. So, there will be no regulation at all. You can do as you please with
silver in this country.

Every applicant for a permit or a licence will be required to comply with
the objectives of this Bill, as well as the broad-based socioeconomic
empowerment. We expect that through this Bill we will encourage local
beneficiation. We do not expect local beneficiation to be compromised by
international demands so as to ensure broad participation throughout the
value chain.

The Bill introduces new types of licences, namely the refining licence and
the beneficiation licence. The refining licence will allow the holder
thereof to hold unwrought precious metals and be able to directly sell
semifabricated precious metals to the holders of a jewellery permit and a
beneficiation licence. Industries that will derive benefits from the
beneficiation licence would be industries in the IT, avionics and
electronics industries who do not hold a refining licence but may want to
work with both unwrought, as well as semifabricated precious metals. The
licence, we expect, will be issued for a period of ten years.

We understand that this industry has been operating under shrouded rules of
secrecy virtually designed for it by itself. Acknowledging the above, we
believe that this piece of legislation extends security of tenure in that
the period of transition is two years in which all companies will have the
opportunity to comply with and operate within the environment created by
this legislative framework. This indeed creates a certainty in that every
operation’s lifespan will then be linked to the refinery licence.

In conclusion, I believe that we now have a balanced piece of legislation
that will have a favourable impact on the South African economy. We need to
recognise that the structural shift that is taking place in our economy
requires us to increasingly focus on the value adding aspects of the mining
sector. Whilst such changes might be uncomfortable for vested interests,
they are very necessary for our long-term sustainable growth.

I look forward to members supporting this Bill and favourably embracing the
changes that need to take place if we really do want to transform our
economy and our society. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms N F MATHIBELA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, Ministers, Deputy
Ministers, ladies and gentlemen in the gallery, I greet you. The ANC
supports this legislation. We support this Bill.

The legislation on precious metals is celebrated in the context of the 50th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter. This legislation seeks to translate the
clause, “The people shall share in the country’s wealth,” into reality. As
the ANC, we continue to develop legislation that is in the interest of all
South Africans.

The Precious Metals Bill and the Diamonds Amendment Bill are pieces of
legislation premised on the following: accountability, transparency,
economic growth, deracialisation of the industry through broad-based BEE,
skills development and the development of the local industry through
beneficiation. As the ANC we believe that legislative development will go a
long way in contributing positively to job creation and skills development.

Some of the industry’s players say that jobs will be lost if this
legislation is promulgated. But, when we asked them to promise that jobs
would not be lost if the legislation was stopped, they failed to commit
themselves. The issue of probable job losses bandied about by industry
players is being used as a decoy to delay transformation.

Maloko a mantle, re le ANC, re itse sentle gore go mekgatlho ya sepolotiki
le ya borakgwebo e e sa ikemisetsang go nna karolo ya kago-seša le
tswelelopele ya intaseteri ya gauta le polatinamo. Re le ANC, re dumela
gore khumo ya Aforika Borwa ke ya batho botlhe. Ka molao o moša re dumela
gore batho ba tlile go kotula go le gontsi.

Re ikemiseditse go fedisa tshotlego le khumanego mo bathong ba Aforika
Borwa. Batho ba Aforika Borwa ba tshwanetse go kotula mo diporojekeng.
Tiriso ya molao o moša e tlile go neelana ka diporojeke, katiso le
diphatlhatiro. Bašwa le basadi ba tshwanetse go bona katiso ya go betla le
go kgabisa gauta, teemane le polatinamo.

Kgabiso ya polatinamo, gauta le taemane e tlhodile ditiro lefatsheng ka
bophara. Re le puso ya ANC, re itse sentle gore ekonomi ya Aforika Borwa e
tlile go gola le ditiro di tlile go sireletsega. Re le ANC, re ikemiseditse
go diragatsa se batho ba Aforika Borwa ba ileng ba se kopa ka Kliptown ka
1955, fa ba dumelana ka Freedom Charter. Freedom Charter ke lekwalo la
batho botlhe ba Aforika Borwa, bantsho le basweu ba kopane.

Re le ANC, re dumela gore batho ba tshwanetse go tshela ba itekanetse le
gore ba tshwanetse go dira mo ba batlang. Re dumela gore borra- le
bommakgwebo ba tshwanetse go dira kgwebo mo maphateng otlhe a ikonomi ya
Aforika Borwa. Precious Metals Bill e ikemiseditse go dira gore batho
botlhe ba dire kgwebo mo lephateng la intaseteri ya meepo. (Translation of
Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[Hon members, as the ANC, we are aware that there are political parties and
business organisations that do not intend to be part of the reconstruction
and development of the gold and platinum industry. We, the ANC, believe
that the wealth of South Africa belongs to its people. We believe that
people will benefit a lot from this new piece of legislation.

We intend to bring suffering and poverty to an end for all the people of
South Africa. The people should benefit from this Bill, as new projects
will be initiated, training will be provided and new job opportunities will
open up. The youth and women have to be given training in handcrafts and in
gold, diamond and platinum design.

Platinum, gold and diamond design has created jobs worldwide. The ANC-led
government knows very well that the South African economy will grow to
secure jobs. As the ANC, we intend to implement the aspirations that the
people of South Africa set down at Kliptown in 1955, when they drafted the
Freedom Charter. The Freedom Charter is a document of all the people of
South Africa, both black and white.

The ANC believes that people should live under healthy conditions and work
wherever they want. We believe that businessmen and businesswomen should do
business in all sectors of the economy in South Africa. The Precious Metals
Bill will allow all the people to do business in the mining industry.]

The citizens of the country, led by the ANC, in 1992 proclaimed:

  The mineral wealth beneath the soil is the national heritage of all South
  Africans, including future generations. As a diminishing resource, it
  should be used with due regard to socioeconomic needs and environmental
  conservation.


The ANC is committed to ensuring that the mineral value chain is developed
downstream and the skills base created. The legislation is a logical tool
and vehicle in ensuring that the mineral wealth of the country benefits all
citizens.

Some prophets of doom and gloom predict that about 8 500 jobs will be lost
if the Bill is promulgated. As the ANC government, we have observed an
immense shedding of jobs since the advent of democracy and we feel that
that does not augur well. It is quite interesting to note that between 1994
and 2003, about 176 824 jobs were lost in the mining industry. The
development of a local beneficiation industry will address the challenges
of job losses and job scarcity.

The Chamber of Mines says the Precious Metals Bill will neither provide
greater downstream beneficiation opportunities, nor create greater access
to precious metals primarily in the jewellery trade and in generalised
manufacturing, and that the Bill is likely to affect beneficiation in this
country negatively and be counterproductive.

Re le puso ya ANC, ga re dumela se Mokgatlho wa Meepo o se buang. Re dumela
gore Precious Metals Bill e tlile go oketsa bokgoni jwa rona jwa go kgabisa
gauta, polatinamo le taemane. Re le ANC, ga re kitla re dumela go bolelelwa
dilo tse di fosagetseng. (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[As the ANC, we do not agree with what the Chamber of Mines says. We
believe that the Precious Metals Bill will enhance our skills development
in gold, platinum and diamond design. The ANC will not be misled.]

Some so-called experts tell us that our competitive edge lies in mining
minerals and that we cannot beneficiate. In some instances, we are told
that the sector is highly technical and therefore it cannot be BEE-
compliant. As the ANC, we regard that as a myth used by forces of
maintenance to delay change. On that note, we say that no amount of scare
tactics will stop the train of transformation as it effects change in this
industry.

The leader of the DA, the hon Tony Leon, said that the ANC was not helping
the people, that it was helping itself and it must be stopped.
[Interjections.] It becomes clear that the hon Tony Leon forgets that the
ANC is the custodian of the interests of the people of South Africa. We
assure the hon Tony Leon that his future lies in good hands in the ANC, and
he must lighten up and phola [relax.]

We are the only organisation that has a vision for the country, and we
believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Chair, this Bill intends to ensure local
beneficiation of the country’s precious metals, such as gold and the
platinum group of metals, to promote sound development of precious metal
enterprises and to ensure that the precious metal resources are exploited
and developed in the best interests of the country.

However, and as indicated during the presentation by the Chamber of Mines
and we unfortunately have to agree, this Bill will not achieve these
intentions and could unfortunately actually undermine the achievement of
these intentions.

The main reason for this statement is, inter alia, owing to the
introduction of a new category of precious metals, being “semifabricated
precious metals”, following the introduction of a new beneficiation
licence, which complicates rather than simplifies the existing position.

In addition thereto, the introduction of the Diamond and Precious Metals
Regulator introduces an additional layer of regulatory control for the
industry. The regulator will also have unlimited discretion, as no guidance
on how the discretion is to be exercised is provided in the Bill. We are
back to the problem in the Diamonds Amendment Bill, Madam Minister.

The position creates uncertainty and is possibly unconstitutional, an issue
raised during the presentations. And I beg to differ, hon Minister: During
your single appearance at the diamond hearings when the department came to
brief the committee on the responses, I indicated in fact our possible
opposition to the Bill - you were there - on the basis that certain
fundamental parts of the Bill were non-negotiable. And I indicated that to
you.

The issuing and renewal of licences and permits, which are currently simple
administrative processes, will be more difficult and cumbersome and will
ensure more uncertainty. The beneficiation licence will introduce
additional administrative burdens without any benefit to beneficiation.

The further imposition of a permit to import will also introduce new
additional administrative burdens, which have practical considerations that
could negatively affect current agreements, investor confidence and local
employment. The approval for export not only creates a new administrative
burden, but also provides no criteria, once again, for the Minister, who
has unlimited discretion, which is also arguably unconstitutional.

Whilst the introduction of the regulator and the associated costs and
administrative procedure are questionable, the Bill will unfortunately
neither provide greater downstream beneficiation opportunities nor create
greater access to precious metals primarily in the jewellery trade and in
generalised manufacturing.

In terms of this Bill, the platinum sector, which is currently not
regulated, will in addition to the gold sector also be regulated. The
argument of equitable access to precious metals is not, in our view,
addressed fundamentally in this Bill. Mentioning it as an objective of this
Bill is misleading to say the least. The Bill does very little, if
anything, to promote equitable access, in particular for the poor society.
The regulation of the platinum group of metals will not in itself ensure
local beneficiation nor equitable access, whilst the introduction of a
state-owned and state-controlled Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator to
regulate the industry will not assist in reaching this objective.

Although we agree with the intent expressed in the Bill of making South
Africa a major international minerals beneficiation country – with which we
agree - in order to grow the local beneficiation industry in South Africa,
this Bill, with the accompanying Diamonds Amendment Bill as I have stated
before, will neither ensure this nor will it ensure the offset in the loss
of jobs expected in the production sector, which is currently believed to
provide 417 000 workers with employment.

The wide and unfettered discretion allocated to the Minister is arguably
unconstitutional in light of the lack of guidance and criteria set out in
the Bill in terms whereof the Minister is expected to exercise her various
discretions.

This Bill is therefore likely to be counterproductive and to affect
beneficiation negatively. The DA will therefore be opposing the Bill. I
thank you, Madam Chair. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, the Precious Metals Bill, which repeals the
remaining provisions of the Mining Rights Act of 1991, is an important
piece of legislation as it provides for the acquisition, possession,
smelting, refining, beneficiation and disposal of precious metals. The fact
that there will only be one regulator for both the diamond and precious
metals industries will in itself result in savings on administration costs.

We in the IFP see beneficiation as a crucial component to the real
development and growth of the various industries within the mining sector.
It is therefore encouraging that this Bill makes provision for a precious
metal beneficiation licence, which will be issued for a period of 10 years
and renewable for further periods not exceeding 10 years.

We hope that this will provide a much-needed boost for beneficiation in the
industry. The requirement for the transportation of precious metals will be
that the persons transporting it must be in possession of a certificate. It
is interesting to note that even though catalytic converters are being
manufactured in South Africa, South African cars are not being fitted with
them; only cars that the manufacturers export are being fitted with
converters. I believe that the motor industry should be engaged in this
discussion.

The precious metals industry has to take a serious look at the involvement
of the historically disadvantaged South Africans in the business, because
their involvement and participation must be increased. At the hearings it
was said that incentives are required for business to make investments and
to develop skills. The IFP agrees with this sentiment. I do believe that,
as we proceed, impediments in the industry will be taken care of. The major
task is that we, as South Africans, must take up the challenge and work
together.

The IFP supports the Bill. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, Ministers and hon
members . . .

 . . . . Mna ndikhule esikolweni kusithwa bantwana amagqwetha akrele-krele
kakhulu . . . [ . . . I grew up at school with teachings that said:
Children, lawyers are very intelligent . . . ]

However, this is not the case with the advocates in the DA. Everything is
complicated. All these Bills are very complicated for the advocate. I don’t
know where he studied his law. I used to think that lawyers make the best
parliamentarians because they know the law. I don’t know what’s happening
now. [Interjections.] This Bill is unconstitutional. I have a right to
joke; I’m a human being. All the serious Bills that we have ever had in
this Parliament are allegedly unconstitutional.

Andazi ke noba thina lo Mgaqo-Siseko asiwazi na kanti wawungabhalwa sithi
na? [I do not know whether we do not understand this Constitution; didn’t
we draft it?]

These bills go through hundreds of law advisers and lawyers.

Andazi ukuba zigqitha kanjani kubo. [I do not know how they passed them . .
. ]

Mr W P DOMAN: But politics play a role.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I think politics and the law
are not very different. The law is about politics and politics is about the
law. Hon members, allow me again to clarify issues pertaining to the
Precious Metals Bill, as introduced by the Minister for consideration and
adoption by this House.

Just to reiterate, I would like to remind hon members that this Bill and
the Diamonds Amendment Bill complement each other; in the sense that one
cannot have an excellent piece of jewellery manufactured without the use of
both precious metals and diamonds, and we have both in South Africa.

I would like to deal in more detail with the licences and permits that we
propose in this Bill, besides the new definitions of unwrought and
semifabricated precious metals, these licences are central to the changes
we are proposing. A refining licence, which would replace the recovery-
works licence and generally allows holders to deal with unwrought precious
metals will also be required for dealing in all platinum group metals and
not only platinum and iridium as is currently the case.

Through this legislation the refining licence holder will be permitted to
sell precious metals in semifabricated form to jewellers and precious metal
beneficiation licensees. This will facilitate the flow of precious metals
to jewellers and other beneficiators in the precious metals value-addition
chain. We must remember therefore that the holder of this licence will also
be able to acquire semifabricated precious metals for the purpose of
recycling such metals.

Contrary to popular belief, the introduction of the beneficiation licence
was thoroughly thought through and it was done purposefully. The licence
caters for people other than jewellers who use both unwrought and
semifabricated precious metals to produce final goods. It is also suitable
for researchers. Again there will be no need for people to apply to the
Receiver of Revenue and the SA Police Service to obtain this licence, as it
will now all be done under one roof, which is much simpler, not
complicated, Adv Schmidt.

People in this trade currently have to rely on a special permit to work
with unwrought precious metals, which is rather cumbersome. Therefore the
beneficiation licence will be valid for 10 years and renewable, and this
will also be an added advantage for our jewellers.

We have also retained the jewellers’ permit for jewellery manufacturers;
however, it is now valid for five years instead of one year, as it
currently stands. In addition, the onerous process of applying for the
permit at different departments will be removed and on top of that the
licensee will only be expected to keep proper books of account as compared
to a register.

The centralisation of the administration of the Precious Metals Bill within
the Department of Minerals and Energy is very critical, particularly for
jewellery manufacturers. This centralisation is also important for the
department, because it will now be possible for us to monitor the use of
precious metals with confidence and to satisfy ourselves that the levels of
value addition in our country will sustain development in our country far
beyond mining.

Our reasons for deregulating silver, as the Minister has already indicated,
are based on the volumes produced in the country. I would also like to
remind hon members that part of our reasons for regulating metals is to
curb crime related to theft and smuggling of metals, which negatively
affect our mining industry. That is why there are more stringent rules
around unwrought precious metals like gold and platinum group metals, which
include platinum, palladium, rhodium, iridium, osmium and ruthenium.

Let us look at the implications of deregulating, for example, silver. Any
person who has a legitimate business will now be able to acquire silver in
the same way that he or she is able to acquire copper, and to use this
metal for manufacturing jewellery and other articles. They will not need to
keep a register, which is burdensome. They will not need a safe of a
prescribed category, and they will be able to dispose of their finished
product as they see fit.

What this means for groups like Gabane, for women’s groups and also crafts
people in our rural areas, is that they can adopt their traditional skills
to produce craft jewellery made out of silver or copper, without having to
go through the existing processes that actually hamper progress in this
sector.

Before I sit, I want to raise a matter of concern of this government about
the restructuring that we see happening in the mining industry. There is a
new fashion today; everybody is creating a PLC. Zonke ezi PLC zazingekho
[All these PLCs were not there] . . . when we were not talking about
restructuring our laws, when we were not talking about involving the black
majority in the mining industry.

We just want to warn the industry that this government is not sleeping,
even if we look as if we are sleeping. These days we open our eyes, even
when we are praying. We closed our eyes once and the country was taken;
even our cows were taken. It is only when the women saw that the children
didn’t have milk that the men woke up. [Laughter.]

Now we are saying that we are not prepared to close our eyes whilst they
are ring-fencing our iron out there. We are asking why are they ring-
fencing that iron? Well, we want to ring-fence our platinum out there. We
want to ask: Why ring-fence and form a PLC in London or ring-fence our
diamonds and form a PLC in Luxembourg?

There is not a single diamond mine in Luxembourg or in London and therefore
if there is a plan to take away the assets of this country there will be
war. I just want to warn everybody. Thank you very much. Ibuyile iAfrica.
[Africa is back.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Chair, the Precious Metals Bill will bring into effect
additional administrative procedures. The ACDP notes that the industry’s
stakeholders have voiced their objections to the fact that the proposed
licensing changes, in particular, will increase the administrative burden.
The Bill requires motivating documentation that is comprehensive and well
prepared. This has been criticised as an unnecessary addition to the
administrative workload.

The ACDP supports the emphasis that is placed on the administrative
procedure that will promote orderliness and transparency. It is our hope
that the new administrative procedure that will come about will be
streamlined for maximum efficiency. The ACDP maintains a strong awareness
of the job creation potential within the administrative sphere that is
apparent in this new scenario.

The ACDP further recommends the SA Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator
Act as a central operations body for the administrative component of this
Bill. I thank you.

Mr C T MOLEFE: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers present
here, hon members, and everyone who is with us today, in 1994 all those who
had been discriminated against proudly chanted the slogan: “Freedom in our
lifetime!” Today, through the debates that we have around the two Bills, we
are saying, “Access and beneficiation in our lifetime!”

Today, on 1 November 2005, through the debates on both Bills, we are
embracing the Freedom Charter clause that dictates unequivocally that, “We
all shall share in the country’s wealth

Setswana, Moatefokate Schmidt, ra re bana ba motho ba kgaogana tlhogo ya
tsie. [In Setswana, Adv Schmidt, we say siblings share whatever little food
there is.]
We believe that the time has come for the previously disadvantaged to share
in the minerals of our country. [Interjections.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Yes, the thing is that you don’t share; it is
just the cronies that get everything. That is the problem.

Mr C T MOLEFE: I wish hon De Lille was here because she promised the
President that she would be dealing with these noisemakers. It doesn’t help
this country to have people like you.

This piece of legislation is monumental as it seeks to transform the
precious metals industry, which is 119 years old, after the first discovery
of gold on a small farm in the Witwatersrand in 1867. This has been 119
years of sheer exploitation of the masses of our people, characterised by
race-based ownership. Those that oppose this Bill indirectly agree with the
continued exclusive white ownership of this industry, and this Bill is
therefore addressing such issues.

Although he specifically talked about diamond beneficiation, hon President
Mogae of Botswana also emphasised the urgent need for regional countries to
access and beneficiate their minerals. It is for this reason therefore that
we call upon the DA and other political parties to join the citizens of
this country in our chant: “Access and beneficiation in our lifetime!”

Local beneficiation or manufacturing has the potential to reduce the impact
of the ongoing job losses in the mining sector. Some industry role-players
said during the hearings that these Bills are going to lead to job losses.

However, there is one thing that I liked during our hearings: whenever
Cosatu took the stage to tell them that that is blatant lies, they all ran
away from the hearings; even some of these hon members who have been
talking on this Bill today, absconded. They were never there, but today
they want to tell us who were there, about what the industry said.
In particular, the Chamber of Mines and Emplex, when persistently asked
whether this Bill is going to lead to job losses, said: “No, there is no
way that it would be doing this because, anyway, 178 000 jobs were lost
between 1994 and 2003 in the mining industry. This is the reason why even
today we have Cosatu marching and protesting about the issue of job losses,
and not about the introduction of this Bill.”

Cosatu, for that matter, supported the two Bills, whilst a section of the
industry objected to them. The DA, today, vocally declared their opposition
to the transformation process. This confirms the notion that in content and
in character the DA remains the DP. Therefore, as a people, we must say no
to their Animal Farm-type of approach that says: “All animals are equal,
but some are more equal than others.” Remember, the Freedom Charter says:
“All shall be equal before the law.” [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: That’s what we say.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: But to the ANC it’s not so.

Mr C T MOLEFE: Chairperson, the Chamber of Mines was established in 1887,
but today we remain a country with scarce beneficiating and manufacturing
skills. Furthermore, we have one company, Johnson Matthey, which is the
preferred manufacturer in this country and has been in existence for many
years.

Why are we not skilled, and why are we not beneficiating in this country?
For so many years, out of their own volition, they never transformed the
industry. It is for this reason that we are saying that the Bills that are
being introduced will level the playing fields and allow the previously
disadvantaged masses of our country to have a stake in the minerals of our
country.

In conclusion, we want to say that the ANC, together with the citizens of
this country, supports this Bill. And finally, as the chairperson said
earlier on, he will take members of the DA to a workshop. I don’t think
they will ever change, because they are there to oppose whatever the ANC
raises. Even when you tell them that they are members of the DA they will
oppose that and perhaps say that they are members of the DP. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Laughter.][Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I believe your last statement, hon
member. Hon Chairperson, really . . .

 . . . abantu endikhule nabo bangayazi laa nto kwakusithiwa yi-LP.
Niyalikhumbula ela cwecwe likhulu elalidlala kwi-gramafoni? Lalisithi
lakuba nomkrwelo litsho njalo kulaa ndawo inye, lingadluli. Uyazi, uAdv
Schmidt uvele waba lelo cwecwe linomkrwelo ngoba yonke laa nto ebeyithethe
kwi-Diamonds Ammendment Bill okanye uMthetho oyilwayo wezeeDayimane uphinde
yona.

Yilaa nto ke ibithethwa nguSekela-Mphathiswa, ezibuza ukuba kanti aba bantu
basemthethweni abazongcungela na kanti, ingakumbi xa kuthethwa ngomthetho.
Ngoko ke andizi kuziphendula ezi zinto uMnu uSchmidt azithethileyo kuba
asizo zinto eziphuma kuye ngaphakathi njengelungu lekomiti.

Kwaye ngaphezulu - ndikukhumbuze Adv Schmidt - ngelaa xesha lo Mthetho
uyilwayo ubuphambi kwekomiti khange uwuphikise. Waye wathi wena awuzi
kuvota, hayi ukuba awuzi kuwuvotela. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[ . . . people with whom I grew up would know what an LP record is. Do you
remember that big vinyl record that used to be played on a gramophone? If
by any chance the surface got scratched, it would play in one place
continuously without going further. Advocate Schmidt is behaving just like
such a damaged LP record today because he repeats what he spoke about in
the debate on the Diamonds Amendment Bill.

The Deputy Minister also made her comments about legal people, as we
thought that they were bright and that they were experts, especially with
regard to legal matters, and I understand why. I, therefore, am not going
to waste time responding to Mr Schmidt’s comments because I am sure they do
not come from him personally as a member of the committee.

Furthermore – if I may remind you, Adv Schmidt - you did not voice any
objection to this Bill when it was tabled before the portfolio committee.
You also said that you were not going to vote, and not that you would not
vote in support of it.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Why don’t you check with the caucus?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Today you have changed your mind.

Let me tell you . . . [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Tell us about the declaration of war.
The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: . . what we have done, Adv Schmidt,
and I‘ll try and assist you, firstly, contrary to what you say, the
definition of semiprecious metals, which is an enabler in this legislation,
actually reduces the regulatory and administrative burden. This will allow
downstream beneficiation, more freedom and also allow members of the
industry to focus on their businesses.

Secondly, in this second Bill we have a longer transitional period of two
years as compared to the one that we had in the first Bill, the Diamonds
Amendment Bill. This is to allow companies that have long-term contracts to
do what they need to do in order to comply with this new legislative
framework.

Finally, the administrative procedures that are proposed here are meant to
streamline the application for and granting of all the licenses and permits
that are required. Now, several members, such as hon member Mathibela, and
the comrade from the ANC who spoke before me, have spoken about this story
of job losses.

If there are jobs to be lost, who will shout first? It is the unions. The
unions will stand up and shout if their members are going to lose jobs.
When the trade unions came before the portfolio committee they never raised
the issue of job losses owing to this piece of legislation. Even the people
who were alleging that there would be job losses couldn’t justify their
claims when they were asked: “In the event of this piece of legislation
being withdrawn, do you guarantee that there won’t be job losses?” They
couldn’t because here we are dealing with mineral resources, which by their
nature will come to an end.

So when the resource comes to an end and the area is not mined, jobs are
going to be lost. This is the reason we as government are saying that now,
during the lifetime of a mine, come up with a plan that you are going to
execute once the resources are exhausted down there.

The industry has to understand that we seriously want those plans to be
placed on the table when they come to us to say that after they have mined
this mine, this is what is going to happen to their workers. You train them
and give them skills that will enable them, even if they go back home, to
be able to create livelihoods for themselves.

I think, as you said, hon member Mathibela, this story of job losses is
just a decoy by our detractors to try and stop or halt our transformation
agenda, which is something they cannot and will not do.

Talking about job losses in the face of these two Bills actually shows
short-sightedness, because for the long-term sustainability of the
industry, it needs to invest in areas other than mining, which is going to
enable the industry to live beyond its lifespan.

If we create beneficiation, we start giving our young people new skills in
cutting, polishing and tool-making, etc. I am talking here about skills
that, even when the mines have closed down, could be exported to other
countries either in Africa or elsewhere. Therefore we believe that this is
going to enable us to attract investment into the country, grow our
manufacturing base and create more jobs in the downstream.

I thank all members and all parties who have supported this piece of
legislation. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
Bill read a second time (Democratic Alliance dissenting).


       REFLECTING ON CHARACTER OF OTHER MEMBERS WITHOUT PRIOR WARNING


                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): After members’ statements on 25
October 2005 and in response to a remark by the hon Minister of Education
regarding a ruling I had given earlier, I stated that I would consult
Hansard and return with a ruling.

Having now had an opportunity to study Hansard, I wish to rule as follows:
The Minister of Education contended that members should not reflect on the
skills or abilities of other members without due notice to those members
that such references would be made.

Whilst it is practice in this House that members, as a courtesy, inform
other members beforehand if they are going to attack them politically,
whether or not that has been done is not for the Chair to rule on, nor
would it have been feasible in this instance as the hon Chief Whip of the
Opposition was responding directly to an earlier statement by the hon Chief
Whip of the Majority Party on the same matter.

In my ruling at the time I pointed out to the majority party that they did
have another slot in which to respond to the points raised by Mr Gibson,
but they elected not to use that opportunity.

To the extent that the Chair was asked to express itself, I remain
satisfied that the member’s statement by the hon the Chief Whip of the
Opposition did not amount to a personal attack on hon Mr N T Godi as there
was no reflection on his character or conduct. In view of the
aforementioned, I now regard the matter as disposed of.


                                NURSING BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, hon members, I am tabling the Nursing
Bill today, which replaces the legislation that currently regulates the
nursing profession. The current legislation dates from 1978, and no longer
reflects either government policy or changes in thinking concerning the
manner in which the nursing profession is structured, hence it was
necessary to replace the current law in its entirety.

Before I deal with the substance of the Bill, kindly allow me to provide a
brief historic context: In 1994 four nursing councils existed, namely the
Bophuthatswana, Ciskei, South African and Transkei nursing councils. As you
may all be aware, these were established based on the discriminatory laws
of the apartheid government.

We had to abolish all these councils and establish an interim one at
national level. That interim council was mandated to come up with
amendments regarding the composition of the council. Our approach towards
the professional councils was to give them autonomy to do their work
properly. The amendment in terms of the composition proposed that the
nursing council should consist of 39 members comprised, as follows: 12
professional nurses in four enrolled categories, elected by the profession;
18 members appointed by the Minister, with nine of these being community
representatives; six professional nurses; two nursing students and one
Department of Health representative.

The first democratic SA Nursing Council was inaugurated in 1998 for a
period of five years. The council was elected through an open election
process; however, there were serious problems that were observed. The
election results did not reflect the country’s demographics, its geography
or the skills needed to have an effective council. As a result, my
predecessor had to make sure that the 18 members that she appointed were
representative and had the skills necessary to complement the elected
group. The same situation repeated itself during my tenure with the 2003
nursing council elections.

I need to indicate that the same issues also characterise the other four
professional councils, so it is not only the Nursing Council that has these
challenges. In 2001 I then appointed a task team with the mandate of
looking into the transformation of statutory health councils, since the
pace of transformation within these councils was not satisfactory.

The task team consisted of members from government, members serving in the
statutory health councils, council officials and academics. They made
several recommendations, which have been used as a basis for the drafting
of the Nursing Bill. The other professional councils are in the process of
reviewing their legislative frameworks, based on those recommendations as
well.

I need to highlight this aspect to indicate that the contents of the Bill
before us are the result of a carefully considered and thoroughly debated
exercise. I am pleased to highlight the following key areas in the Nursing
Bill: The language used in the Bill makes for easy reading, especially for
members of the public whose interests the Bill seeks to protect.

Some of the objectives of the Nursing Council, as listed in the Bill, are:
to promote the provision of nursing services to the inhabitants of our
country that comply with universal norms and values; to establish, improve
and control standards and quality of nursing education and training within
the ambit of the Act and any other applicable laws; and to maintain
professional conduct and practice standards for practitioners.

The Bill significantly increases the accountability of the Nursing Council
and strengthens the requirement for sound corporate governance. No
statutory, professional, regulatory body operates in a vacuum. It must be
accountable to somebody. Since government is the elected representative of
the people of our country, the new Nursing Bill makes the Nursing Council
accountable to the Minister of Health for the performance of its functions
and duties. It requires the council to prepare strategic plans that spell
out how the council will achieve its objectives under the Act, and to
report every six months on the status of nursing and on matters of public
importance.

The Bill also makes provision for codes, such as a code of conduct, which
members of the council must observe. If a member of the council fails to do
his or her job as a member, or engages in unauthorised or fruitless,
wasteful expenditure of council funds, the Minister may terminate his or
her membership.

Of major importance is to ensure that the Nursing Council, like all other
statutory councils, remains true to its mandate of protecting the public.
The council is not a representative association for nurses. It is a
regulatory body that must ensure that professional standards and ethics in
nursing are upheld, so that the public trust in nurses is maintained and
that nursing continues to be a profession of which all nurses can be proud.

The composition of the council has been reduced from the present 39 members
to 25. This is to facilitate improved efficiency and corporate governance
through a smaller and more streamlined council. Instead of holding
extremely expensive elections every time it is necessary to appoint a new
council, members will now be appointed by way of a process of nominations
put forward by members of the profession.

I want to emphasise that the Nursing Council is an expert body that
requires members who are knowledgeable about the many and varied aspects of
nursing: nursing education, professional ethics and the manner in which
nurses are required to conduct themselves as professionals.

Most of those serving on the Nursing Council will be required to have
expertise in nursing, but this knowledge will be complemented by those with
expertise in areas such as finance, law, consumer affairs, human rights and
ethics. Creating this balance is critical for the Nursing Council to carry
out its mandate. Community representation is catered for, but I wish to
stress that this too will need people with proven skills in community work.

Our nurses are crucial to the delivery of health services in South Africa.
They are an extremely valuable and much-needed component of our heath
system. We must have a regulatory body that is able to ensure that we have
a flourishing and highly professional pool of nurses in South Africa to
continue the good work that the nurses do in our country.

The Bill makes it mandatory for employers to submit annual returns of
nurses in their staff establishment, thus assisting with human resources
planning and enabling the Nursing Council to hold employers accountable for
nurses in their staff establishment being properly licensed to work in
terms of their registration.

The final democratic accountability and ultimate responsibility of guiding
the development and strengthening of the health system, promoting health
care and protecting the public lies with the Minister of Health. The
Minister of Health therefore has put into place mechanisms to assist the
Minister in fulfilling this role. All statutory health professional
councils have to work more closely with government to ensure that the
health system is able to achieve the goal of providing good quality
services.

Their assistance in this regard is through ensuring that our health
professionals remain competent and possess the best skills for the public
to entrust their lives to them when illness, disease or infirmity strikes.
Linked to this issue is the question of professional conduct and
discipline.

The Bill now provides for a professional conduct committee, thus moving
away from the notion of disciplinary action. We favour a shift in approach
from only being punitive to one that encompasses corrective and
rehabilitative approaches as well. This does not mean in any way that
drastic disciplinary steps will not be taken where the need arises and the
situation warrants such action.

The Bill makes provision for the establishment of two appeals committees.
The first is the appeals committee on any decision taken by council. This
is in line with other democratic principles in pursuance of good corporate
governance.

The other committee refers to an appeals committee on the outcome of the
professional conduct committee. Presently any person who is disgruntled
about the outcome of the professional conduct committee has only the High
Court as an avenue for recourse. This kind of appeals committee, which will
be appointed by the Nursing Council, is empowered to set aside the findings
of the professional conduct committee if the facts warrant such action.

In terms of financial management, the Nursing Council does not fall within
the ambit of the Public Finance Management Act, and so sections addressing
corporate governance had to be included in the Bill. The Bill stipulates
that the registrar will be the accounting officer of the council and the
roles and functions of the registrar and council are clearly outlined.

The Nursing Council has been empowered to investigate the standard of
nursing services in any health establishment, thus complementing the role
of the Department of Health, or private hospital groups in the maintenance
of proper nursing standards. In the past few years we have seen increasing
numbers of nurses venturing into private practice, or increasingly being
employed in the private health sector. Provision has been made to regulate
private practice for nurses, which in the past was nonexistent. This is
partly due to the fact that nurses have not traditionally been practising
nursing privately.

As a mechanism to promote continuous improvement of knowledge and skills,
and thus impact positively on the quality of care, continuing professional
development is advocated in this Bill. This is in line with other health
professions and international trends designed to entrench the culture of
life-long learning and skills improvement in the health sciences.

This House, however, needs to note that the introduction of continuous
professional development for nurses will be developmental in nature, given
the fact that some nurses are working in remote rural areas where there may
be impediments to accessing suitable continuing professional development,
CPD, programmes.

The introduction of community service for nurses in this Bill is one of the
highlights, and part of the broader programme, requiring health
professionals to give back to the communities across the country,
especially those who reside in rural areas. At present ten other categories
of health professionals have to perform community service as a condition
for full registration with their respective councils as independent
professionals.

Community service provides an opportunity for our newly qualified graduates
to strengthen their cognitive, affective and psychomotor skills in their
chosen professions. Performing community service should not be onerous for
the nursing profession, which, unlike the medical and pharmacy professions,
is not required to do internship on completion of training.

Lastly, the National Health Act, Act 61 of 2003, makes provision for the
establishment of a forum for statutory health professional councils, where
all chairpersons and registrars of statutory councils will be members. This
forum will give the Nursing Council an opportunity to collaborate closely
with the other health professional councils on transverse issues.

When Parliament passes this Bill, it will have paved the way for the major
steps to be taken in improving the regulation of the nursing profession to
ensure improvement of service delivery to all the citizens of our country.

I wish to thank the Portfolio Committee on Health, its chairperson, Comrade
James Ngculu, the NCOP, the SA Nursing Council, various stakeholders, and
in particular my staff for the hard work that they have put in to see this
Bill finalised. I thank you for listening to me.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Chair, the function of a democratic government
is to represent the wishes of the people. What it is not is a series of
committees set up to rubber stamp the wishes of a few individuals who hold
views counter to those of the majority nor to treat the country’s
professional adult citizens like children who are incapable of managing
their own affairs.

There are 180 000 nurses in this country. Nursing organisations across the
board presented extensive documentation based on a wealth of experience and
a full range of views of those nurses to the Portfolio Committee on Health.
The committee listened to their presentations over just two and a half days
and then ignored them completely.

The strong reservation of nursing organisations about this Bill centred
largely around two issues. Firstly, the Minister proposes to seize complete
control of the nursing council – an independent statutory body, which is
supposed to represent the nursing profession. This council will now become
an organ of government, which is accountable only to the Minister of
Health, and not the nurses - which is fundamentally undemocratic and
unrepresentative. No longer will council members have the right to vote for
the professionals they feel best suited to represent them. Indeed, they
have been thoroughly disenfranchised.

During the public hearings, the Democratic Nurses Organisation of South
Africa, Denosa, stated that by removing their right to vote for the members
of their own council, the autonomy and independence of the council would be
severely compromised. They were deeply concerned that the Minister of
Health would now be in full control of a council that was, in fact, created
to regulate the nursing profession and its affairs – something that has
nothing to do with the Minister.

The Health and Other Service Personnel Trade Union of South Africa,
Hospersa, also argued that the Minister should not appoint council members
as this “clearly departs from principles of democracy”. The Aids Law
Project wanted references to the Minister to be removed and the nursing
council tasked to perform its functions in accordance with national health
policy.

The Society of Private Nursing Practitioners said that South Africa had
pioneered the principle that nurses should be governed by nurses and was
strongly opposed to removing the right of nurses to vote for their own
representatives on the council. They did not want the Minister to play a
determinant role in the process of electing representatives. Nor did they
want her to have anything to do with choosing the chairperson.

The School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, a division of Nursing and
Midwifery at the University of Cape Town, said the Bill was of great
concern to the profession, as it would mean that there was no opportunity
for self-determination of the professions by the professionals and that
indeed a hallmark of being a professional would have been removed.

The Federation of Unions of South Africa, Fedusa, said that to have all the
members of the Nursing Council appointed by the Minister would clearly
depart from the principles of democracy. They wished to know what criteria
the Minister would use to appoint these people. This is a question which
still remains unanswered.

Finally, Medi-Clinic and its 6 500 nurses said that it would be good
administrative practice for the council, and not the Minister, to elect its
own chairperson.

Now, despite all this, a handful of ANC representatives decided that South
African nurses were incapable of running their own affairs. It seems that
nurses made the fatal error of electing too many white women to represent
them. So, the Minister of Health will now do the job for them.

Moreover, unlike the existing Bill, which requires that a wide range of
interest groups be represented on the council, the new law places few
constraints on the Minister’s decision-making. For example, ”three persons
must represent communities”. Which communities?

I noted with amazement a passing comment by the chairperson during the
public hearings that we must not allow an uncontrolled implementation of
democracy. Let me repeat that: We must not allow an uncontrolled
implementation of democracy. What country are you living in? The ANC, it
seems, had already decided long before this farce of a public hearing
process was concluded that the nurses of South Africa were not capable of
electing their own representations.

Secondly, the Bill requires nurses to do a year of community service
although most nurses already do two years of work in public facilities
during the course of their training. The committee refused to even consider
the proposal that at least part of this training constitutes community
service.

The DA disagrees with the entire medical conscription system. It has
already proved to be a nightmare for our young doctors. The representatives
of the nurses of South Africa said no, but the ANC members said they knew
better. The Nursing Bill places a significant obligation on student nurses
to carry out a year of community service. But there is no simultaneous
obligation on the state to ensure effective implementation and management
of the programme.

The Minister of Health, Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, needs to recognise that
unless she stops treating health staff like toy soldiers to be shunted
around at will, they will continue to leave this country in droves. Indeed,
reports in the newspapers today, indicate that the placing of young doctors
continues to be beset by utter chaos. And doctors are again being left
hanging until the last minute for a decision about where she intends to
send them.

ANC committee members completely ignored the concerns of nurses. And,
moreover it appears that the Minister intends introducing the nurses’
community service next year, although two months is simply not enough time
to prepare this correctly.

On the one hand the Minister of Health has implored medical professionals
to remain in the country while on the other hand her every action seems to
be telling them that they will only be treated with disdain if they remain.

This Nursing Bill encapsulates exactly why the Minister’s attitude towards
health professionals is so problematic. Everyone in South Africa is aware
of the extent of the medical brain drain crisis. At the Rob Ferreira
Hospital, for example, which the DA recently identified as one the five
worst in the country, fewer than 50% of the nursing posts it needs are
actually filled.

Over 4 000 nurses left the public sector last year, and if this trend
continues the already appalling working conditions in our hospitals will
worsen, prompting a snowballing of resignations. This country will be
unable to sustain the necessary standards of service delivery and the DA
considers it outrageous that after 11 years this problem has worsened and
not improved.

In such circumstances, one might think that no legislative intervention
affecting health professionals would even be considered without carefully
considering the implications for health staff morale. But it is very clear
that the Minister of Health did not do this in relation to nurses’
community service.

In short, this Bill serves as yet another indication that the Minister
neither trusts health professionals to manage their own affairs, nor is
prepared to treat them with respect or consideration.

The DA will most definitely not support this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr L V J NGCULU: Chairperson, we are repealing yet another piece of
legislation that we have inherited from our old order, the Nursing Act of
1978. Hitherto this was the Act that regulated nursing practice, including
education and training. We are therefore putting this Bill, among others,
into the casket of history.

The portfolio committee held public hearings on the Bill and allowed for a
long process of interaction for people who came to make their submissions.
On the whole, most of the submissions supported the principle of the
legislation whilst raising concerns on specific issues. As a committee we
have attempted to accommodate the submissions. This Bill is therefore the
product of a long consultative process.

We take exception, of course, to the views as raised by the DA member of
Parliament, hon Dianne Kohler-Barnard, who states that this process of
public hearings, which is enshrined in our Constitution and the Rules of
Parliament, is a rubber stamp, perhaps indicating a failure to understand
what oversight is all about. Perhaps, most importantly, for members who
have not been participating in this process in the portfolio committee, the
University of Cape Town representative praised the chairperson of the
portfolio committee on the manner in which he conducted the public
hearings. Hon Dianne Kohler-Barnard was actually present.

The Bill therefore establishes the council whose purpose it is to serve and
protect the public in matters involving health services. It must ensure
that it maintains the professional conduct and practice standards set for
practitioners. The composition of the council will be predominantly from
the nursing profession itself, yet again another proposal that did not come
from the ANC, that did not come from other political parties, but came from
Denosa, the SA Nursing Council and a number of other organisations. Hence
this concern is actually accommodated in the Bill.

Sixteen of the 25 members of the council come from the nursing profession.
This was a proposal of Denosa and others and it is therefore important that
even the provision about the chairperson, who must be elected after
consultation with the Minister, was endorsed and adopted by Denosa, the SA
Nursing Council and others.

I am not very certain where the DA actually takes its positions from. It is
not informed by these questions, and we are stressing this point because we
are aware, firstly, that especially the DA has this fixation with attacks
on the leadership of our government. The accusation that this provision
takes away the powers of nurses is actually to paralyse the truth. This is
far from the truth, because Denosa and the SA Nursing Council actually
supported this position.

One of the things that we need to understand, and I am fairly confident of
this as I stand here, is that Denosa and the SA Nursing Council, in
particular, will feel offended to hear the DA speaking on their behalf.
They voiced their concerns to us. We interacted on the issues they raised.
At the end of it all we came to a collective agreement that the provision
on the composition of the council was reasonable and complied with the
democratic process, in particular that we deal with this as an elected
Parliament, and that, in this equation, the executive has a
constitutionally defined role.

Therefore, for any political party, in particular the DA, to claim what
they are claiming, when they themselves are beset by the huge problems of
the undemocratic nature of governance within their party, is actually an
insult to the democratic Constitution as a whole.

Another key provision of the Bill is the issue of continuing professional
development, a situation where our nurses will ensure that they are apace
with development. This provision will ensure that nurses keep abreast of
developments in their professional field, as well as with research and
training. The question was fully supported.

The question about community service was again fully supported and agreed
upon after a long discussion. There were a number of disagreements about
the timing of this. We indicated that people must not predetermine the
regulations, because those things will be determined in the regulations.

We agreed that no provision would be made in the Bill regarding the
question of foreigners having to do community service. Foreigners’
professions will, firstly, have to be verified and, secondly, we do not
agree with some of the issues that are raised regarding foreigners not
doing community service in South Africa. We in the ANC are convinced that
the issue of community service is essential to our health system. I am
surprised to hear the DA today calling it medical conscription. When I look
at some of them on their benches, few of them had the guts to join the End
Conscription Campaign when the call actually came to defy conscription.

The key question about community service is to address the needs of our
health system and the human resources. We must ensure that where needs
arise, especially in rural and other underserviced areas, people have
access to the health system. Equally important is that community service
plays a part in intervention to ensure that our health services actually
meet the basic needs of our people, in particular their health needs.

The ANC is proud of this legislation. We are fairly confident that it will
bring public confidence to the profession in general and to the SA Nursing
Council in particular.

We have also heard, and again we applaud it, the nursing profession and
Denosa and others saying that this Bill brings them, as the nursing
profession, self-confidence for the first time. They will be proud when
they put their epaulettes on their shoulders. Today, for the first time in
the democratic order, they are recognised as a profession. Hence we stated
earlier on that they would regard it as an affront to have the DP
spokesperson speaking on their behalf, because she has no standing at all
in the eyes of Denosa and the progressive nurses. [Interjections.]

Another important point we must understand is that the other critical
provision of the legislation will also allow nurses to do dispensing,
diagnose and also supply and keep medicines. Again, this is a very
important provision, given the challenges of human resources in our
country.

When hon Dianne Kohler-Barnard stands up here and decries the challenges
facing our health system when interventions are made to address these
particular questions, we cannot but conclude that the DA has no interest in
resolving the problems of our health system. We are actually reminded of
what the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk once said, namely that the DA said
when things go wrong in South Africa, they celebrate. This Bill will ensure
that things will not go wrong in South Africa. We have no place to
celebrate.

We would therefore like to thank the Department of Health, in particular,
who were with us throughout our deliberations on this Bill. I am certain
that they will be happy to see the fruits of their labour as this House
passes this Bill today.

As regards the howling, the heckling and the interjections that came from
the DA today, please ignore them. [Interjections.] This House never behaves
in the manner in which the DA behaves. We always maintain the dignity and
we are certain that the profession regulated in this Bill will be proud of
the work we have done.

I would like to thank all members of the portfolio committee in particular
who worked diligently on this Bill. I am aware we all differed on this
Bill. We all had differences of approach, but at the end of the day we came
with a good product, and the product is the Nursing Bill in front of us.
The ANC is once again proud of being associated with yet another
progressive piece of legislation on our way to a better life for all.

Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, what do we, as legislators and members of the
public, wish for our nurses: That they be compassionate, competent and
accountable. They do not have to be Florence Nightingale, but they
certainly should not be like the nurse who sent a mother home because the
mother had arrived without a clinic card, with her baby who had asthma, and
the nurse wanted to punish her, resulting in the baby dying at home.

How do we create good nurses who have high morale? We believe we do this by
building a framework which gives them pride in their work, gives them a
safe supportive environment, both physical and emotional, gives them job
satisfaction, gives them incentives for promotion, gives them adequate
payment and ensures that they’re not overstressed, and trains them
adequately, both theoretically and practically, so that they are
responsible and professional.

Our current framework, unfortunately, does the opposite, due to our
overcentralised health system, stress caused largely by HIV/Aids,
inadequate equipment and poor working conditions, and shocking security.
Added to this, we have a sense of entitlement, which is not balanced by a
sense of responsibility, poor monitoring information systems, and salaries
that do not compensate for the negatives.

The IFP would change the entire health system. We would place authority
clearly at district and provincial level, and let discipline be important
but fair, close to where the nurses work. We would put in place one of the
best private health care systems in the world to work for the public
through private-public partnerships, which go to best bidders, not to best
buddies.

We would have independent ombudsmen and standards compliance bodies, which
make sure that minimum standards are maintained in all public and private
health establishments. We would emphasise that responsibilities are as
important as rights, and we would have a completely different Aids policy,
implementing an unambiguous policy that treats HIV as an ordinary disease
without secrecy provisions, and we would have more testing, more treatment,
more training and more support.

The current system fails because it is top-down, the Minister decides
everything for everyone, responsibility is confusing, civil society is co-
opted, public-private partnerships go to best buddies, not bidders, and
instead of accountability we have charters.

How does the nursing council Bill fit into the overall picture with the
same flaws, only more? I will mention four of the worst. The council is not
elected; the IFP would have preferred it to be democratically elected and
provided freedom of choice. Community service, if not handled, will lead to
nurses leaving in droves; the IFP would have preferred room for exemptions,
and nurses drawn to underserved areas by incentives.

The special provision for nurses to do quasi-medical and pharmacy work
could, in our opinion, be dangerous; the IFP would prefer a primary health
care nurse category, with the nurses licensed to do the work for which they
are qualified.

As far as foreign nurses are concerned, experience and training should be
welcomed in our hospitals. They will now be interfered with.

Unfortunately, because of the short-term needs of the country, the IFP will
support the Bill. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms M N S MANANA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, I feel very
honoured and privileged to take part in this important debate. I rise on
behalf of the ANC and as a nurse to support this Bill. This is the most
important piece of legislation that affects nurses and midwives in the
country. Nursing is a caring profession and is practised by a person who is
registered with the council as a professional nurse, midwife, staff nurse
and auxiliary nurse, as stated in clause 31.

I must state from the onset that the member from the DA indicated that she
is not going to support this Bill, as usual. As members of the committee,
we are not amazed by her behaviour. But, as the ANC, we will continue to
try to make a better life for our people, as we promised them.

Amongst the objectives of this Bill are the following: to promote
guidelines regarding health standards and standards of nursing education
and training, and to provide for the registration of nurses and the keeping
of registers. Regarding education and training, a nursing institution that
intends to conduct a nursing education and training programme in order to
prepare persons for practice in any one of the categories as mentioned
above must, firstly, apply to the council in writing for accreditation, and
submit information on the education and training programme to be provided,
and how it will meet the prescribed standards and conditions for education
and training.

Secondly, a nursing institution must furnish any other information that may
be required by the council for accreditation or approval of the education
and training programme. It must also be paid the fees as prescribed by the
council. The council may refuse or grant conditional or provisional
accreditation. The council must then issue an accreditation certificate for
a nursing education institution. Concerning contravention of this clause,
the institution or person guilty of an offence will be convicted, fined or
imprisoned for two years or get both a fine and imprisonment.

When it comes to registration prerequisites to practice: In terms of this
Act, no person may practise unless registered to practise in the category
for which he is trained - any new category may be created by the Minister.
An employer must employ and retain persons to perform functions pertaining
to the profession with necessary qualifications and be registered as such.

The registrar may only register a person if satisfied that the information
and documentation in support of the application for  registration meet the
requirements. Upon receipt of the prescribed fee, a certificate will be
issued to authorise the application to practise in the nursing profession.
If the registrar is not satisfied regarding the information and
documentation submitted, he or she must refuse to issue a registration
certificate and must inform the applicant in writing of the reason for such
decision.

Regarding the registration of learners: In line with the functions of the
council pertaining to nursing education, the Bill provides an additional
mechanism for protecting the public through registration of learners. In
addition, health facilities are requested to restrict access to clinical
facilities for the purpose of training to those learners that are
registered with the council as learners.

Ngithanda ukwazisa abantu ukuthi uma ufuna ukufundela ukuba ngumhlengikazi
kufanele ubhalise kulo mkhandlu. Abantu mabaqaphele, khona bengeke badlelwe
izimali zabo yizikole ezingekho emthethweni ezithi ziqeqesha abahlengikazi
zibe nazo zingabhalisile kulo mkhandlu.

Izindawo lapho abahlengikazi befunda khona kufanele zibikwe, zinikwe imvume
ngumkhandlu. Kufanele zilandele imigomo yalo mkhandlu wamanesi. Uma
zehluleka ukwenze njalo, zifana nezephula umthetho. Umuntu ongakwenzi lokho
angajeziswa aphinde aboshwe iminyaka emibili. (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to inform people that if they want to study to become a
nurse, they must register with this council. People should be aware so that
they won’t be robbed of their money by these fly-by-night educational
institutions that are claiming to be training nurses without being
registered with this council.

Institutions where nurses are studying should be reported and given a
permit by the council. They must follow the guidelines set by the nursing
council, failing which they will be breaking the law. Any person who does
not do this may be prosecuted and sentenced to two years in jail.]

The council may provide limited registration to a person if he or she has a
qualification that does not meet the required standards of education and
training; does not comply with clause 31; does not have the required
professional knowledge, skills and ability; and is in the Republic for a
limited period for the purpose of practise, research or education.

A person may register an additional qualification after applying to the
council in writing for such registration, if he or she complies with
conditions, furnishes the prescribed particulars and pays a prescribed fee.
The council must ensure that the prescribed ethical conduct pertaining to
research related to the practise of nursing is adhered to. Regarding a
person who acts in contravention of the ethical rules or any other law, the
council may institute appropriate disciplinary action against that person.

All categories of nurses are going to be kept in one register, unlike
before where there were separate prescribed registers and enrolment lists
in respect of different prescribed categories of practitioners. The
register must be kept and maintained by the office of the registrar. A
register for non-practising members will be kept. Persons who go back into
practice will have their names moved to the main register.

The introduction of community service for nurses through this Bill is part
of the roll-out programme of community service concerning health
professionals. Currently, I am sure there are nine to 10 other professions
that have started to do community service, such as doctors and pharmacists.
This is not an internship as nurses do it on completion of their training.
A person who is a citizen of South Africa and intends to register for the
first time to practise as a professional in a prescribed category must
perform remunerative community service for one year at a public health
facility.

Removal from and restoration . . . [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I regret your time has
expired. Please conclude.

Ms M N S MANANA: In conclusion, this Bill will assist the public regarding
its purpose. The council will uphold human rights as enshrined in the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Chair and hon members, up until now the nursing
profession has been regulated by a 27-year-old piece of legislation. It
comes as no surprise that this legislation is outdated in various ways.

The primary deficiency in the old Act is the focus on rights concerning the
nursing profession, as opposed to the rights of the public to proper health
care. Certainly, the profession requires protection of its members’ rights,
but not to the exclusion of the rights of the public. The Bill achieves
this balance between the rights of the nurses and those of the public
through a better defined and, hopefully, better functioning council and
registrar.

Further, the Bill places a very high standard of conduct upon the
profession and recognises that nurses, like teachers and police officers,
form the backbone of our society. But whilst we rightly demand the highest
of standards and professional conduct from these individuals, we should
also recognise their value to society by providing adequate compensation.
The salaries that most nurses currently receive simply cannot sufficiently
reflect their value.

We urge the Minister to reassess the current salary structures of nurses
who are in the Public Service. We support the Bill. [Applause.][Time
expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Matsemela. Hon members, this is
her maiden speech. [Applause.]

Ms M L MATSEMELA: Madam Chair, hon Minister of Health, hon members, I am
privileged to stand at this podium for the first time to speak in this
important debate. I am privileged, because I come from an organisation, the
ANC, committed to the quality of life of our people, and in particular
their health status. The Bill is therefore another attempt on the road to
better health care for all our people, in particular the poor.

Against this background, we in the ANC are guided by the seminal document,
the Freedom Charter, adopted by the Congress of the People on 26 June 1955,
55 years ago. As we celebrate our achievements, we are continuously mindful
of the historic task facing us in the ANC, that of creating a better life
for all. In this regard, our challenge in the health sector is to create a
comprehensive programme to eliminate the vast inequalities inherited, and
that is, increased efficiency, effectiveness, quality and governance. This
needs a determined political will.

As the government of the day, the ANC has, through the overwhelming mandate
given by the electorate, obtained the right to give expression to their
aspirations. Every citizen in this country has the right to achieve optimal
health, and it is the responsibility of the state to provide this. Health
and health care, like other social services, and particularly where they
serve women and children, must not be allowed to suffer.

Central to this are the role of statutory councils and its role relating to
governance of the health sector in South Africa, in particular in regard to
health professionals, medical schemes, medicines control and research. The
Bill before us today seeks to do precisely that, namely to strengthen it in
terms of its membership, operational procedures, accountability, good
governance, and so forth.

With regard to the latter, the Bill is unambiguous. Chapter 3, clause 46,
provides for the mechanisms to deal with matters in regard to
unprofessional conduct, and it is indeed significant that the support for
this clause was amplified during the public hearings. As a movement for
fundamental change, the ANC welcomes this provision, given that we place a
high premium on the disposition of those who get appointed to positions of
leadership.

We believe that they should be informed by the desire and the commitment to
serve. They should be persons who unite and guide the council and inspire
confidence. Moreover, we are vigilant about those who use councils such as
the Nursing Council to create their own fiefdoms with scant regard for the
ethos that should guide this.

We have made significant progress with respect to delivering on the aspect
of the Freedom Charter which relates directly to the provision of health
services. We are delivering health services free at the point of delivery
to children under the age of six and to pregnant and lactating women, as
well as to people with disabilities and for those who cannot afford it.

One of the key priorities of this government and the national Department of
Health is obviously to improve the quality of care primarily to restore the
dignity of our people. In this regard we will remain vigilant against any
unprofessional conduct by health professionals, and in terms of this Bill,
that of nurses and midwives. We will ensure that the application and the
conduct of nurses and midwives are improved at all levels and that
community participation in health issues is strengthened.

Key challenges facing our health sector include the persistently low morale
of nursing staff, enhancing the recruitment and retention of health workers
in general, lack of proper management and utilisation of resources and
enacting legislation to ensure the entire nation has access to safe and
affordable medicines. Some of these challenges require collective
prioritisation, communities and health users taking greater responsibility
for the delivery of health care at all levels.

We believe that the transformation of the statutory council will enable
them not only to reflect the diversity of the South African health
professionals, but also to promote and protect standards of conduct to
protect the rights and interests of patients and clients.

In conclusion, I therefore deem the Nursing Bill essential for good
governance. It ensures norms and standards and accountability, and last,
but not least, promotes efficiency and compassionate delivery of services.

The ANC supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Chair, frustrated Eastern Cape health workers last week
lashed out at the health department for gross staff shortages at public
hospitals and clinics, saying they were simply unable to attend to the
large numbers of patients who flock there daily. At some clinics hundreds
of patients are turned away every day after queueing for hours, because
nurses are overburdened and unable to cope. [Interjections.] You may not
care, but the people of South Africa do!

Exhausted nurses have had enough and are resigning. This Bill sadly does
nothing to boost the confidence of the nursing profession or alleviate the
mounting stresses and impending crisis. The ACDP is committed to quality
health care delivery and recognises the need for legislation, which
protects the public. Patients’ safety and quality care continue to be
elusive, however, as chronic and critical shortages of the health care
workforce continue to increase. The World Bank has identified nurses and
midwives as the most cost-effective resource for delivering high-quality
health care in both new and established economies.

The health care system in South Africa, as it is in many other countries,
is nurse centred, and this Bill defines who a nurse is, and what a nurse
can and cannot do, primarily for the purpose of protecting the public. It
is essential that health professionals being regulated are also competent
to practise, and that competencies for nursing roles are linked with
relevant education.
The general content of the Bill is supported by nurses. However, there are
grave concerns that the Bill does little to instil confidence in nursing as
a profession, and this is important if we hope to retain and attract nurses
to this profession. The Bill gives unfettered power to the Minister to
determine what should be happening to nurses and midwives, burdens the most
impoverished professional group and ignores democratic processes.

For this reason the ADCP will vote against this Bill.

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Chairperson, just for information’s sake, Madam Dianne
Kohler-Barnard, it is unfortunate that you didn’t hear what the SA Nursing
Council and Denosa were saying to us after the presentation, and the manner
in which they said that we were so accommodating and thanked us for it.
[Applause.]

It is no coincidence that the Bill before us today comes at a time when we
are celebrating 50 years of the Freedom Charter and, as the ANC, we are
indeed reflecting on the significant progress we have made as a country in
regard to delivering on the aspects of the Freedom Charter as it relates to
the health sector in particular.

In the January 8, 2005 statement, our movement has declared itself thus,
and I quote:


  We will strive to improve service in health facilities through improved
  training, recruitment and retention of health personnel, improved
  infrastructure and enhanced health promotion and awareness.

In context, this ANC-led government has, through government’s ten-year
review, created a barometer to gauge our successes and challenges in
relation to transformation and to develop an understanding of the
challenges still facing us.

As a movement steeped in the tradition of introspection, we are obviously
cautious of what still needs to be done to arrive at an equitable system
that will help redress the backlogs, improve access, increase efficiency
and ensure accountability by all, particularly those in management.

When we assumed government in 1994, we, for the implementation of the
Freedom Charter, adopted the Reconstruction and Development Programme as an
integrated, coherent, socioeconomic policy framework for meeting the basic
needs of all our people.

As first priorities in this regard, the RDP identified land, housing,
water, electricity, telecommunications, transport and a clean and healthy
environment, nutrition, health care and social welfare. It said that, in
this way, we would be able to begin to reconstruct family and community
life in our society. The RDP therefore committed the democratic government
to move our country decisively forward towards social transformation and
the eradication of poverty and underdevelopment.

It is indeed appropriate that we juxtapose this debate against the
background prescripts of the RDP and the Freedom Charter, and we therefore
have no doubt that the role being played by the government in policy
formulation, creating the legislative framework, setting norms and
standards for health, governance and regulation of the health sector, is
the correct one. The mandate given to us by the overwhelming majority of
our people is testimony to this.

The Nursing Bill we are debating today is but one of the critical
instruments that will ensure the transformation of statutory councils for
health. This Bill therefore establishes a fully transformed and
representative SA Nursing Council. This Bill therefore recognises the
critical importance of the nursing profession, and provides for the
upholding and maintenance of the professional and ethical standards of
nursing.

In this regard, clause 58 provides for a Minister of Health, after
consultation with the council, to make regulations in relation to the
appointment to and functioning of the council; registration of requirements
relating to qualifications; accreditation of the education and training
institutions and private practice; professional conduct; inquiries; appeals
and penalties; removal from and restoration to the register, and so on.

In terms of the report of the task team on statutory councils that was
appointed by the Minister, not only is it the prerogative of government to
set policy for governance within the framework of the Constitution, but it
is also its responsibility.

As the ANC, we welcome these provisions since they will ensure
accountability as opposed to having a situation where councils are a law
unto themselves. We believe that councils should be fulfilling the
responsibilities they are entrusted with. Hence, we are endorsing the
critical role the Minister has to play, as enshrined in the Bill.

An important component of accountability is transparency, and regular
monitoring of the council’s performance and evaluation of delivery on its
mandate in terms of quality and quantity are critical elements that must
inform these regulations. We believe that a prerequisite for inculcating
accountability is for each member on the council to have a clear
understanding of his/her duties. The demand put to the current SA Nursing
Council is to continue its good work and reinforce accountability and
improvement of quality of service.

The Bill also ensures that private education and training institutions
comply with all regulations governing the nursing profession. This will
primarily be to ensure the convergence of practice and policy, as outlined
in the 1997 White Paper on the Transformation of the Health System.

Yes, health professionals are the cornerstones of the health system, and
they are entrusted not only with improving the quality of care, but also
contributing towards the human dignity of those in their care. In this
regard, the Constitution, through chapter 2, section 27, has placed the
burden of this on us as government. By extension, the national Department
of Health has to realise this right. We therefore argue that for effective
service delivery, a clear understanding of the constitutional and
legislative imperatives is critical.

The debate on the need for transformation of the health sector in general
and statutory councils in particular, must be seen in the context of the
developmental state, which must, in our situation, continue to create the
framework within which health is promoted. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Ms P TSHWETE: Madam Chairperson, hon Minister of Health and Deputy Minister
of Arts and Culture, hon members, it is a privilege and an honour for me to
be taking part in this debate on the Nursing Bill. This is part of a
process of consolidating the developmental nature of the South African
state.

I would like to remind hon Kohler-Barnard that one of the requirements of
section 5 of the Nursing Act of 1978, up to 1992, is for the Minister to
appoint an officer of the Department of Health and at least two people who
are not registered with any existing professional council.

The list of members is long, but the interesting part is that of the 10
registered nurses, five were to be white - which was then European, I think
– three Bantu, one coloured and one Indian, to be elected in accordance
with the prescribed manner and procedures by white, Bantu, coloured and
Indian registered nurses and midwives, respectively. [Interjections.] This
is totally not right and not in line with the present dispensation.
[Interjections.]

Asizi kuthatha imigaqo-nkqubo kaRina Venter apha. Siza kuqhuba sibheke
phambili, kwaye anizi kuphatha niphethwe. [Kwahlekwa.] [We are not going to
use Rina Venter’s policies here. We are moving forward and you will not
rule while you are being ruled. [Laughter.]]

We are not going to accept and be driven by Rina Venter’s policies . . .

 . . . kulo rhulumente simlweleyo. [ . . . not in the new government we
fought for.]

Kohler-Barnard . . .

An HON MEMBER: The honourable . . .

Ms P TSHWETE: . . . hon Kohler-Barnard – by the way, sometimes I even
forget that you are honourable when you speak at the meetings, because at
times you become so rude – is busy talking about cockroaches in our
hospitals. She’s not talking about Rina Venter, who did not even know that
it was important to have a hospital in a rural area. [Interjections.]

The role of the Nursing Council . . . listen! Wait, I’ll tell you. The role
of the Nursing Council is primarily to protect and serve public interests,
for your information. The Nursing Council therefore is acting on behalf of
the Minister, and it is the Minister of Health who has to exercise
stewardship over communities on the role of the council. Thus the Nursing
Council, on behalf of the Minister, must ensure that health care users, not
patients this time, receive health care services in a dignified and
respectable manner, without their constitutional right being infringed
upon.

This time the nomination of members of the council, as well as the short
listing thereof, will be done through elections, because these processes
have proven to be very costly . . .

 . . . ezi nkqubo uzifunayo wena. [ . . . the ones you advocate.]

Remember, R1,4 million was spent on an election in which participation by
the nursing profession was only seven per cent. There can’t be any
justification for continuing costly exercises such as these, when the
turnout continues to be low and the racial composition is not addressed by
these elections.

Uyabona ke apho kubuhlungu khona? Sele besithi yizani size kunyula, bathi
yizani neNdiya elinye. Bayanixelela ukuba yenzani ntoni. Ngoku bathi
uMphathiswa wethu bakabe ngunopopi, angabi nandima ayidlalayo kwibhunga.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Can you see where the problem is with that? When it is time for elections,
they even tell you that you should have one Indian person. They prescribe
for you. They now want our Minister to rubberstamp policies and not take
part in the council.]

That is what they are saying, and we are not going to allow that.
[Applause.] The ANC government is saying that the Bill intends to transform
the Nursing Council. We are transforming the Nursing Council.

Le naniyifakile nina, ethi . . . [The one you appointed, which says . . . ]

 . . . one Bantu, one White, one Indian; we are transforming it. This time
the Nursing Council is going to be made up of 25 members, whether you like
it or not. [Interjections.]

Again, we say as the ANC, let us provide the skills that are needed by the
Nursing Council. We want to ensure that it is nonsexist, nonracist, and
that it moves away from being prescriptive. The Minister will appoint,
after consultation with the Nursing Council, a chairperson . . .

 . . . nithanda ningathandi. Kufanelekile ukuba uMphathiswa abe nendima
ebalulekileyo ayidlalayo kuba wena . . . [ . . . like it or not. It is
vital for the Minister to play a significant role because you . . . ]

 . . . hon Kohler-Barnard, when you go to these hospitals you expect the
Minister to answer or to be accountable. Why is the Minister not going to
play a role in the Nursing Council this time? It’s not going to be like
that. Therefore it is quite right for the Minister of Health to appoint the
chairperson and the registrar of the Nursing Council, after consultation
with the Nursing Council.

In conclusion, I would like to thank our chairperson, Comrade James Ngculu,
for his leadership and support.

UQabane uNgculu akhange angaxhaswa yi-Denosa. Futhi musani ukusebenzisa
igama leDenosa, iya kunibetha, ngoba khange izithethe ezi zinto
benizithetha apha. [Comrade Ngculu has always enjoyed the support of
Denosa. May I also ask you not to implicate Denosa, as it is totally
opposed to that because it never pronounced on any of the things you talked
about.]

The ANC supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Mphathisihlalo, nginemizuzu emincane kabi yokuthi
ngiphendule kodwa ngicela ukubonga bonke laba abeseke lo Mthetho. Ngicela
ukusho nje kumhlonishwa u-Rabinowitz ukuthi lo Mthetho esiwushaya namhlanje
ufuna ukubhekelela zonke lezi zinto abekhuluma ngazo. Kodwa angiboni ukuthi
uyoke usiphathe lesi situlo, ngakho ungazikhohlisi. [Uhleko.]

MaNkabinde siyabonga kakhulu ngalokhu okhuluma ngakho ukuthi kufanele
sibhekisise kahle imiholo yamanesi. Siphansi phezulu nokwenza konke lokho
hhayi emanesini kuphela. Siyabonga kakhulu.

Ngicela futhi ukusho ukuthiu-Dianne akazi nokuthi sikhuluma ngani. Ukhuluma
ngezinye nje izinto. Thina sikhuluma ngomthetho lapha kodwa yena ukhuluma
ngezinye izinto ezingekho emthethweni. Kufanele sikufunde ukuthi uma
kuzokhulunywa lapha kukhulunywa kanjani. Angisho nje ukuthi nina be-DA
angive nginizwela. Ngisho iphephandaba i-Business Day lithi lona
onikhulumelayo unifakela amahloni ngoba akwenzayo . . . (Translation of
Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I have very few minutes in which to
respond, but I should like to thank all those who supported this Bill. I
wish to say to the hon Rabinowitz that this Bill that we are passing today
aims at looking at all the things that she spoke about. But I do not think
she will ever be in this seat, so she must not fool herself. [Laughter.]

Ms Nkabinde, we thank you very much for the point you raised about the
nurses’ salary structures. We are looking at that issue right now, and not
only the nurses’ salaries. We thank you very much.

Let me please say once again that Dianne does not even know what we are
talking about here. She is just talking about other things. We are talking
about a Bill here and yet she talks about things that do not even appear in
the Bill. We need to learn how to speak here at the podium. Well, let me
also say that I feel very sorry for the DA. Even the Business Day newspaper
correctly said that your spokesperson on health issues shames you because
what she does . . ]

 . . . she is developing a reputation as a thoroughly unreliable source of
information on her specialist subject . . .
Ngiyanizwela. Funani omunye umuntu. [Uhleko.] Kodwa ake ngithi-ke
ukunifundisa. [I feel very sorry for you. Look for another person.
[Laughter.] But let me give you a few lessons.]

As I said, I would like to take this opportunity to educate the DA on the
meaning of democracy. Democracy means the right of the people of this
country to elect their own representatives to ensure that their interests
are protected at all times. The people of this country have elected the ANC
. . . [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please, members! Order! Order,
please!

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: . . . to represent their interests here in this
House and they did so with an overwhelming majority.

Beningobani-ke nina, nimele bani futhi? [Who are you after all, who are you
representing?]

So what we do as the representatives of the people is to promote and defend
their interests at all times. Therefore the Bill in front of us is
primarily and fundamentally about the protection and promotion of the
people’s interests through the establishment of a council that will ensure
the highest standards of professional conduct by those who belong to the
nursing profession.

Aniwufundidisanga nakahle lo Mthetho futhi anazi nokuthi uthini. Benihleli
nje ningavulile izindlebe. [You did not even study this Bill properly and
you do not even know what it says. You were just idly sitting and not
listening.]

I am not surprised that the DA, through its spokesperson . . .

 . . . sengimchazile-ke ukuthi ungumuntu onjani . . . [ . . . I have
already described what kind of a person she is . . . ]

. . . used the objective of the Nursing Council to promote parochial
interests of nurses by nurses.

Kufana nani lokho. [That is very much like them.]

Their basic understanding of democracy is one in which the parochial
interests of an inward-looking group are promoted, and they defend some
minority interests against some imagined enemies falling outside the group.
[Interjections.]

Such a narrow understanding of the professional council is archaic and
should be banished to the annals of history, together with the DA. The
nurses of this country have spoken and have nothing to fear from their
elected representatives, because they are part of the people they serve.

Ngakho-ke ngiyabonga kakhulu kulaba abeseke lo Mthetho. Hlalani ninjalo
nina! [Ihlombe.] [Therefore I thank all those who supported this Bill. You,
remain as you are! [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES-165: Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Baloyi, M
  R; Bekker, H J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu , M J; Bhengu,
  P; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W;
  Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Cele, M A; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
  Combrinck, J J; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M;
  Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlhamini, B W; Dodovu, T S; Fihla, N B;
  Frolick, C T; Fubbs , J L; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gololo,
  C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, M M; Hogan, B A; Jacobus, L ;
  Jeffery, J H; Johnson, M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Khoarai, L P;
  Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W;
  Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S;
  Lishivha, T E; Lucas, E J; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Mabena, D C;
  Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madella, A F; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R;
  Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahote, S; Maine,
  M S; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P;
  Manana, M N S; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B
  L; Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S;
  Mlangeni, A; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L
  J; Mofokeng, T R; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Montsitsi, S D;
  Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A;
  Mthembu, B; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A
  C; Nene, N M; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J;
  Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A;
  Nkabinde, N C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M
  D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Phala, M
  J; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Ramodibe, D M; Ramphele, T
  D H; Scheemann, G D; Schippers, J; September , C C; Sibande, M P;
  Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S ; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Sikakane, M R; Skhosana, W
  M; Smith, P F; Smith , V G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Tobias, T
  V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J;
  Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Van der Heever, R P Z; Van Wyk, A; Vezi, T E; Vos, S
  C; Wang, Y; Xingwana, L M ; Zikalala, C N.


  NOES-29: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A
  M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Jankielsohn, L;
  Joubert, L K; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M;
  Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R;
  Selfe, J; Smuts, M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P; Swathe, M M; Trent, E
  W; Van Dyk, S M; Weber, H.


As the result of the division showed that there was not a majority of the
members of the Assembly present for a vote to be taken on a Bill as
required by Rule 25(2)(a), decision of question postponed.

The House adjourned at 17:58.
                                 __________

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           FRIDAY, 28 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


     (1)    The JTM on 25 October 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


            i) Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29 – 2005 (Reintroduced)]
               (National Assembly – sec 75)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for 2004-
         2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 199-2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the
    Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment Bill [B
    32-2005] (National Assembly-sec 75), dated 27 October 2005:

         The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
         subject of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa
         Amendment Bill [B 32-2005] (National Assembly-sec 75), referred to
         it, and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75
         Bill, presents the Independent Communications Authority of South
         Africa Amendment Bill [B 32B – 2005].


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the
    Convergence Bill [B 9-2005] (National Assembly-sec 75), dated 27
    October 2005:

         The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
         subject of the Convergence Bill [B 9-2005] (National Assembly-sec
         75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         as a section 75 Bill, presents the Electronic Communications Bill
         [B 9B – 2005].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee  on  Finance  on  a  Study  Tour  to
    Australia and  New  Zealand  during  the  period  5  -  15  June  2005:
    “Rationalisation of the Regulation of the Financial  Services  Sector”,
    dated 21 October 2005:

    Introduction

    Between 5 and 15 June 2005,  members  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Finance undertook a study tour to Australia and New  Zealand  to  learn
    from  those  countries’  experiences  of   rationalizing   institutions
    responsible for the regulation of the  financial  sector.  The  present
    study tour needs to be seen as complementing a similar  study  tour  to
    Britain undertaken  by  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Finance  in  the
    previous parliament. The present report needs to be read together  with
    the report on that visit published in the ATC dated 4 December 2003.

    An active debate is underway in South Africa  about  rationalizing  the
    institutions responsible for regulation of  the  financial  sector.  At
    present  prudential  regulation  of   the   banking   sector   is   the
    responsibility of the South African Reserve Bank,  while  a  number  of
    other  institutions  reporting  to  three  government  departments  are
    responsible for prudential regulation of other  financial  institutions
    and  market  conduct/consumer  protection.  In  addition,   issues   of
    transformation and extending financial services to lower income  people
    are being dealt with through  the  Financial  Sector  Charter  Council.
    While no firm decisions have yet been taken on the precise form which a
    rationalization process in South  Africa  should  assume,  there  is  a
    growing consensus that simply maintaining the  status  quo  is  not  an
    option.


    The Significance of the Australasian Experience


    The  British  “model”,  studied  by  our  predecessors  in   the   last
    Parliament,  represents  one  key  experience.  In  1997,  the   Labour
    Government established a  single  financial  regulator,  the  Financial
    Services Authority. As with most significant reform episodes, this  was
    given impetus by a perceived failure of the previous regulatory  system
    – in this case prompted by  the  collapse  of  the  Barings  Bank.  The
    essential feature of the British single financial  regulator  model  is
    that one authority, the Financial Services  Authority,  is  responsible
    both for prudential regulation of all financial  institutions  and  for
    market conduct/consumer protection regulation. Under this  system,  the
    Bank of England has no direct role  in  prudential  regulation  of  the
    banks,  but  retains  responsibility  for  overall  stability  of   the
    financial system – a responsibility which it discharges mainly  through
    the publication of a regular Financial Stability Report.


    The Australian system represents a significant systemic alternative  to
    the British single regulator model – known as the “twin  peaks”  model.
    It came into existence in 1998, as a response to recommendations of the
    Financial System Inquiry (the Wallis  Committee)  report  published  in
    1996. One of the significant factors underlying the  Australian  reform
    was a perception that lines of demarcation  between  the  operation  of
    banks and other financial institutions were becoming blurred and that a
    system of prudential regulation  that  focused  largely  on  banks  was
    inadequate to the emerging reality of financial markets. The  essential
    feature of the Australian “twin peaks” model is  the  establishment  of
    two distinct institutions responsible  for  prudential  regulation  and
    market conduct/consumer protection regulation respectively.


    The Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority  (APRA)  is  responsible
    for the supervision of  banks,  long  term  and  short  term  insurance
    companies and superannuation (retirement)  funds.  As  in  the  British
    system, the Reserve Bank has no direct  responsibility  for  prudential
    regulation of the  banks  –  although  it  retains  responsibility  for
    monetary policy and the maintenance of financial  stability,  including
    stability of the payments system.


    The other “peak” in the Australian system is the Australian  Securities
    and Investments Commission  (ASIC)  which  is  responsible  for  market
    conduct and consumer protection across the financial  system.  ASIC  is
    also responsible for company registration (not just of financial sector
    companies) as well as insolvency and securities regulation.  It  has  a
    large  enforcement  division   staffed   by   lawyers,   analysts   and
    investigators that prepare cases for prosecution.


    Both APRA and ASIC operate independently of government but according to
    mandates set out in laws and policy  directives  set  out  by  Treasury
    Ministers. They both participate, along with the Treasury  and  Reserve
    Bank, in the Council of Financial Regulators (CFR) that operates  as  a
    coordinating mechanism.


    New Zealand does not represent a systemic model, but is interesting  as
    a country that is moving from a system described as “light  regulation”
    towards establishing a stronger system of regulation. New  Zealand  has
    specific characteristics arising from  the  fact  that  most  financial
    institutions operating in the country are  Australian.  The  system  to
    adopt is, nevertheless, subject to debate with  no  obvious  indication
    that the Australian model will necessarily be adopted in New Zealand.


    Assessment by Persons Interviewed


    The Committee was extremely fortunate to be able to meet with  a  broad
    range  of  knowledgeable  persons  from   most   of   the   significant
    institutions as well as with academics who have  followed  developments
    in the field. This included the Chairpersons of both APRA and ASIC (for
    a full list of respondents see Appendix).


    All respondents from Australia expressed general satisfaction with  the
    “twin peaks” system and indicated that there was no dynamic that  would
    lead Australia to adopt a single financial  regulatory  system  in  the
    near future. A number said that they were not necessarily  recommending
    it as a model for others to emulate, or arguing that it was better than
    the single financial regulatory  system,  but  all  felt  that  it  was
    working well in Australia. Even respondents from the Reserve Bank,  who
    acknowledged  that  the  Bank  had  initially   opposed   taking   bank
    supervision away from it, said that they believed that  the  model  was
    working well and said that they had close  working  relationships  with
    APRA.


    APRA had, however, undergone a major challenge within two years of  its
    establishment with the case of the HIH insurance  company.  HIH  was  a
    general insurance company which collapsed amidst indications of serious
    fraud in  connection  with  re-insurance  deals.  Several  of  its  top
    executives were later convicted of criminal offences.  APRA  informants
    told us that the perception underlying the creation of APRA – that  the
    distinction between banks and insurance companies had become blurred  –
    had initially led APRA to under estimate the need for its staff members
    to develop specialist focuses on particular institutions. We were  told
    that this had since been corrected  and  that  staff  members  are  now
    focusing on a main sector, in addition to maintaining a  broader  watch
    over others.


    Respondents at ASIC were perhaps the strongest proponents of the  “twin
    peaks” model. They pointed, first, to the arguments put forward in  the
    Wallis Commission. It had argued that a single  regulator  model  would
    create an authority that would be too powerful and  too  unwieldy.  The
    Commission felt that it was too early to move  in  this  direction  and
    therefore recommended trying the “twin  peaks”  system  first.  Another
    point made by the Commission was that the “culture” of  prudential  and
    market conduct/consumer protection regulation  differed  significantly.
    The latter point was emphasized by a number  of  respondents  in  ASIC.
    They argued that there was an inherent “clash of cultures” between  the
    two types of regulatory activity. In the Australian context, this  came
    to a head on the issue of disclosure.  The  fundamental  philosophy  of
    ASIC  was  that  consumer  protection  would  be  enhanced  by  maximum
    disclosure. Review of the fairness or otherwise of  contracts  was  not
    the real focus  of  market  conduct  regulation  by  ASIC.  Rather  the
    emphasis was on ensuring that clients received full  information  about
    the contracts they were entering into and that  markets  were  provided
    with full information about any change in the circumstances  of  market
    players.


    The prudential regulator, APRA, on the other  hand  sometimes  favoured
    non-disclosure to the market in cases where it judged disclosure  might
    provoke a market reaction that would jeopardize systemic stability. Our
    respondents argued that such tensions were inherent in  any  regulatory
    system that embraced both functions.  Respondents  in  ASIC  tended  to
    argue  that  the  twin  peaks  model  with  the  Council  of  Financial
    Regulators (CFR) operating as a clearing house  for  decisions  in  the
    event of a conflict of views was preferable to the  British  FSA  model
    where the conflict would be sorted out “in house” in the  agency.  They
    indicated that the principle established in  the  CFR  was  that  where
    there was a clear prudential regulatory imperative,  this  would  trump
    the market conduct regulator’s positions, but that information would be
    made available to the market as soon as possible. However,  there  were
    many decisions where a “trade off”  was  required  and  both  ASIC  and
    Treasury respondents argued that one of the  major  advantages  of  the
    “twin peaks” plus CFR model was that where such a trade off had  to  be
    made it would be more transparent, the product of  open  dialogue  and,
    with Treasury representation on the CFR, be seen as a decision with the
    political  backing  of  government  –   which   would   be   ultimately
    responsible. APRA respondents were,  however,  somewhat  less  sanguine
    arguing that taking “trade off”  issues  to  the  CFR  sometimes  meant
    “messy” external fights that under  the  British  FSA  model  would  be
    settled internally.


    The New Zealand experience is relevant in  that  they  are  seeking  to
    change and strengthen their regulatory system. For more than 20  years,
    the country has had what was  repeatedly  described  to  us  as  “light
    regulation”. The system had relied on three pillars:


 1. Self-regulation by institutions;
 2. Market discipline; and
 3. Regulatory discipline.


    For most of the past two decades it was the first two  that  were  most
    emphasized,  with  the  third  being  “light  handed”.   For   non-bank
    institutions all that was required was disclosure to clients. Insurance
    companies, for example, do not have to be licenced but have  to  either
    secure an agency rating or advise clients that they have opted  not  to
    seek such a rating. The definition of banks (subject to  regulation  by
    the Reserve Bank) is based only on the use of the term  “bank”  in  the
    name of the institution not on  the  function  performed.  Any  finance
    company can accept deposits and carry out functions normally associated
    with a bank as long as it does  not  call  itself  a  bank.  For  banks
    supervised by the Reserve Bank, the system in place is based on meeting
    the Basel 1 requirements with  the  Bank  moving  towards  implementing
    Basel 2. However, the Reserve Bank does not itself  monitor  compliance
    with capital adequacy requirements  etc.  This,  rather,  is  monitored
    through outside auditors that reported to the Reserve Bank. The Reserve
    Bank can, however, give directions via the Minister of Finance to place
    defaulting banks in statutory management. These, in practice, are  very
    few and far between. A Treasury official told us  that  the  difference
    between APRA and the New Zealand  Reserve  Bank  (NZRB)  is  that  APRA
    issues directives, whereas the NZRB  “has a chat” with any  institution
    about which it is concerned.


    We were told that there was a growing feeling in New Zealand that  this
    system of “light handed” regulation was  not  adequate.  Amongst  other
    things, the country had seen the emergence of a number  of  unregulated
    finance companies that were both unsafe and  were  charging  exorbitant
    interest. Although we were told that none of these  posed  any  serious
    risk to the systemic stability of the  New  Zealand  financial  system,
    significant numbers of people  were  at  risk  of  losing  savings  and
    deposits. There was thus a move afoot to  reform  the  system  and  the
    Ministry of Economic Development was preparing  a  discussion  document
    identifying options in this regard. We were also told that  legislation
    on financial intermediaries was likely to be tabled shortly.


    We did not receive any clear indications of what  form  a  strengthened
    system of financial regulation in  New  Zealand  would  take.  However,
    several principles and considerations were mentioned to us.  First,  we
    were told that decisions on institutional arrangements would  be  based
    on a clear identification of the outcomes that  regulatory  reform  was
    expected to achieve. Second, there are the  specific  circumstances  of
    New Zealand where most banks are  Australian  subsidiaries  subject  to
    APRA regulation and also to a rule which  prioritises  Australian  over
    other clients in the event of liquidation. Third, there is  a  view  in
    New Zealand that APRA is too “hands on” and that it may not make sense,
    in view of the smallness of the country, to try to  replicate  the  two
    Australian institutions –  suggesting  perhaps  a  preference  for  the
    single regulatory model. Finally, there is no clear decision that  bank
    supervision should be taken away from the Reserve Bank.


    Conclusions and Recommendations


    Decisions on reform and rationalization of the system of regulation  of
    the financial sector in South Africa cannot involve simply  looking  at
    “models” as they operate in other  jurisdictions  and  then  having  an
    abstract debate as to which is “the best”. Rather such  decisions  need
    to be based on an analysis of our own specific  circumstances  and  the
    outcomes we need to achieve in South Africa from a process  of  reform.
    It is  only  in  that  context  that  consideration  of  “international
    experience” becomes relevant.


    The circumstances in both Australia and New Zealand are very  different
    from those in South  Africa,  and  the  challenges  and  priorities  of
    regulation in these  jurisdictions  are  thus  different  in  important
    respects from those facing us in South Africa. Both Australia  and  New
    Zealand are higher income  OECD  countries.  Neither  is  grappling  as
    serious priorities  with  issues  of  transformation  or  of  extending
    affordable financial services to large numbers of excluded people.  The
    system of consumer protection in both  Australia  and  New  Zealand  is
    based largely on disclosure –  on  the  principle  that  consumers  are
    rational market players who will take appropriate decisions if provided
    with full information. In our circumstances, the need  also  to  defend
    vulnerable consumers against unfair provisions in  contracts  has  been
    evident e.g. in a  number  of  recent  rulings  of  the  Pension  Funds
    Adjudicator. Finally, any decisions on reform/rationalization  must  be
    based on a careful identification of available human resources (as well
    as the human resource implications  of  any  change)  and  not  on  the
    simplistic  “importation”  of  models   from   elsewhere   where   such
    considerations may not apply in the same way.
    Having said that, the issue of a “clash of cultures” between prudential
    and market conduct/consumer protection regulation does seem to us to be
    important.  Historically,  in  South  Africa   we   have   had   fairly
    “sophisticated” long established  prudential  regulation  but  consumer
    protection and transformation/extension of financial services  is  more
    recent and yet to fully find its feet. Whatever regulatory reform model
    is eventually  adopted  must,  therefore,  in  our  view,  provide  for
    transparent, open  and  politically  informed  decision-making  on  any
    “trade offs” that may occur between the two forms of regulation.  Above
    all it must not allow what are “new issues” in our context of  consumer
    protection and transformation to be swamped  by  more  established  and
    possibly more traditional views on prudential regulation. Secondly, the
    decision to take bank supervision out of the  Australian  Reserve  Bank
    into APRA was made viable by  the  ability  to  transfer  most  of  the
    existing bank supervision staff to the  new  agency  and  to  establish
    within a short space of time that APRA would provide the same or better
    levels of remuneration, prestige and job satisfaction than the  Reserve
    Bank. Whether the same conditions apply in South  Africa  is  something
    that would have to  be  carefully  assessed  in  any  consideration  of
    establishing either a single regulator or a body like APRA.


    The Committee wishes to express its profound thanks  to  all  those  in
    Australia and New Zealand who shared information with us  and  also  to
    the New Zealand Parliament for providing us with a  Committee  room  in
    which to conduct our meetings.


    Appendix:


    A.  Delegation of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on study  tour  to
    Australia and New Zealand


    African National Congress


 1. Dr R Davies, Leader of delegation
 2. Mr K A Moloto
 3. Mr M L Johnson
 4. Mr B A Mnguni
 5. Mr L Gabela
 6. Ms B Hogan


    Democratic Alliance


 7. Mr I Davidson
 8. Dr S M van Dyk


    United Democratic Party


 9. Mr M Stephens


    Inkatha Freedom Party


10. Mr T E Vezi
    11.    Mr A Hermans, Committee Secretary


    B. List of Persons Consulted


 1. The Hon B Baird, Australian MP, Chairperson: Standing Committee
         on Economics, Finance and Public Administration
 2. The Hon C Bowen, Australian MP, Deputy Chairperson: Standing
         Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration
 3. The Hon L Tanner, Australian MP
 4. Dr J Laker, Chairperson: APRA
 5. Dr R Jones, Deputy Chairperson: APRA
 6. Mr C Gaskell, Head International Relations: APRA
 7. Mr S Somogyi, APRA
 8. Mr J Lucy, Chairperson: SIC
 9. Mr G Tanzer, Executive Director: Consumer Protection: ASIC
10. Mr M Rodgers, Executive Director: Regulation: ASIC
11. Ms S Chan, Lawyer, International Relations: ASIC
12. Dr P Lowe, Assistant Governor: Reserve Bank of Australia
13. Dr T Richards, Head: Economic Analysis: Reserve Bank of Australia
14. Dr M Orsmond, Deputy Head: Economic Analysis: Reserve Bank of
      Australia
15. Mr J Murphy, Executive Director:  Markets  Group,  Australian  Treasury
    Department
16. Mr D Love, Manager of Investor Protection Unit: Australian
           Treasury Department
17. Ms L Allan, Acting Manager pf Prudential Policy: Australian
           Treasury Department
18. Prof M Sathye, Head of Accounting, Banking and Finance Discipline
           and Deputy Head: School Of Business and  Government:  University
           of Canberra
19. H.E Mr A Mongalo, South African High Commission
20. Mr L Mason, General Consul: Securities Commission, New Zealand
21. Hon C Cosgrove, New Zealand, MP, Chairperson: Finance and
           Expenditure Committee
22. Hon G Copeland, New Zealand, MP, Deputy Chairperson: Finance
           and Expenditure Committee
23. Hon C Carter, MP, Minister of Ethnic Affairs, New Zealand
24. Ms F Barker, Senior Analyst: Macro Policy, Australian Treasury
           Department
25. Ms L Thomson, Manager: Legal Services: Ministry of Economic
           Development, New Zealand
26. Mr B Layton, Director: New Zealand Institute of Economic Research
           and Development
27. Mr B Scroope, Analyst, Ministry of Economic Development, New
           Zealand
28. Ms H Lan Yap, Senior Analyst, Ministry of Economic Development,
           New Zealand
29. Mr G Mortlock, Reserve Bank of New Zealand
30. Mr I Woolford, Reserve Bank of New Zealand



                           MONDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


     (1)    The JTM on 31 October 2005 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (i)     Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2005 (Reintroduced)]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Submission of Financial
          Statements by Municipalities for the financial year ended 30 June
          2005 [RP 221-2005].

2.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)    National Treasury Consolidated Financial Information for the
         year ended 31 March 2005, including:


          1. Report of the Auditor-General on the Consolidated Financial
             Information of National Departments, National Revenue Fund,
             State Debt and Tax and Loan Accounts of the National Treasury
             (“Department”) for the year ended 31 March 2005;
          2. Report of the Auditor-General on the Consolidated Financial
             Information of Constitutional Institutions, Schedule 2, 3A and
             3B Public Entities and Trading Accounts (Entities”) for the
             year ended 31 March 2005.


3.    The Minister of Labour


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance Fund
         (UIF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Micro Finance Regulatory
         Council (MFRC) for the year ended 31 December 2004.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


      a) Letter from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
         dated 26 October 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
         terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
         1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
         Annual Report of the Legal Aid Board for 2004-2005:


         LATE TABLING OF THE LEGAL AID BOARD ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2004-05


         I write to furnish reasons in terms of Section 65(2) of the Public
         Finance Management Act (PFMA) for the delay in the tabling of the
         Legal Aid Board Annual Report to Parliament. In terms of Section
         65(1) of the PFMA, all Executive Authorities are required to table
         their Annual Reports and those of the entities under their
         responsibility, financial statements and the Auditor-General’s
         report on the financial statements by the 30th September.


         Although proofs of the Legal Aid Board Annual Report were submitted
         to my office at the beginning of September 2005, the deadline for
         submission could not be met as required due to delays encountered
         during the printing of copies for tabling in Parliament.


         The Annual Report of the Board will be tabled on 28 October 2005.


         I thank you in advance for your co-operation.


         Kind regards,


         B S Mabandla
         Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      b) Letter from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
         dated 26 October 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
         terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
         1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
         Annual Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2004-
         2005:


         LATE TABLING OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION ANNUAL
         REPORT FOR 2004-05


         I write to furnish reasons in terms of Section 65(2) of the Public
         Finance Management Act (PFMA) for the delay in the tabling of the
         South African Law Reform Commission Annual Report to Parliament. In
         terms of Section 65(1) of the PFMA, all Executive Authorities are
         required to table their Annual Reports and those of the entities
         under their responsibility, financial statements and the Auditor-
         General’s report on the financial statements by the 30th September.


         The South African Law Reform Commission is one of the components of
         the Branch: Legislation and Constitutional Development in the
         Department. The Commission’s financial statements are part of the
         Departments’s annual report which was tabled on 30 September 2005.
         A report on the activities of the Commission was, however, not
         tabled as required. The Commission only met on 30 September 2005 to
         approve the report. The report has since gone for layout, design
         and printing and it is anticipated that it will be ready for
         tabling on 18 November 2005.


         I thank you in advance for your co-operation.


         Kind regards,


         B S Mabandla
         Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      c) Letter from the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs dated 27
         October 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
         section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No
         1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
         Report of Inala Farms for 2004-2005:


         INALA FARMS: TABLING OF ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS IN
         PARLIAMENT


         I acknowledge with thanks receipt of the letter dated 18 October
         2005 from the Acting Speaker, Mr G Doidge.


         Inala Farming (Pty) Ltd (Operations Company) is currently
         undergoing liquidation, and as such is involved in the court
         proceedings connected therewith. It Is for this reason that Inala
         Farms (Pty) Ltd (Property Company) has not tabled their Annual
         Report in Parliament.


         It is not clear at this stage when the liquidation process will be
         finalised.


         Kind regards


         A T DIDIZA
         MINISTER


      d) Letter from the Minister of Sport and Recreation dated 28 October
         2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
         Boxing South Africa for 2004-2005:


         Tabling of Boxing South Africa’s Annual Report


         According to section 55(1)(d) of the PFMA, the accounting authority
         of Boxing SA had to submit their Annual Report to the Executive
         authority by the end of August 2005, for tabling in the National
         Assembly by 30 September 2005.


         Boxing South Africa did not comply with section 55(1)(d) of the
         PFMA and was asked to provide a written explanation in this regard.


         The following reasons for the late submission of the Annual Report
         were provided by Boxing South Africa preventing the Executive
         Authority to comply with section 65(1)(a) of the PFMA:


          1. The Auditor-General completed the annual audit of Boxing South
             Africa and advised BSA on 27 July 2005 that the Annual
             Financial Statement would be disclaimed due to inter alia, the
             lack of an audit trail in the finances concerning tournaments,
             unsatisfactory reconciliation of the licence fees and asset
             register.
          2. The Board of Boxing SA resolved to withdraw the Financial
             Statements, rectify them and then resubmit to the Auditor
             General. The indulgence of the Minister was duly sought in
             terms of the Boxing Act.


          3. The Board’s rationale was that the Financial Statements were
             disclaimed in the previous year and to accept a second
             disclaimer would send a signal that the finances of Boxing SA
             was in disarray, which is not the true situation.


         Kind regards


         REV DR M A STOFILE
         MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
    Diamonds Amendment Bill  [B 27 – 2005 (Reintroduced)] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 31 October 2005:

         The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy,  having  considered
         the  subject  of  the  Diamonds  Amendment  Bill  [B  27   –   2005
         (Reintroduced)] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to  it,  and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as  a  section  75  Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 27A - 2005].
2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs, dated 12
    September 2005:

         The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs having considered the
         Report of the South African Parliamentary Delegation on the 17th
         Plenary Assembly Session of the Southern African Development
         Community (SADC) Parliamentary Forum, held at Dar Es Salaam,
         Tanzania, 10 – 17 December 2004, referred to it, reports that it
         has concluded its deliberations thereon.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Report of
    the South African Parliamentary Observer Mission on the 2005 Zimbabwe
    Parliamentary Elections – 31 March 2005, dated 19 October 2005:

         The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs having considered the
         Report of the South African Parliamentary Observer Mission on the
         2005 Zimbabwe Parliamentary Elections – 31 March 2005, referred to
         it, reports that:


         It has noted the report and agrees to it, but accepts different
         views from different parties;


         The Committee recommends that the report be accepted and request a
         further debate in the House.

    Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Report of
    the Public Service Commission on the Investigation into the Appointment
    of Professional Cubans in the South African Public Service, dated 19
    October 2005:

         The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs having considered the
         Report of the Public Service Commission on the Investigation into
         the Appointment of Professional Cubans in the South African Public
         Service, referred to it and reports that:


         It has noted the report and agrees to it;


         The Committee recommends that the report be accepted.


    Report to be considered.


5.    Correction of Report – PC on Home Affairs


      The Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the National
    Conference Against Child Pornography (published in the Announcements,
    Tablings and Committee Reports of 7 September 2005 (p 1767), contained
    an error under the heading of Mr Patrick Chauke, Chairperson: Home
    Affairs Parliamentary Portfolio Committee, paragraph 3, in that it
    indicated R150. It should read “R1,50c”.

                          TUESDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    Bills passed by National Assembly on 1 November 2005 and transmitted
    for concurrence:


       i) Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2005 (Reintroduced)] (National
          Assembly – sec 75)


          The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Economic
          and Foreign Affairs.


      ii) Precious Metals Bill [B 30B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)


          The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Economic
          and Foreign Affairs.

TABLINGS:

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

1.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

    1.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of
             Trade and Industry for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for
             2004-2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Trade and Investment South
             Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Support Program for
             Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2004-2005.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
             Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
             Board for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          f) Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme
             2005.

    2.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

           a) Letter from the Minister of Trade and Industry dated 17
              October 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
              terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management
              Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
              tabling of the Annual Report of the Department of Trade and
              Industry for 2004-2005.


    3.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry for consideration and report:

          a) Additional Protocol to the Trade, Development and Cooperation
             Agreement (TDCA) between the Republic of South Africa and the
             European Community (EC) and its member states, tabled in terms
             of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Additional Protocol to the
             Trade, Development and Cooperation Agreement (TDCA) between
             the Republic of South Africa and the European Community (EC)
             and its member states.


    4.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry:

          a) Government Notice No R.431 published in Government Gazette No
             27560 dated 13 May 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          b) Government Notice No R.518 published in Government Gazette No
             27615 dated 3 June 2005: Import Control in terms of the
             International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of
             2002).


          c) Government Notice No R.567 published in Government Gazette No
             27685 dated 24 June 2005: Proposed introduction of a
             compulsory specification for replacement elastomeric cups and
             seals for hydraulic brake actuating cylinders for use in motor
             vehicles using non-petroleum base hydraulic brake fluid, in
             terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          d) Government Notice No 641 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Lafarge
             Gypsum (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No
             58 of 1962).


          e) Government Notice No 642 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Nampak
             Metal Packaging Limited – Bevcan, in terms of the Income Tax
             Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


          f) Government Notice No 643 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Pulp
             United (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No
             58 of 1962).
          g) Government Notice No 644 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Nampak
             Products Limited – Corrugated Flexographic Printing Project,
             in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


          h) Government Notice No 645 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Sud-
             Chemie SA (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act
             No 58 of 1962).


          i) Government Notice No 646 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Trident
             Steel (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No
             58 of 1962).


          j) Government Notice No 647 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: UCAR
             South Africa (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962
             (Act No 58 of 1962).


          k) Government Notice No 648 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Duys
             Engineering (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962
             (Act No 58 of 1962).


          l) Government Notice No 649 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Duys
             Engineering (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962
             (Act No 58 of 1962).


          m) Government Notice No 650 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: MOLT
             Fruit Processing (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act,
             1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


          n) Government Notice No 651 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Silicon
             Technology (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962
             (Act No 58 of 1962).


          o) Government Notice No 652 published in Government Gazette No
             27750 dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Pulp
             United (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No
             58 of 1962).


          p) Government Notice No 602 published in Government Gazette No
             27713 dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of
             the Designs Act, 1993 (Act No 195 of 1993).


          q) Government Notice No 603 published in Government Gazette No
             27713 dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of
             the Trade Marks Act, 1993 (Act No 194 of 1993).


          r) Government Notice No 604 published in Government Gazette No
             27713 dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of
             the Patents Act, 1978 (Act No 57 of 1978).


          s) Government Notice No 605 published in Government Gazette No
             27713 dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office – Amendment to Companies Administrative
             Regulations, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of
             1973).


          t) Government Notice No 606 published in Government Gazette No
             27713 dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of
             the Registration of Copyright in Cinematograph Films Act, 1977
             (Act No 62 of 1977).


          u) Government Notice No 607 published in Government Gazette No
             27713 dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office – Amendment to Close Corporations
             Administrative Regulations - 1984, in terms of the Electronic
             and Communications and Transactions Act, 2002 (Act No 25 of
             2002).


          v) Government Notice No 655 published in Government Gazette No
             27735 dated 8 July 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          w) Government Notice No 1099 published in Government Gazette No
             27735 dated 8 July 2005: Notices of initiation of
             investigation into the alleged dumping of detonated fuses and
             delay detonators (commonly known as shock tubes), originating
             in or imported from the Peoples Republic of China, in terms of
             the International Trade Administration Commission of South
             Africa.


          x) Government Notice No 1100 published in Government Gazette No
             27735 dated 8 July 2005: Customs and Excise Tariff
             applications: List 9/2005 in terms of the International Trade
             Administration Commission of South Africa.


          y) Government Notice No R.622 published in Government Gazette No
             27762 dated 8 July 2005: Amended Safeguard Regulations in
             terms of the International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act
             No 71 of 2002).


          z) Government Notice No 766 published in Government Gazette No
             27846 dated 5 August 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


         aa) Government Notice No R.779 published in Government Gazette No
             27847 dated 5 August 2005: Amendment in terms of the
             International  Trade Administration Commission of South
             Africa.


         ab)  Trade and Economic Agreement between the Republic of South
             Africa and the Republic of Turkey, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         ac) Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade and Economic Agreement
             between the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of
             Turkey.


    5.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Home Affairs dated 4 October
             2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
             section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
             Annual Report of the Film and Publication Board for 2003-2004.


    6.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication
             Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 158-
             2004].

    7.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence, the Joint Standing Committee on Defence and the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister of Defence dated 20 October 2005 to
             the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
             65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
             of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
             Report of the Department of Defence 2004-2005.

    8.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and the Joint Monitoring
         Committee on the Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of
         Women for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for Gender
             Equality (CGE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             120-2005].


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.     Report of the Constitutional Review Committee, dated 28 October
2005:

     In terms of section 45 of the Constitution Parliament has to establish
     a joint committee to review the Constitution at least annually.


     In giving effect to this provision the Constitutional Review Committee
     placed advertisements in the media on 9 May 2005 inviting from the
     public submissions regarding changes to the Constitution. The
     submissions had to reach the Committee by 30 May 2005. In all, 17
     submissions were received.


     The Committee requested the Parliamentary Legal Services Office to
     consider each of the submissions in the light of current jurisprudence.
     Where necessary the Legal Services Office engaged the assistance of
     legal specialists such as Professor Julian Hoffman from the University
     of Cape Town as well as the Parliamentary Information Services Section.


     Hereunder are brief summaries of the submissions of the public as well
     as the Committee’s views and its recommendations.


     1.      Property: Section 25
     It was submitted that section 25 of the Constitution should be amended
     to allow for land redistribution to take place without subjecting the
     process to rigid legislative requirements; to reform the tax system for
     the introduction of a land tax system; to amend the circumstances for
     determining the amount of compensation paid for the expropriation of
     property; and to impose positive obligations on the legislature and
     executive to implement the amendments.


     The Committee noted that the redistribution of land is on-going and
     that a positive right to property was not included in the Constitution
     for the specific purpose of allowing redress of past injustices as well
     as allowing for measures to ensure equitable access to property,
     including land. The Committee is further of the view that the
     regulation of a land tax is a matter to be dealt with in ordinary
     legislation and not the Constitution.


     Recommendation
     The Committee accordingly does not support an amendment to section 25
     of the Constitution.


     2.     Traditional Leaders: Sections 211 and 212
     It was submitted that sections 211 and 212 of the Constitution should
     be amended to make provision for the effective functioning of
     institutions of traditional leadership and that traditional communities
     must be specifically recognized in sections 211 and 212. Also, that
     section 212 be amended to provide a role for traditional communities
     and leaders in legislative and executive decision making; that the
     section fails to recognise a role for traditional communities other
     than at local government level and that the wording of section 212(2)
     should be in the peremptory form.


     The Committee is of the opinion that the recognition of specific
     traditional communities in the Constitution would require a drastic
     deviation from current policies and conflicts with democratic
     principles.


     Recommendation
     The Committee is satisfied with the current construction of sections
     211 and 212 and accordingly recommends that no amendment to these
     sections is needed.


     3.     Equality Clause: Section 9
     It was proposed that an element of “prejudice” should be incorporated
     into the test for “discrimination” in section 9 of the Constitution.
     It is submitted that the wording of section 8(4) of the interim
     Constitution sets a better requirement for discrimination than the
     wording in section 9(5) of the final Constitution.


     The Committee is of the opinion that the Constitutional Court has
     clearly pronounced itself on the “equality” clause and in this respect
     the Committee does not support the submission.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment to section 9 is warranted.


     4.     Interpretation Clause: Section 39
     It was proposed that the Constitution should contain interpretation
     guidelines additional to section 39 of the Constitution because without
     such interpretation guidelines and methodologies “the understanding of
     justice seems to be within the particular bosom of the judges.”


     The Committee does not agree that the interpretation of the
     Constitution should be subjected to rigid principles as proposed.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment to the Constitution in this
     regard is needed.


     5.     Limitation Clause: Section 36
     It was submitted that because the rights in the Bill of Rights do not
     enjoy the same status, the Constitution should make provision for a
     hierarchy of rights.


     The Committee notes that the Constitutional Court has in the case of S
     v Makwanyane and Another [1995 (3) SA 391 (CC)] recognized that certain
     rights do enjoy greater status than others. However, the Committee is
     of the view that it is not necessary to amend the Constitution to give
     effect to the proposal.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment to the Constitution is
     needed.


     6.     Marriage
     Separate submissions were received for the inclusion of a definition of
     “marriage” in the Constitution.
     The Committee is of the opinion that a definition of “marriage” should
     not be included in the Constitution.


     Recommendation
     The Committee does not recommend any amendment to the Constitution in
     this regard.


     7.     Innocent until proven guilty
     It was submitted that the slogan used by the Drive Alive Project, i.e.
     ”If you as a motorist hit, run over or injure a Pedestrian, you will be
     guilty of an offence and pay the penalty” is contrary to the
     Constitution because it reverses the presumption of “innocent until
     proven guilty”.


     The Committee is of the opinion that the presumption of innocence is a
     pillar of our criminal justice system and that the submission was not
     requesting a constitutional amendment.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment to the Constitution in this
     regard is needed.


     8.     Prisoners’ right to vote
     It was submitted that prisoners should not be allowed to vote.


     The Committee is not in favour of an amendment to the Bill of Rights
     and does not agree that prisoners should be disenfranchised.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment in this regard is needed.
     9.     Provision of Old Age Homes
     A submission was received that motivates for Old Aged Homes to be
     provided for aged people in order to protect such persons from abuse.


     The Committee is of the view that the submission does not require a
     constitutional amendment but that it is a proposal that should be
     directed to the Department of Social Services.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment is warranted.


     10.    Right to Life and the Death Penalty: Section 11
     It was submitted that the death penalty should be re-instated as a
     sentence for certain serious crimes, for example, murder and rape.


     The Committee does not support the re-introduction of the death
     penalty.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment be considered in this
     regard.


     11.    Health Care Services: Section 27
     It was proposed that a woman’s right to reproductive health care
     services should not be extended to abortions, except in cases of rape,
     where the pregnancy poses a serious health risk or where the foetus is
     extremely disfigured.


     The Committee is of the view that the suggested amendment would impact
     negatively on the fundamental rights of women.


     Recommendation
     The Committee does not support the submission and recommends that no
     amendment to section 27 is needed.


     12.    Care of Children’s rights: Section 28
     It was proposed that section 28 of the Constitution should be amended
     as follows-
              • section 28(1)(b) - to entrench a right for every child to
                family care, parental care, or guardian care,  or to
                appropriate alternative care when removed from the family
                environment;
              • section 28(1)(f) – to include the following words after the
                word “service”, namely, “or be subjected to any cultural,
                ethnic, social or religious practices or acts”;
              • section 28(1)(g) – to provide for the constant supervision
                of a child who is detained by an appointed and qualified
                person.


     The Committee is of the view that section 28(2) of the Constitution
     entrenches the right that a child’s best interest is of paramount
     importance in every matter concerning the child. The Committee is
     further of the view that the proposed amendments would not result in
     additional protection for children.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that the existing provisions are adequate and
     that no amendment is needed.


     13.    The independence of the Judiciary - Section 165(2)
     It was proposed that the independence of the judiciary should be
     suspended so as to allow it to be monitored by a parliamentary organ.
     Also, that monitoring should be in place until the entire justice
     system is transformed and that “immoral court verdicts” should be
     addressed. Further, that a mechanism should be introduced that holds
     the judiciary accountable to the State and to the citizenry at large.


     The Committee acknowledges that judicial independence is entrenched in
     the Constitution and that the independence of the judiciary is
     essential to the doctrine of separation of powers. However, the
     Committee notes that a mechanism that provides for complaints against
     judicial officers is currently being addressed in legislation.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment in this regard is needed.


     14.    Section 184(2)(d)
     A submission proposed that the South African Human Rights Commission
     should be empowered and obliged to educate people on human rights from
     primary school level and to every family in the country.


     The Committee is aware that the functions of the Commission are
     dependent on its resources and that the proposal does not require an
     amendment to the Constitution.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment in this regard is warranted.


     15.    Chapter 9 of the Constitution
     It was submitted that section 192 of the Constitution should be amended
     to make provision for the inclusion of telecommunications and that the
     Broadcasting Authority should be included in section 181 of the
     Constitution as an institution supporting constitutional democracy.


     The Committee acknowledges that there is uncertainty between what is
     understood to fall within the realms of broadcasting and
     telecommunications. The Committee notes that the Portfolio Committee on
     Communications is currently deliberating on the Convergence Bill that
     covers the merging of broadcasting and telecommunications. The
     Committee is of the view that the Department of Communications and the
     Portfolio Committee on Communications should be called upon to make
     further presentations on this topic to the Committee.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that the matter should be more fully
     considered.


     16.    Section 146(6)
     It was submitted that section 146(6) of the Constitution should be
     amended because it makes a distinction between national delegated
     legislation made in terms of section 101 and provincial delegated
     legislation made in terms of section 140. It was further submitted that
     provincial delegated legislation may not be referred to the National
     Council of Provinces (NCOP) in terms of section 146(6).


     The Committee is of the view that section 146(6) does not prohibit
     provincial delegated legislation from being referred to the NCOP.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment in this regard is warranted.


     17.    Animal Rights and Section 24
     It was proposed that the “protection” of animal rights should be
     included in the Constitution because current animal rights legislation
     is inadequate. Further, that provision should be made in the
     Constitution for an obligation to be imposed on government to take
     reasonable steps to ensure the protection of the environment and
     animals.
     The Committee acknowledges that the Bill of Rights only deals with
     human rights and does not support the inclusion of positive rights for
     animals. Also, because section 7(2) of the Constitution places a duty
     on the State to amongst others, fulfil the rights in the Bill of
     Rights, the Committee is of the opinion that section 24 does not have
     to be amended to specifically place an obligation on the State to
     protect animals and section 24(b) may be a conduit for the “protection”
     of animals legislation.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment is warranted in this regard
     but that the submission be referred to the Portfolio and Select
     Committees dealing with Environmental Affairs for comment as to whether
     the existing animal protection legislation is adequate.
     18.    Religion: Section 15
     It was submitted that section 15 of the Constitution should be amended
     to specifically recognize the fundamental principles of the religion of
     Islam.


     The Committee holds the view that an amendment to section 15 that
     recognizes a particular religion will be contrary to the principles of
     the constitutional order, especially in respect of freedom of religion.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment in this regard is warranted.




     19.    Labour Relations: Section 23
     It was recommended that labour legislation should be reviewed to ensure
     it is consistent with section 23 of the Constitution.


     The Committee notes that the submission does not require an amendment
     to the Constitution, but an enactment of ordinary legislation.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment to section 23 is warranted.


     20.    Co-operative Government: Section 40 (1)
     A submission was received that proposes that the reference to
     “provincial” government in section 40(1) of the Constitution should be
     removed and that provincial government should be merged with national
     government because national government constantly intervenes in the
     affairs of provinces.


     The Committee notes that the provincial sphere of government forms an
     integral sphere in respect of the constitutional order and therefore
     its removal would require drastic amendments to the Constitution and
     other legislation.


     Recommendation
     The Committee recommends that no amendment to section 40(1) is needed.


     21.    Parliament and Local Government
     It was submitted that local government should not be represented in the
     National Council of Provinces (NCOP) by organized local government. It
     is argued that section 163 should be deleted and that local government
     should be allowed to associate along the lines of labour legislation in
     terms of section 23 of the Constitution.


     The Committee is of the opinion that section 67 of the Constitution
     adequately provides for local government to be represented in the NCOP.
     Further, the representation of local government in the NCOP is not
     dependant on an employment relationship and therefore section 23 cannot
     apply.


     Recommendation
     The Committee does not support any amendment to the Constitution in
     this regard.


     Submissions were received from:
|Number      |Submission received from            | No of           |
|            |                                    |submissions      |
|1           |Peter Meaken                        |1                |
|2           |Royal Bafokeng Nation               |2                |
|3           |Marriage Alliance of South Africa   |2                |
|4           |Doctors for Life International      |1                |
|5           |Hazel Shelton                       |1                |
|6           |Mr Nick McConnell                   |1                |
|7           |Mr Mick McConnell                   |1                |
|8           |Mrs G McConnell                     |1                |
|9           |Learners of the Hendrik Verwoerd    |1                |
|            |High School                         |                 |
|10          |Ms NM Tshoma                        |1                |
|11          |Mr A F Nkoana                       |1                |
|12          |Ms Khahliso Mochaba and Ms Justine  |1                |
|            |White                               |                 |
|13          |Janis Jordan                        |1                |
|14          |Rashid Patel and Company (Attorneys)|1                |
|15          |Mr J M Nhlapo                       |1                |


Report to be considered.



National Assembly


1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on  Agriculture  and  Land  Affairs  on
     Land and Agrarian Reform Summit, Gauteng, dated 25 October 2005:

   The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having been
   participated in the Land Summit held in Nasrec, Gauteng from 27 – 31 July
   2005, reports as follows:


   1. BACKGROUND TO THE LAND SUMMIT


   1. The Minister for Agriculture and Land  Affairs,  in  the  Budget  vote
      speech  to  Parliament  outlined  the  programme  of  action  of   the
      government for the coming financial year. Central to those  activities
      was the question of access to and use of agricultural land as well  as
      the issue of land reform in general, all of which  culminated  in  the
      Summit on Land and Agrarian Reform.
   2. The Summit was held to draw from international and  local  experiences
      on land reform policy and implementation. It also served as a platform
      to engaged in open, frank and honest dialogue  on  land  and  agrarian
      reform within South Africa.


   2. DELEGATION


   1. Although the Committee submitted a recommendation to Parliament for  a
      ten-member  multi-party  delegation  to  attend   the   Summit,   such
      recommendation was not approved, and no reasons were provided.
   2. Therefore, the following four members attended: Mr Z. Kotwal (ANC); Mr
      D.M Dlali (ANC); Mr B.A Radebe (ANC)  and  Mr  A.H  Nel  (DA).  Mr  J.
      Boltina  accompanied  the  committee  for  logistics  and  secretarial
      support.


   3. THEME OF THE SUMMIT: “A partnership to fast-track land reform:  A  new
      trajectory, forward to 2014.”


   4. OBJECTIVES


1. Inform the South African public about  progress  made  in  the  land  and
   agrarian reform process;
2. Acknowledge challenges facing the process;
3. To look at “blockages” in implementing land and agrarian reform;
4. To affirm commitment to the process;
5. To invite South Africans to actively participate  in  land  and  agrarian
   reform;
6. To examine the country’s land market and how it functions; and
7. To examine how to make interventions  on  what  is  required  to  improve
   delivery mechanism.


5. IN BROAD TERMS THE SUMMIT WAS INTENDED TO:


1. Celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter;


2. To reverse the legacy of Natives Land Act of 1913 that  was  promulgated;
   and


     3. Review access  to  agricultural  land  in  the  past  decade  while
        encouraging dialogue amongst key partners and stakeholders.


     6. BUILD-UP TO THE SUMMIT: Provincial Departments of  Agriculture  and
        Land Affairs were encouraged to hold provincial summits as a  build
        up to the National Summit.


     7. KEY NOTE SPEECH BY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND LAND  AFFAIRS,  HON.
        THOKO DIDIZA


   In 1994, the democratic government inherited one of  the  worst  racially
   skewed land distributions in the world; whites owning 87% and blacks  13%
   of agricultural land. Undoing this legacy of apartheid’s  highly  unequal
   redistribution is therefore a fundamental priority for the nation. It was
   because of this reality that even during the negotiations periods  for  a
   peaceful settlement one of  the  important  principles  that  had  to  be
   addressed was the need to undertake land reform in South Africa.


   Gathered here today, as stakeholders from Government, political  parties,
   business, farmers, workers tenants, landless communities, civil  society,
   faith –based organizations and traditional authorities – to honestly take
   stock of Constitutional obligation to carry out the just  and  fair  land
   and agrarian reform over  the  last  decade  and  also  define  real  and
   concrete measures to accelerate land reform in South Africa.


   This Summit takes place under the back-drop of the  50th  Anniversary  of
   the Freedom Charter whose vision for a future democratic dispensation  in
   South Africa contained the following important land and agrarian issues:


 • “South Africa belongs to all who live in it, Black or White,
 • The people shall share in the country’s wealth,
 • The land shall be shared among those who work it.”


   This vision of the Freedom Charter was a direct opposite of and an attack
   on the apartheid vision that had its roots in  the  Native  Land  Act  of
   1913. The immediate and devastating impact of the Native Land Act that is
   still evident in almost  all  aspects  of  lives  today  was  graphically
   described in the following words by Sol  Plaatjie,  the  first  Secretary
   General of the African National Congress, in his  book  “Native  Life  in
   South Africa:”
   “Awaking of Friday morning, June 20, 1913, the South African native found
   himself, not actually a slave, but a pariah in the land of his birth.”


   It is against  this  painful  history  of  land  dispossession,  economic
   exploitation and social domination of particularly the  African  majority
   population, that the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa imposed
   the duty and an obligation on the State, as a matter of public  interest,
   to take legislative and other measures to effect land reform in order  to
   facilitate  restorative  land  justice,  increased  access  to  land  and
   improved security of tenured.


   The principle that underpinned the Freedom  Charter  and  that  is  today
   enshrined in the Constitution, firmly asserts that never again should  an
   individual or a group of  individuals  and  communities  in  the  country
   suffer from unjust,  inhuman  and  unfair  dispossession  of  their  land
   property and material possessions.


   After ten years of  courageous  and  concerted  efforts  to  restore  the
   dignity and the respect  of  the  poor,  the  dispossessed  and  landless
   communities, the overall assessment of  government  performance  and  its
   social partners is  that  commendable  progress  has  been  made  in  the
   delivery of land and agrarian reform in South Africa.


   This progress has been made in spite of the fact that the first years  of
   democratic governance, a lot of focus was on reorganization of the State,
   the integration of various administrations, the drafting and promulgation
   of new legal statutes and setting up of institutions to support land  and
   agrarian reform.


   In examining progress, there is a need to acknowledge that there  was  no
   standard from which to measure, safe to say the targets  as  set  in  the
   Reconstruction and Development Programme. The matter  is  raised  because
   any international comparison would indicate that each land reform program
   in a particular country would have its own  peculiar  circumstances  into
   consideration.


   Taking this reality into consideration how far has the government gone in
   the past ten years? Since 1994, over 1.2 million  people  have  benefited
   from the entire land reform program of government. More  than  3  million
   hectares of land have been delivered. Government housing program has also
   made a contribution towards land delivery.


   Further,  agricultural  control  boards  were  abolished  to   deregulate
   commodity and trade markets. Subsidies and tax concessions that  favoured
   commercial farmers were withdrawn and  support  programmes  for  emerging
   farmers and land reform beneficiaries were  established.  And  a  minimum
   wage for farm workers was introduced.
   But progress that has been made is not enough. More, swift, resolute  and
   resourceful efforts must still be made to transfer 30%of  farm  land  and
   transform the agrarian  economy  and  to  contribute  to  higher  growth,
   employment creation and greater social and economic equity.


   In assessing the experience gained, the progress made gave confidence and
   have become  more  hopeful  about  the  future.  Furthermore,  invaluable
   lessons learnt from experience stands in good stead with in the  redesign
   and implementation of 2014 land and agrarian reform.


   From experience, the following have been learnt that:


    • Legal processes are inherently  adversarial,  slow  and  expensive  in
      comparison  to  agreements  around  a  common  vision  and  negotiated
      processes that work better, faster and improved relations;
    • Integrating government programmes must be integrated and collaboration
      between departments at all levels encouraged;
    • Markets by themselves do not redistribute land at the scale,  quality,
      location and  price  from  rich  to  poor  and  from  white  to  black
      participants;
    • The willing buyer – willing seller approach needs to  be  mediated  by
      the reality of a failure of land markets;
    • Restriction on subdivision of land forces beneficiaries to form  large
      groups that are difficult to manage and sustain;
    • The tension between the protection of property rights  and  obligation
      on the state to undertake land  reform  is  essential  to  maintain  a
      healthy balance between these growth factors;
    • Current legislation regulates evictions rather than provide protection
      to farm dwellers land rights;
    • Strategic partnerships such as share equity schemes  need  to  address
      the question of unequal power relations (knowledge,  wealth,  networks
      etc);
    • The neglect of the rural areas and almost  exclusive  focus  on  urban
      areas has further impoverished the rural and agrarian  economy,  while
      increasing the pressure on urban and peri-urban land  for  sustainable
      human settlement.


   The following measures need to be done to ensure that land  and  agrarian
   reform moves to the new trajectory that will  contribute  to  the  higher
   path of growth, employment and equity by 2014:


 • Re-affirm redistribution target of 30% agricultural land by 2014;
    • Establish government, business labour and civil  society  partnerships
      that are binding with clear role, responsibilities and accountability;
 • Introduce proactive acquisition of land by the land for  targeted  groups
   in the land market;
    • Establish a register  of  land  needs  for  target  groups,  including
      (labour tenants, farm workers and landless);
    •  Identify  specific  interventions  for  targeted  groups,   including
      proactive land acquisition by the state;
    •  Introduce  a  comprehensive  support  package  for  the  new   owners
      (including agriculture, financing, infrastructure, marketing, training
      and education, technology transfer, extension  and  support  for  land
      reform projects such as water rights, housing, education, health etc);
 • Make land and agrarian reform a cluster priority;
 • Orderly management of evictions and illegal land occupations;
    • Introduce measures to enhance the security of tenure of farm  dwellers
      and other vulnerable groups;
 • Complete restitution cases by 2008;
 • Implement Communal Land Rights Act fully;
 • Integrate land and agrarian reform into local economic development;
 • Link rural and urban areas through amongst others  peri-urban  small  and
   medium holdings;
 • Acquire land for towns that need land for expansion;
 • Complete the repeal of the Sub-division Act and  sub-divide  farms  where
   necessary;
    • Implement progressive land tax as means to promote more intensive  use
      of land, reduce farm sizes and reduce speculative value of land;
 • Manage ownership of land by foreigners;
 • Strengthen cooperation between three spheres of government;
    • Formulate post Summit implementation strategy for the three  years  as
      per the President’s extension on the settlement of outstanding claims,
      especially rural claims.


     8. STAKEHOLDER STATEMENTS  ON  LAND  AND  AGRARIAN  REFORM  (Political
        parties in Parliament)


   8.1      Mr Kgalema Motlanthe: African National Congress


   The true meaning of the freedom charter was also spelt out  by  the  late
   President of the ANC, Oliver Tambo in 8th January 1980 statement to  mark
   the 25th anniversary of the charter when he said:


   “The Freedom Charter contains the fundamental  perspective  of  the  vast
   majority of the people of South Africa of the kind of liberation that  of
   us are fighting for. Hence, it is not merely the Freedom Charter  of  the
   African National Congress and its allies. Rather it is the charter of the
   people of South Africa for liberation … Because it came from the  people,
   it remains still a people’s charter, the one basic political statement of
   our goals to which all genuinely democratic and patriotic forces of South
   Africa adhere.”
   To the extent that these words remain true today,  the  words  of  Oliver
   Tambo are a fundamental premise in  understanding  the  Freedom  Charter.
   This is so because the  charter  embodies  a  vision  of  an  alternative
   society to society we inherited. It  constitutes  the  programme  of  the
   people for creation of a truly democratic, non-racial, non-sexist, united
   and prosperous country. Therefore, we in the ANC our premise  remains  of
   debating land transformation, is the Freedom  Charter  and  this  remains
   unchanged.


   This Summit on land and agrarian reform will need to practically  advance
   the objective contained in the Freedom Charter that  the  land  shall  be
   shared among those who work in it.


   Taking place in the year of the 50th anniversary of the Freedom  Charter,
   the summit should also review progress  made  over  the  last  decade  in
   advancing land and agricultural reform, and  importantly,  look  at  what
   needs to be done to accelerate and deepen the process of transformation.


   It has been 50 years  since  the  Congress  of  the  People,  meeting  in
   Kliptown on 26 June 1955, declared that “Restrictions of  land  ownership
   on a racial basis shall be ended, all the land re-divided  amongst  those
   who work it to banish famine and hunger.”


   While  legal  restrictions  on  ownership  have   been   abolished,   the
   devastating legacy of the 1913 Land Act is  still  reflected  in  current
   land  ownership  patterns,  in  the  structure  and  composition  of  the
   agriculture  sector,  and  in   the   levels   of   rural   poverty   and
   underdevelopment.


   While much progress has been made in the first 11years of  democracy,  it
   is clear that there is still a long way to go. It is  also  necessary  to
   assess the rate of progress to date, the lessons that  have  been  learnt
   and the factors that constrain the  realization  of  the  vision  of  the
   Freedom Charter.
   This National Land Summit also takes place at a time when  we  enter  the
   second decade of freedom. Accordingly, it is necessary to look  back  and
   ask difficult questions.  The  Summit  must  answer  amongst  others  the
   following questions:


    • How far have we gone to transform land ownership that in terms of  the
      apartheid regime 13% of the population would own 87% of the land?
    • What progress has been made in ensuring that by 2014,  we  would  have
      redistributed 30% of the white-owned agricultural land to blacks?
    • To what extent is  the  principle  of  willing-buyer;  willing  seller
      affecting the pace of land reform in South Africa? What can be done to
      increase the pace of land redistribution?
    • Have we answered the question of what should be done  to  address  the
      skewed land ownership patterns both domestic and foreign?
    • Could we honestly suggest that all the stakeholders in  the  land  and
      agriculture sector have acted in a manner that advances vision 2014?


   As part of building  a  partnership  to  fast  track  land  reform,  thus
   advancing the vision of  the  Freedom  Charter,  we  must  re-affirm  the
   charter’s call “The Land Shall be Shared  Amongst  Those  Who  Work  It.”
   Indeed, the summit must take decisions that will ensure that the land  is
   shared among all who work it.


   Land transformation is unfolding with a  constitution  exactly  says.  In
   this regard section 25 of the constitution provides for amongst that:


   “The state must take reasonable legislative and other measures within its
   available resources, to foster conditions which enable citizens  to  gain
   access to land on an  equitable  basis.”  Accordingly,  the  constitution
   imposes an obligation on the state. Furthermore, section 25  states  that
   “A person or community disposed of property  after  19  June  1913  as  a
   result of past discriminatory laws  or  practices  is  entitled,  to  the
   extent provided by an Act of Parliament, either to  restitution  of  that
   property or redress.” This is an obligation on the part of the state. The
   constitution further instructs the state that “no provision of section 25
   may impede the state  from  taking  legislative  and  other  measures  to
   achieve land, water and related reform, in order to redress the result of
   past racial discrimination.”  Once  more,  this  is  an  obligation  that
   government must perform.


   The point is  that  land  transformation  and  agrarian  reform  is  non-
   negotiable. It must happen  because  the  constitution  of  the  Republic
   provides  both  the  legislative  and  policy  framework  for   such   an
   undertaking.
   Apartheid has caused poverty and hunger amongst the majority  of  people.
   Land and agrarian reform are therefore central in poverty eradication and
   economic growth. However, this  can  only  be  effective  if  people  act
   collectively and in partnerships. Simply put, there is no case of us- and
   -them.


   The first 10 years  of  democracy  have  seen  important  and  impressive
   progress in land reform. The  challenge  facing  the  summit,  and  South
   Africa as a whole, is to build on these achievements  to  accelerate  and
   deepen land agrarian reform.


   The struggle to end injustices must succeed as the  constitution  of  the
   Republic states that: “We the  people  of  South  Africa,  recognize  the
   injustices of our past. Honour  those  who  suffered  for  injustice  and
   freedom in our land. Respect those who worked to build  and  develop  our
   country, and believe that South Africa belongs to all  who  live  in  it,
   united in our diversity.”


   Many years to come the future generations will look back at  this  summit
   where hundreds of delegates from the length and breadth  of  the  country
   gathered in NASREC to determine the way  forward.  The  generations  will
   judge the summit on the basis of the actions taken and  commitments  made
   to enhance democratic transformation.


   8.2      Mr Molefe Pheto: Azanian People’s Organization


   The current status: Ten years past the 1994 democratic elections,  little
   has been gained by the landless regarding the return of historical lands.
   Landless are still hungry and some are  actually  employed  on  the  same
   lands which formerly belonged to ancestors. The two government programmes
   to redress the hunger  for  land  use:  the  land  restitution  and  land
   redistribution. Both programmes are failing  dismally.  Land  Restitution
   requires proof of dispossession after 1913. Land Redistribution is  based
   on white farmers willingness to sell.


   The latter is more of a problem because various factors  such  as,  white
   farmers are not willing to  sell  to  blacks;  they  know  the  value  of
   empowerment through land ownership;  and  there  are  practical  examples
   where, if they are willing to sell, they inflate the  prices  beyond  the
   actual value.


   Clearly then, blacks would remain in a no-win situation. There should  be
   a mechanism to force white farmers to behave and sell  properly  or  land
   should be appropriated. Statistics show that ten years  after  democracy,
   land ownership is roughly as follows: 55 000 white farmers own  all  farm
   land outside the “designated poor reserves”; black owned land by emerging
   farmers is still to be quantified. 83% is white owned, 17% is black owned
   or 87% is white owned farmland and 13% is black owned poor land.


   The State and the Land: The state is supposed to own 7% of  land-mass  of
   the country. Most state owned land  needs  an  urgent  audit.  There  are
   examples of farmers using vacant land for  themselves.  Also,  there  are
   vast tracts of white owned land which is not used at all. The  lands  are
   so huge that they cannot manage to utilize all the lands own.


   Social factors on the farms: farm workers family social conditions on the
   farms are appalling and unacceptable. Simple requirements such as toilets
   do  not  exist.  There  are  no  structures  for  entertainment;   sports
   facilities; health facilities and worst of all  is  that  workers  suffer
   from hunger despite being involved in the food production which  is  even
   exported.


   The way forward: Black empowerment programmes  of  activities  should  be
   quickened; there should be adequate  government  assistance  to  emerging
   black farmers; there be programmes in schools about  farming;  a  massive
   farming programme for youths  should  be  introduced  and  trained  youth
   should then be employed to assist farming communities;  there  should  be
   audit of land owned by government; and farmers who owned more  than  they
   need should be forced by legislation to sell at reasonable prices.


   8.3      Mr Daryl Swanepoel: New National Party


   The social challenge facing South  Africa  is  to  ensure  that  the  new
   freedom also manifests itself in land ownership. If twenty years down the
   line, land ownership patterns  have  not  change  there  will  be  socio-
   political problems, which are  not  in  the  interest  of  political  and
   economic stability. It is therefore  in  everyone’s  interest,  including
   those required to dispose of their land, to ensure speedy  and  effective
   implementation of and conclusion to the land  reform  programme.  On  the
   basis of willing buyer – willing seller,  but  reviewed  to  ensure  non-
   exploitation, and people’s rights and economic  interests  must  also  be
   factored in.


   The Summit will have to focus on the issue of  land  restitution  itself.
   Land reform is meant to redress the disposition of land  and  to  address
   the land ownership patterns of the country. But there are  no  mechanisms
   to ensure that redistributed land remains in the hands of those that were
   previously disadvantaged, or for that matter that  monetary  compensation
   contributes to change in land ownership patterns.


   And this is a difficult challenge, given people’s  constitutional  rights
   with regard to that which they own  and  their  right  to  free  economic
   activity. Nevertheless, it is a challenge  that  must  be  addressed:  If
   twenty years down the line we  have  spent  billions  and  have  not  yet
   achieve real ownership reform, then the  question  is:  Has  the  country
   spent the money wisely?


   There are many cases where restituted land is sold for its monetary value
   back into the community from which it was redistributed, in some cases to
   the very person from which it was expropriated in the first  place.  What
   contribution does that make to changing land ownership patterns?  And  if
   after having spent billions of rands, we still sit  with  socio-political
   problems due to a lack of land ownership, what has the country achieved?


   Land transformation must go hand in hand  with  economic  transformation.
   Economic  transformation  is  a  long-term  activity  and  therefore,  as
   difficult as it is, mechanisms must be sought and synchronized with  land
   transformation programmes to bring about a correlation between  ownership
   of the economy and ownership of the land.


   In short, NNP suggests a speedy and effective  land  reform  –  effective
   land reform meaning that  the  intended  change  in  the  land  ownership
   patterns is sustained. However, in this area some work still needs to  be
   done  to  design  the  necessary  control  mechanisms  for  ensuring  the
   retention  of  restituted  land  in   the   hands   of   the   previously
   disadvantaged,  until  such  that  the  envisaged   economic   and   land
   transformation goals that Government has set.


   The private sector  and  current  landowners  should  engage  in  private
   initiatives as well. That will  give  effect  to  the  envisaged  changed
   ownership patterns. It need not be the stereotype  “taking  from  whites,
   giving to blacks”. It can also be joint ventures,  new  partnerships  and
   there are a number of good examples that can be pointed already.


   There is another side to this as well. Land ownership in itself is not as
   important as land as a means to secure income. If land reform  programmes
   succeed only  in  changing  ownership  patterns,  but  do  not  establish
   commercially viable operations, it will not contribute towards  improving
   the national wealth.


   NNP position therefore, is that new farmers must  not  only  be  provided
   with land, farmers must also receive training and  assistance  so  as  to
   develop viable farms. To this end, there is a need to look at  programmes
   and  determine  whether  there  is  sufficient   inter-departmental   co-
   ordination to comprehensively deal with the provision of land, access  to
   capital, training and development and finding markets.


   8.4 Dr A I van Niekerk: Democratic Alliance


   The question of Land reform is not about the right or wrong thereof,  but
   rather the direction, the method and pace.


   With a relative high population density in South Africa  and  a  relative
   low potential of the agricultural resources, land reform requires a  well
   planned process, efficiently managed, timeously and adequately funded and
   implemented with the least possible disruption of food security.


   The cost to implement land reform and restitution must be for the account
   of all the people in South Africa and should not be borne by the  present
   land- owners or agriculture industry only.


   Fair market value for land should be the base and willing buyer,  willing
   seller principle adhered to as far  as  possible.  Deviation  from  these
   principles could put the whole process in jeopardy and put  South  Africa
   on a road of land quotas and economic disaster as  experienced  in  other
   countries.


   A serious problem in this exercise of land reform is the inability of the
   State machinery to function efficiently. Too  many  delays  and  decision
   points seriously interfere with the successful completion of  nearly  all
   projects.


   It is of essence that productivity of land is  sustained.  Recipients  of
   land must not be abandoned by the State and  be  supported  by  strategic
   planning and experienced partners which have a proven track record.


   A far greater emphasis should be placed on land reform in communal  areas
   in the Eastern Cape and other Provinces where unutilized  high  potential
   land with a tremendous  latent  potential  could  alleviate  the  poverty
   problems of those areas.
   Many of the reform and restitution projects will become poverty traps  if
   they not already are if government does not step in with a new  approach.




   8.5      Professor C T Msimang: Inkatha Freedom Party


   The IFP moves from the premise that there are  three  types  of  property
   ownership, namely, private and communal. It is thus unfortunate that  the
   government emphasizes the first two which were foisted upon South  Africa
   by colonialism via the Roman-Dutch law. The IFP position is that communal
   landownership,  in  terms  of  indigenous  customary  law   should   take
   precedence over private and public land ownership.


   The reason why the communal landownership is crucial is that  traditional
   communal communities still constitute the majority of the  South  African
   population. It is therefore follows  that  these  communities  should  be
   endowed with ownership rights to the land occupy. This is  most  probably
   the point of departure between the government  and  the  IFP.  Government
   holds the  view  that  community  ownership  is  broken  into  individual
   ownership, that is, ownership by individuals members whereas to  the  IFP
   it is clear that the community as a collective holds all the land for the
   benefit of all its members and those  of  the  future  generations  in  a
   mystical continuity with those of the previous ones.


   IFP makes a clear distinction between ownership  by  traditional  leaders
   and ownership by traditional communities. To the IFP traditional  leaders
   do not own the land, they only hold it in trust for their subjects.  This
   element alone shows  that  no  basis  exists  for  a  comparison  between
   traditional communities and  the  European  feudal  system.  It  will  be
   recalled that in the latter, the land was owned not by  people,  but  the
   landlord. Precisely because of this distinction the IFP has often pointed
   out that there is a  need  for  a  shift  in  emphasis  from  traditional
   leadership to traditional communities regarded as  a  specific  model  of
   societal organization.


   The above distinction is essential since land issues are central to  both
   traditional  leadership  (as  trustees)  and  the  traditional  model  of
   societal organizations (as owners). It is also central to the  definition
   of the cultural and social equilibrium of the new  South  Africa.  It  is
   land that defines a  community.  The  essential  feature  of  traditional
   communities is the self –administration of land which is assigned to  the
   community, via the action of  traditional  leadership,  to  each  of  its
   members to meet the needs.


   It  is  regrettable  that  the  cultural  and  social  function  of   the
   institution of communal property has not yet been  sufficiently  explored
   by the official academia. Indeed the entire history of land settlement in
   South Africa has not been the object of complete academic  research,  and
   yet it underpins the core of historic  background  and  the  present  day
   social tensions.


   The failure to recognize communal property  is  the  heaviest  legacy  of
   colonialism and racial oppression persisting to  this  day.  The  IFP  as
   ruling party of the erstwhile KwaZulu government has  been  committed  to
   counter this legacy and promote a process in which traditional leadership
   and communal property can receive joint, recognition and protection.  IFP
   has committed to reverse colonial dynamics which to this day are at  play
   in so far as, with the  exception  of  KwaZulu-Natal,  all  the  land  of
   traditional communities belonging to the majority of  the  South  African
   people is still classified as state property.


   The country must realize  that  communal  property  supports  a  type  of
   differentiation in economic models which at  this  juncture  of  national
   history  is  essential  to  maintain  social   stability.   “Subsistence”
   agriculture  and  “subsistence”  commercial  activities  may  effectively
   enable large segments of population to conduct  a  free  and  independent
   existence  without  having  to  augment  the   urban   proletariat,   and
   agricultural activities should be upgraded to profit-making  and  profit-
   driven enterprises as soon as possible.


   All these reasons lead the IFP to appeal that communal property ownership
   should gain recognition, not only in terms of  indigenous  and  customary
   law, but also in terms of legislation ensuing from national government.


   The IFP is also concerned about the decentralization of  powers  when  it
   comes  to  land  distribution  and  restitution.   True   to   federalist
   philosophy, the view is held by the party is that land  is  a  provincial
   and local rather than central competence. Every province in  the  country
   has its general as well as unique land needs. Therefore, leveling down of
   provincial frameworks to uniformity remains  detrimental  to  reform  and
   conflict resolution. It is according to the IFP plea that the  Department
   of Land Affairs should make a preliminary policy decision to delegate  to
   provinces as much as  possible  of  its  legislative  and  administrative
   competencies. The necessity of provincial and local government  dimension
   to land affairs is underscored by the fact that this  subject  matter  is
   extremely explosive, conflict ridden  and  capable  of  creating  a  long
   string  of  social  racially  charged  conflict.  Provincial  and   local
   government would be in a much better position of operating and developing
   policies with sensibilities to the on the ground potential for conflicts.




   8.6      Mr L Greyling: Independent Democrats


   The Independent  Democrats  mains  that  addressing  the  inherited  land
   inequalities in South Africa is crucial towards  creating  a  stable  and
   prosperous nation. Unfortunately, all can agree that  the  pace  of  land
   reform has been too slow and there is a need to find ways of improving it
   to address the very real concerns held by people.


   Firstly, there is a need to place land reform in the context of  enormous
   changes that agricultural sector has undergone over the last  ten  years.
   South Africa has moved from highly protected and subsidized  agricultural
   sector to of the least protected in the world, which in the face of  huge
   agricultural subsidies in the  North  have  made  farming  a  very  risky
   profession.


   These changes have also led to agriculture shedding a number of jobs  and
   exacerbating high unemployment rate. Some commentators believe that South
   Africa’s future does not lie in agriculture and  that  government  should
   place its emphasis on simply creating and industrialized economy.  It  is
   pertinent to note that many  of  the  so-called  Asian  tigers  initially
   relied on agriculture as  the  basis  for  their  economic  take-off.  In
   economies like China and Taiwan, it was also their extensive land  reform
   programme that created an equitable basis for future economic growth.


   ID believes that greater priority must be given to agriculture  and  land
   reform in South Africa and that more financial  and  technical  resources
   should be directed towards it. Government  support  for  agriculture  has
   more than halved in the last decade. Having set  the  context  one  would
   like to consider the  three  major  components  of  land  reform  namely,
   restitution, redistribution and tenure reform.


   On the issue of restitution, it is  encouraging  to  note  that  in  this
   year’s budget far more money has been set aside to  finalize  restitution
   claims. This is welcomed to move forward on the issue. The slow  pace  of
   settling restitution claims is resulting in frustration on  the  part  of
   both the claimants and those farmers whose land is currently under claim.
   While ID Government motives in setting a deadline for the registering  of
   restitution claims, the Party belies that this approach  has  meant  that
   many people and communities have been excluded from obtaining justice  on
   past dispossession.


   ID has been approached by a number of people who  have  valid  claims  of
   being dispossessed but were unaware of  the  cut-off  date  of  1998  for
   registering the claims. Many of such people live in deep rural areas  and
   were not adequately informed of the cut-off deadline.


   In terms of redistribution there are  many  constraints  on  the  current
   approach adopted by the State which will make it difficult to  reach  30%
   target  by  2014.  Initially,  according  to   the   Reconstruction   and
   Development Programme the 30% target should  have  been  reached  in  the
   first five years of democracy. The target has since shifted to  2014  and
   if one considers the slow pace of land reform it is clear that there will
   be immense difficulty in reaching the set  date.  Without  a  doubt  more
   resources will need to be allocated to land redistribution.


   In the area of tenure reform, ID is concerned that the  budget  allocated
   to implementation of the Communal Land Rights Act is only a paltry  R  12
   million for this year, which consequently will only allow it  to  be  bed
   implement as a pilot project in KwaZulu-Natal. ID would strongly urge for
   more money to be set aside  for  its  full  implementation  as  there  is
   currently uncertainty over landownership in many  parts  of  the  Eastern
   Cape. This is having an adverse effect on development  as  investors  are
   unable to get clarity on the  processes  that  need  to  be  followed  in
   obtaining leases for projects. This is a matter that has to  be  urgently
   addressed if were to encourage development in what is one of the  poorest
   regions of the country.


   The challenge for land reform is not only transfer land, but ensure  that
   land generates wealth for beneficiaries and society as  a  whole.  To  do
   this the level  of  post  settlement  support  needs  to  be  drastically
   improved. The Freedom Charter  sates  that  “the  State  shall  help  the
   peasants with implements, seeds, tractors and dams to save soil.” This is
   particularly the case for small-scale agriculture, which if nothing  else
   could be a very effective poverty  alleviation  strategy  and  provide  a
   sustainable livelihood for many rural people who  are  enduring  grinding
   poverty.


   9. REGIONAL EXPERIENCE


   9.1      Prof Sam Moyo: African Institute for Agrarian Studies


   In most Southern Africa countries, the most salient  land  policy  change
   has been  the  legal  provisions  introduced  to  enable  customary  land
   tenures, under which the majority  of  people  live,  to  lease  land  to
   developers through long term lease-hold and natural resources  concession
   arrangements. These policy developments largely  emulate  the  Mozambique
   and Botswana customary tenure arrangements, and  expand  the  land  lease
   practices already found in state-held land and public  natural  resources
   regimes.  These policy directions have received much international  donor
   support. The SADC is currently in the process of adopting a Regional Land
   Reform  Technical  Facility,  intended  to  mobilize  aid  and   regional
   expertise to improve land policy formation processes.


   Yet the crucial underlying issue is whether these  reforms  will  address
   the increasingly growing land  concentrations,  mainly  among  white  and
   black elites and foreign owners, including multi-national firms  who  use
   it for agriculture, tourism  and  urban  real  estate  development.  Land
   concentration among black elites, to exclusion  of the poor and  “remote”
   communities,  generates  further  conflict.  These  processes   of   land
   concentration are part of official policies aimed at developing  agrarian
   capitalism and tourism, both based on export-oriented land uses.  Perhaps
   because land concentration in countries  such  as  Zambia,  Botswana  and
   Malawi have been  less  dramatically  executed  than  the  Zimbabwe  land
   transfer process. The concentration  processes  are  largely  uncommented
   upon in the regional and international discourses on the land question.


   Some of those impacts result more from the attendant debilities that face
   a foreign currency in a starved and isolated economy rather than directly
   from land reform itself. They reflect the government’s poor international
   donor relations, given that, in the  past,  development  assistance  less
   proscribed by invreased concerns over governance and human rights  issues
   might have been mobilized to ease the foreign exchange and import stress,
   rather than watch the continued economic collapse.


   Nonetheless, humanitarian aid has been  provided  to  about  45%  of  the
   Zimbabwean population. The net result of these poor relations between the
   government and international  community,  based  on  domestic  governance
   contradictions and the problems of  “rule  of  law”  in  Zimbabwe’s  land
   reform  approach  to  mass  land   expropriation,   supported   by   land
   occupations, has been the entrenchment of the radicalization of the  land
   reform policy process.


   This has closed opportunities for economic recovery and poverty reduction
   through international assistance. This potentially defines the  framework
   of future aid relations in the region in general.


   Therefore, in summary, land reform policies in Southern Africa seem to be
   evolving through the interactive use of market and compulsory  approaches
   to land acquisition for redistribution, restitution and tenure reform  to
   both the landless and emerging  black  agrarian  farmers.  Official  land
   reform policies were increasingly being  forced  to  respond  to  growing
   popular demands for land. An important  lesson  to  be  learnt  from  the
   political independence settlements in the settler territories of the sub-
   region is that, by not sufficiently addressing the problem of inequitable
   land and natural resources  ownership,  the  downstream  entrenchment  of
   unequal racial economic  opportunities,  ensuing  from  such  control  in
   economies facing slow employment growth, are likely to fuel agitation for
   radical land reform.


   Thus, land redistribution, restitution and tenure  reform  in  redressing
   historical grievances, social justice and poverty are crucial ingredients
   of reconciliation and development, and essential to the resolution of the
   national question and democratization processes.


   9.2      Dr George Mburathi: Land Reform in Kenya


   Consolidation of land: During the  period  from  1952  to  1961,  massive
   movements of people took place  in  the  Central  Province  of  Kenya  by
   relocating people into villages.  This  was  organized  by  the  colonial
   government. Few years before independence, land consolidation was carried
   out whereby families on small holdings were put together into  respective
   parcels, followed by the issuing  of  title  deeds.  From  the  villages,
   families were moved onto their families respective parcels of  land.  All
   this was done forcibly and there was no freedom of choice or  expression.
   At one time, the Kenyan model of  individual  titles  was  considered  an
   example of how other countries should follow. However with time,  certain
   elements have cropped up which make it difficult for the title system  to
   reflect the social reality  at  the  grassroots  level.  Co-existence  of
   indigenous tenure systems still thrive.


   Settlements: Soon after independence, massive settlements of people  from
   native reserves  to  the  former  white  highland  were  undertaken.  The
   following process took place: Selection of people to  settled;  Selection
   of   settlement   areas;   Adjudication   of   land    for    settlement;
   Infrastructure/health clinics, schools roads etc; Land  buying  companies
   and co-operatives; Preparation for new settlers  in  terms  of  training;
   Training of trainers; Farmers training centers; Co-operation  of  various
   departments; and Credit.


   Current situation: Ever increasing demand for land has  overshadowed  the
   transparency and effectiveness of institutions at all levels to deal with
   public and customary land and in addition, to the delivery system of land-
   related services. The delivery of land related service is centralized.


   The situation  was  reflected  by  the  Njonjo  Commission.  This  was  a
   commission of enquiry into land  law  system  of  Kenya  in  2002,  which
   focused on the Principles  of  a  National  Land  Policy  Framework,  the
   Constitutional Position of Land and the New Institutional  Framework  for
   Land Administration, amongst others. It was  observed  that  the  overall
   lack of policy, the destruction of the infrastructure,  the  interference
   in land matters by provincial administration and most of all the  failure
   to heed the  views  and  needs  of  local  residents,  has  brought  land
   administration into total disrepute in the  eyes  of  Kenyans.  The  Land
   Reform policy–making process was initiated by the Minister  of  Land  and
   Housing.


   Therefore, in all cases, Land Reform and  Administration  should  achieve
   the following:


 • Gaurantee the security of all categories of tenure;
    • Keep all categories of land rights, whether  individual,  communal  or
      public clear and unambiguous;
    • Provide a robust framework for the marketability, including transfers,
      of different species of land rights, in specific cultural and economic
      contexts;
    • Facilitate the sustainable regulation and management of all categories
      of land, public private and community;
 • Provide an accurate and transparent land information system; and
 • Avail socially acceptable mechanisms to sort out disputes.


   9.3      Mr F K Tsheehama, Permanent Scretary: Namibia Ministry of Lands,

      Resettlement and Rehabilitation



   The challenge of land redistribution is equally a reality for Namibia and
   that the government of the Republic of Namibia has vowed to address  this
   with vigour within the laws of the Republic.


   The struggle for independence in Namibia was a war aimed  at  giving  the
   Namibian people the right to self-determination and to take full  control
   of their resources and means of production, among which land as means  of
   production is key.


   It is this need for and denial  of  access  to  land  as  a  vehicle  for
   development that necessitated the Namibian people and  oppressed  people,
   to take up arms in order to fight for their rights and to  determine  the
   destiny. The history of Namibia, like in South Africa,  is  testimony  to
   the injustices that were committed by the colonial powers  on  people  in
   effort to disown the people and take control of the land.


   In 1904 the first major resistance to foreign occupation  was  marked  by
   violent response when forefathers and mothers resisted  having  the  land
   grabbed by the colonial settlers. This  war  left  approximately  80  000
   Namibian people exterminated by German colonial  invaders.  In  1905  the
   German  government  issued  orders  empowering  the  colonial  regime  to
   confiscate all land from the Herero and Nama people.


   The colonial governments continued to push the majority of people to less
   productive land where population pressure on the land and other resources
   caused  extreme  poverty.  This  process  of  confiscation  involved   no
   compensation and in almost all cases  it  included  confiscation  of  the
   livestock of the people.


   In 1989 the Constituent Assembly adopted a constitution  that  guaranteed
   the right in land and provided for expropriation with just  compensation.
   At independence in 1990, the government, realizing  the  importance  that
   land will play in the development of the economy and the  eradication  of
   poverty amongst the majority of people, resolved that, in the interest of
   national reconciliation, a national consultation of the way  forward  was
   necessary.


   On coming to power, the SWAPO-led government announced its  intention  to
   redress the imbalances in the ownership and possession  of  land  through
   the transfer of land to the landless majority.


   This resulted in the 1991 National Conference on Land Reform and the Land
   Question that charted the  way  forward  and  the  manner  in  which  the
   government would implement the reform in  both  communal  and  commercial
   agricultural areas.


   10. INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE (LATIN AMERICA): LAND REFORM IN  MEXICO  AND
   BRAZIL
   10.1 Mr Eugenio Peixoto: Brazil Permanent Secretary for Agrarian Reform


   Brazil’s land problem  was  characterized  by  high  inequality;  33%  of
   population is rural; but 60% of farm land under –used, while 4.5  million
   rural households with little or no land;  history  of  sometimes  violent
   land invasions and confrontation between land owners and landless people.


   The rationale for land reform was based on social stability  and  equity;
   efficiency; macroeconomic  conditions  improving  and  during  1990s  the
   supply of land was up; and the price was down; and  land  reform  was  an
   integral part of National Poverty Reduction Strategy.
   Political background: Cardoso  government  (center-left/right  coalition)
   came power in 1995. Social movement  of  the  landless  people  (MST  and
   others) put pressures on government to deliver on  land.  Government  put
   the land reform high on the agenda. Subsequently,  created  Ministry  for
   Land and Agrarian Development. The Ministry obtained substantial increase
   in  land  reform  budget.  There  was  also  improvement  in  legal   and
   administrative framework for federal expropriation programme. World  Bank
   supported negotiated land reform pilot project nationwide (to 14  states)
   under the name (Land-Based Poverty Alleviation Project).


   There are two social movements, the MST and the CONTAG.  These  movements
   have quite distinct  constituencies  and  were  formally  and  informally
   associate themselves with the land reform and also have  different  views
   about the appropriate strategy to implement land reform.


   MST favours invasions and expropriation as the  appropriate  land  reform
   strategy while CONTAG supports invasions and expropriation,  but  also  a
   less confrontational strategy of land reform, including  negotiated  land
   reform.


   There were two land reforms programmes. Expropriation:  was  administered
   by Federal Land Reform and Colonization Institute  (INCRA).  Compensation
   method was through government bonds for compensation of land and cash for
   improvements.   Social   movements   helped   to   identify   farms   and
   beneficiaries.


   Land Credit programme  was  implemented  with  the  states.  Compensation
   method was through a voluntary agreement between owners  and  beneficiary
   associations. However, the price agreed is evaluated  by  government  and
   civil society. The programme has a  formal  partnership  with  CONTAG  to
   screen farms and beneficiaries.


   Project cycle Federal Programme focused on identification of farms  often
   by social movements; the eligibility for expropriation verified by  INCRA
   and approved by  INCRA  at  federal  level;  and  once  expropriation  is
   approved, the owner former owner has  to  surrender  the  land,  but  can
   contest listing and valuation of farm in court.


   Expropriation method: Farm size above maximum means  that  each  district
   has a reference farm size calculated as “15 modules”, 1 module is defined
   as viable family farm; farms up to 15 modules cannot be expropriated, but
   can be bought by INCRA; for example, if 1 module is 50 hectares, then the
   reference farm size is 750 hectares; If a farm is  above  that  reference
   farm size and declared “unproductive”, the government  could  expropriate
   it.


   Project cycle Land Credit Program: is  highly  decentralized  to  states;
   associations first  screened  by  District  Screening  committees,  where
   labour unions and civil society are involved; then technical  evaluation;
   the State committee for Sustainable Rural Development approves projects.


   Land Credit Project cycle:  the  negotiations  for  land  price  involves
   communities with the help from the state officials and CONTAG unions; all
   money for land purchase and investments transferred to former  owner  and
   community accounts at the time of  the  land  transfer;  community  owned
   funds then released in tranches upon receipt of expenditure reports;  the
   resettlement and all  investments  such  as  housing,  roads,  irrigation
   managed by community, and often executed by them.


11. ORGANIZED AGRICULTURE


1. Mr J F van der Merwe: AgriSA


   AgriSA  has  engaged  with  policy  makers  since  1992  to  gain  better
   understanding of the frustrations and aspirations of the landless and hoe
   it relates to the productive use of land, especially for food  production
   in a competitive commercial environment. A number of  guiding  principles
   emerged that should be applied for land reform, namely:


    • Land should be managed within  a  statutory  framework  that  balances
      needs, rights and obligations in an equitable fashion – being fair and
      just to all concerned. Acceptance of the importance of “rule  of  law”
      is therefore paramount for transparency, fairness and an outcome  that
      will be in the best long-term interest of the country.
    • Because State assisted land reform represents a major intervention  in
      the ownership pattern of productive  resources  and  therefore  causes
      uncertainty, unfortunately with negative economic  and  labour  market
      consequences, issues such as sharing of information, discipline around
      cut-off  times  for  restitution,  sound   supportive   administrative
      processes and adequate funding for land acquisition should be  adhered
      to.
    • The question being debated is who should pay for land reform. There is
      broad agreement that land reform is in national interest and therefore
      the cost of land reform should be borne by all South Africans  through
      Treasury and it should not be  required  from  present  landowners  to
      contribute differently or more to this  cost  than  other  tax  paying
      citizens. A skewed distribution of land reform cost can easily  result
      in efficient farmers being bought out at a price that will  not  allow
      them to invest elsewhere in equal or similar economic opportunities.
    • This implies that it is reasonable for landowners to expect  a  market
      related price for land that they have to  part  with,  which  is  best
      determined by means of the “willing buyer, willing seller” concept.
    • It is for government to decide on the target for land that needs to be
      transferred into the hands of black farmers and those  who  need  land
      for  housing.  However,  any  commitment  in  this  regard  should  be
      underpinned  by  adequate  financial  support   from   government   to
      facilitate land transactions and should include resources for  pre  as
      well as post settlement support.
    • Government should also take cognizance of the effect  of  land  reform
      policies and programmes on food security and jobs – issues of  similar
      importance as land reform in the context  of  stability  and  economic
      opportunities, especially in rural areas. Targets for land reform  are
      therefore not as issue to be  decided  on  without  considering  other
      important national imperatives.


   AgriSA  and  its  affiliates  have  committed  towards   addressing   the
   agricultural dimensions of land reform, and  more  especially  supporting
   the development of successful Black farmers. AgriSA is in  a  process  of
   seeking wider industry support and co-operation for  an  initiative  that
   will support and promote black farmer development programmes, nationwide.
   Also wish to work closely  with  NAFU  and  government  in  this  regard.
   Information on progress with land reform and farmer settlements  as  well
   as the application of “best practice” that will deliver positive results,
   mentorship  facilitation,  strategies  to   achieve   broader   community
   involvement, canvassing of financial resources for programmes and  policy
   advocacy will be the core functions of this initiative.


   The demand for land also  needs  to  unpacked.  There  are  physical  and
   economic constraints that  limit  the  opportunities  to  participate  in
   commercial agriculture. The question has been raised whether we  want  to
   grow subsistence farming. This  is  a  political  decision  about  future
   options but need to guard against  simplistic  short-term  solutions  for
   complex challenges.


   There seems to be a perception that  commercial  farmers  have  excessive
   resources at disposal. Although there are large-scale farmers the reality
   is that  most  farmers  are  small  businesses  with  low  profitability.
   According to the 2002 Agricultural Statistical Survey 51%  of  commercial
   farmer’s turnover was below the level that required farmers  to  register
   for VAT. If the norms of the National Small  Business  Act  (Act  102  of
   1996) were applied, also in terms of capital employed, the vast  majority
   of farms would be classified as small businesses. These  are  facts  that
   should be more commonly understood and acceptable. The ability of farmers
   to share resources and remain viable are therefore limited.


   Globally, due to freer markets and competition, farm  sizes  are  on  the
   increase to achieve economies of scale in order to  be  competitive.  The
   sustainability  of  small  scale  farming  under  these   conditions   is
   questionable from a pure economic perspective.


   The local commercial sector, due to limited government  support  compared
   to international counterparts, faces  an  even  heavier  economic  burden
   dictating a greater need to become bigger in order to reap  the  benefits
   of the so-called economies of scale.
   It is the government responsibility to  promote  the  competitiveness  of
   primary agriculture, for example by reducing  the  cost  of  administered
   prices. It includes reducing taxes and levies on a number of inputs. This
   imperative was  recognized  in  the  Strategic  Plan  for  South  African
   Agriculture. Imposing a land tax will be counterproductive,  neutralizing
   the potential benefit of efforts by government to promote conditions  for
   investment and growth.


   The commercial land market  in  South  Africa  is  active.  About  4%  of
   agricultural land is traded annually. Adequate land of  good  quality  is
   available for redistribution. With the support of LRAD and the  financial
   support  from  commercial  banks,  this  land   can   be   obtained   for
   redistribution. The problem in most cases is that of insufficient equity.
   There are innovative models available to deal with this problem.


   The principle of land expropriation for purposes of land reform was  also
   debated and proposed as a method to expedite the  process  and  cut  down
   cost. With no information available as to what is being considered it  is
   AgriSA’s view that this will not  necessarily  achieve  any  of  the  two
   objectives. AgriSA continue to demand  fundamental  sound  administrative
   processes if the State is to acquire land for land reform  and  for  fair
   compensation. Even an amended Expropriation Act  cannot  move  away  from
   applying  the  “willing   seller-willing   buyer”   concept.   A   common
   understanding on the meaning of this concept and the application  thereof
   should be sought. There is a need therefore rather debate more  practical
   solutions for specific problems that a market assisted  approach  towards
   land reform presents.


2. Mr M  Matlala: NAFU


   Gathered here deliberate on effective ways to accelerate land  reform  in
   South Africa and find equitable ways of sharing  the  available  land  in
   socially acceptable ways.


   In South Africa, black farmers  who  were  not  even  in  a  position  to
   participate in the rush for agricultural profits for many decades are now
   left with such backlog  of  enablement,  than  even  the  countries  like
   Brazil, Japan or wherever, requires far more  complex  modeling  than  is
   currently being applied.


   NAFU members  have  very  little  land  and  face  almost  insurmountable
   obstacles in  acquiring  land,  and  when  they  do  acquire,  they  find
   themselves so far outside the agricultural value chain  that  competitive
   production seems impossible. In addition to this, the survival of a small
   farmer whether is Black  or  White,  has  become  so  irrelevant  to  the
   accountants who  drive  for  corporate  profit  growth,  that  ultimately
   farming feels more like a punishment than a reward.


   NAFU does not belief that there is too little land  in  South  Africa  to
   promote a healthy  and  stable  agricultural  sector  based  on  socially
   equitable principles. It is however known that access to, and utilization
   of land is complicated by a number of factors. People argue that land  is
   expensive and this is a major cause  for  problems  facing  the  country.
   Expensive land is a normal dynamic and the cost  of  acquiring  expensive
   land can be mitigated through diligent and focused production.


   NAFU contend that land is overpriced. This is not a  normal  dynamic  and
   the best production techniques will not allow  a  farmer  to  farm  in  a
   manner that would allow them to repay the cost of overpriced acquisition.
   Overpriced land has many causes but the two most pertinent reasons are as
   follows:


   In the first instance sellers inflate the actual  value  of  agricultural
   properties by incorporating the perceived value of  improvements  on  the
   property that do not enhance production capacity  and  hence  ability  to
   repay acquisition loans. It should also be noted the  majority  of  these
   non-productive improvements were made  possible  by  unrealistic  profits
   realized in a subsidized production environment, extremely low  repayment
   interest rates and with the utilization of a labour  force  that  had  no
   minimum conditions of service protection. Buyers on the other  hand,  are
   faced with prospect of competing  with  a  global  food  market  that  no
   production subsidies, and have to borrow money at competitive  commercial
   rates from financial institutions that all of this while  paying  minimum
   wages, maintaining respectable work  conditions  and  providing  socially
   responsible developments assistance to  their  work  force.  It  is  this
   definition of willing seller-willing buyer then clearly it will not work,
   because while it may all sound like a  leveling  playing  field,  clearly
   this field has been built on two terrains with the one half  much  higher
   than the other.


   In the second instance, overpriced land results  from  the  wealth  being
   generated in western economies that can  afford  to  buy  land  in  South
   Africa and let it lie fallow until a handsome profit can be made when the
   exchange rate is favourable. Would it benefit the western maize  industry
   if a sizable chunk of South African maize  producing  lands  were  turned
   into game reserves with the aid of profits made  from  subsidized  maize?
   The answer will not be known if South Africa does not begin  to  maintain
   accurate information regarding foreign land ownership, the origin of  the
   funding as well as the purpose for which the  land  in  South  Africa  is
   being utilized for.


   It remains one of the biggest concerns that the relative lack of accurate
   and reliable information about black farmers, successes and  contribution
   they make in feeding the nation, continues  to  allow  those  who  resist
   government’s efforts to reform the  industry,  to  shout  untruths  about
   black farmers and  hide  the  fact  that  their  real  contribution  into
   destabilize an environment that is politically precarious poised.  It  is
   also known what happens when the fundamental need of people to work  land
   is ignored. In Zimbabwe the frustration felt by people in this regard was
   not adequately addressed and South Africa has seen what  the  destructive
   impact on the economy can be when agricultural foundation of the  country
   is destabilized to the point  where  normal  dynamics  and  relationships
   cease to exist. The government in Zimbabwe could not manage the situation
   without the collaboration of the private sector. South Africa  must  take
   heed of what happened and  ensure  that  the  private  sector  and  civil
   society be activated to play a significant role on the road ahead.


   With regards to land restitution, it  is  the  very  same  dynamic  which
   impacts on the willing seller-willing buyer  concept  that  continues  to
   frustrate the process of land restitution. The delays,  more  often  than
   not relate to the vastly  different  perceptions  of  value  that  people
   attaché to agricultural land.


   NAFU contend that the subsidies utilized by the  previous  government  to
   build a strong agricultural infrastructure were  aimed  at  preserving  a
   national resource to the benefit of a select few.


   In this NAFU calls for a review of all legislative  mechanisms  governing
   land and agrarian reform in South Africa. The reality facing  agriculture
   is that while land indeed plays a critical role,  there  is  no  balanced
   agriculture as have not had  for  some  time  (the  high  subsidy  levels
   utilized for decades by the previous government is testimony to that).


   11.3 Transvaal Agricultural Union (TAU)


   Of the 84 900 000 hectares of land approximately 25 000 000  hectares  of
   arable land will be redistributed through land restitution. AgriBEE  will
   take another 26 405 000 hectares. This leaves us with 32 395 000 hectares
   arable land. This excludes the communal  land  that  is  already  in  the
   possession of the State, previously part of the National States and still
   the basis of subsistence farming. This is the land that  has  to  deliver
   food security to South Africa and Southern African region.


   The process of land restitution is based on land claims. In spite of  the
   procedures laid down by the law, land claim is a  major  issue  for  land
   owners because the right to private property is at stake.  The  landowner
   is excluded from the process of the land claim until it is  published  in
   the Government Gazette. The marginalisation of the farmer  as  proprietor
   until the last moment is a distortion of the right to private property.


   The process of land reform also jeopardize the civil rights of the farmer
   if the implementation of  the  Act  is  forced  onto  the  farming  as  a
   political process  without  supporting  the  economic  viability  of  the
   agrarian communities. Land claims and  the  constant  threat  of  AgriBEE
   impacts  on  the  psychological  and  social  structures  of  the   rural
   communities and creates a society in imbalance.


   More agricultural land is available on the free market and  approximately
   2003 farms have already been offered to the Department  of  Land  Affairs
   for possession. In the  mean  time  more  claims  are  published  on  the
   agricultural land. It is unlikely that the  commercial  productive  farms
   will continue its production after the claimants have possessed the farm.
   The question arises if the claimants are farmers,  potential  farmers  or
   only subsistence farmers.  Will  the  new  farmers  sustain  the  optimal
   ecologically balanced production potential of the land? According to  the
   recent examples it is unlikely that commercial agriculture  will  benefit
   from this process.


   The process of Land Reform should enhance the  commercial  production  of
   food provide the structures and environment for  black  emerging  farmers
   without discriminating white commercial farmers.


   On commercial agriculture and food  security,  TAU  emphasizes  that  the
   future of South Africa’s  commercial  agriculture  and  sustainable  food
   production in globalised economies, will be determined  by  international
   economic and financial  standards  and  regulations,  and  not  by  South
   African standards and a Land Reform Programme. TAU  maintains  the  point
   that free economic and market forces must determine  the  development  of
   Economic Empowerment in the agricultural sector.


   The test for successful agriculture is when food is produced in  quantity
   and quality on a commercial basis to impact on  the  basic  existence  of
   every  person  by  delivering  sustenance  to  combat  under-nourishment,
   malnutrition and famine and secure health on  a  sustainable  competitive
   and commercial basis in globalised economies.


   With the collapse of the economies of the  neighbouring  states  and  the
   regression of social services, the South African  economy  will  have  to
   grow with 6% to 7%. This is unlikely if the loss in human capital through
   an aggressive transformation process and policy continues and the  burden
   on services in rural areas escalates. The influx  of  illegal  foreigners
   and the unprotected borders will eventually restrict the growth  and  put
   more stress on commercial agricultural land.


   Therefore, the position of TAU on land reform and cannot change from  the
   stance that land reform and the AgriBEE framework  for  Agriculture  will
   jeopardize  the  property  rights,  production  and  competitiveness   of
   commercial agriculture in a sensitive  and  high  risk  industry  to  the
   detriment of food production and food security.


   12.       ACADEMIC PRESENTATIONS


   12.1 Prof Ruth Hall: University of the Western Cape


   Critical policy questions


   On Small scale farming: Do we believe in this as an option for the  poor?
   What must be done to enable success?
   Land acquisition:  should  the  state  remain  reticent,  or  proactively
   intervene in markets?
   Farm workers: Is their future as rural proletariat only, or as  producers
   in the their own right?
   Land rights and tenure: how should land be held and administered?
   AgriBEE: What commitments from landowners?


   The negotiated transition to democracy, and  the  Constitution,  involved
   fundamental compromises:


    • Existing property rights  would  be  respected,  no  matter  how  such
      property has been obtained historically;
    • But this respect would be set against a strong mandate on the state to
      effect land reform and bring about a more  equitable  system  of  land
      rights


   Section 25 of the Constitution is an agenda  for  transformation  because
   it:


 • Obliges government to implement land reform “in the nation’s interest,”
 • Empowers government to  intervene  in  and  override  markets,  including
   through expropriation;
 • 1 Clause gives qualified protection to property rights;
 • 8 of 9 clauses are about transforming property rights


   As in other democracies, property rights  are  not  absolute,  but  exist
   within a matrix of counter-balancing rights and obligations. However,  up
   to now the state  has  not  intervened  decisively  in  the  property  or
   agricultural economy. Such a laissez-faire approach is  unprecedented  in
   world –historical terms, and international evidence suggests that  it  is
   not capable of bringing about substantial transformation in the  property
   rights.


   There is substantial unused scope for more proactive and  interventionist
   strategies to drive change. Few would consider  the  status  quo  in  the
   rural areas to be sustainable, other than at an extremely high  cost.  It
   is difficult to imagine how these challenges may be resolved  other  than
   through far-reaching land and agrarian reform.


   Four key Challenges


    • To develop a strategic vision for transformation  (and  to  delop  the
      institutions and provide the resources  necessary  for  a  fundamental
      agrarian reform);
    • To engage systematically with  property  owners  in  order  to  secure
      sufficient land for  redistribution  (supply  side  reforms,  directly
      through negotiation or compulsory purchase, or  indirectly  through  a
      land tax);
    • To engage  systematically  with  landless  (in  order  to  define  the
      quantity and quality of land demand and to  mobilize  popular  support
      for land reform); and
    • To provide a supportive environment for a new class of  small  farmers
      (to produce for market and non-market purposes, in terms of access  to
      input  and  output  markets,  revamped  state  support  services   and
      affordable credit).


   Therefore, as a way-forward the Summit represents a historic  opportunity
   to reflect on and learn from experiences over the  past  decade,  and  to
   chart a new course. High-level policy debate is now needed on the  future
   direction of the programme as a whole, and the roles  of  the  state  and
   other progressive social partners. The Summit also  provides  opportunity
   to make commitments about specific interventions that are needed  in  the
   short-term. An appropriate post-Summit process may be required to further
   explore options for the future and top respond to positions presented.


   12.2 Prof G M Nkondo: University of Venda


   The presentation focuses on the complex of political and economic factors
   that seem to drive land occupation  as  well  as  the  government’s  land
   reform implementation strategy. A review of the  debates  in  government,
   the private sector and civil society since 1994 points  to  the  absolute
   importance of deepening and broadening understanding of the interplay  of
   political and economic  forces  informing  government  strategy  and  the
   various forms of resistance and response. And given the  fact  that  most
   people involved in land occupations – the landless  and  homeless  –  are
   poor and illiterate, it is then more urgent to  develop  a  comprehensive
   and integrated public  education  strategy.   For  a  number  of  complex
   reasons,  the  government  land  reform  information  and   communication
   strategy has gone deep and far enough.


   One  wonders  whether  the  landless  peoples  movement,  including   its
   affiliates is on the same page with government  regarding  the  political
   and  economic  considerations,  mid  to  long  term,  that   drives   the
   implementation strategy. A number  of  empirical  studies  refer  to  the
   widening gap in understanding between government and the Landless Peoples
   Movement on both policy and implementation strategy.


   The following observations require close study:


    • The richly nuanced historical and ideological contexts of the  Freedom
      Charter,   the   Reconstruction   and   Development   Programme,   the
      Co0nstitution and the Growth, Economic and  Reconstruction  Programme,
      are not adequately understood, let alone appreciated by those directly
      affected by land reforms;
    • The ideological and strategic reasons for the apparent shift from  the
      Freedom Charter through the RDP and GEAR to the White  Paper  on  Land
      Development, Public Land Management, and  Land  Administration,  still
      have to be articulated in the language of the tribe;
    • How to mange the apparent let down from the euphoria of freedom in our
      lifetime in 1994, to a clear –eyed admission that land reform in South
      Africa is subject to various constraints including; macro-economic and
      fiscal constraints, organizational constraints, capacity  constraints,
      physical resources, governance and institutional constraints;


   The  apparent  tension  between   manifest,   policy,   legislation   and
   implementation has to be managed as cautiously as  possible.  Central  to
   this is the need for a comprehensive and  implementable  information  and
   communication strategy.


   The land use is an extremely delicate and  potentially  explosive  matter
   and must be handled with the utmost care. And all  of  things  necessary,
   deepening and broadening public understanding, especially within the LPM,
   cannot be over-emphasised.
    • There is also the question of the states constitutional duty “to  take
      reasonable steps to enable citizens to gain access  to  land,  promote
      security  of  tenure,  and  to  provide  redress  to  those  who  were
      dispossessed of property after 19 June 1912 as a restitution  of  past
      discriminatory laws or practices. In a country  if  sharp  social  and
      economic disparities, consensus on “reasonable steps” may  prove  hard
      to achieve. Not without such  consensus,  there  will  be  no  end  to
      conflict, and no end to land occupation.
    • Further, there is a need to educate the  public,  especially  the  key
      actors, that the partnership between government,  the  private  sector
      and civil society, fraught with ideological struggles in a globalizing
      economy, cannot be sustained without compromise. Understanding of  the
      ideological and strategic comprise is required.


   12.3     Prof Sipho Buthelezi: University of Fort Hare


   In poor agrarian  economies,  the  pattern  of  landholding  is  a  major
   correlate of political power structure,  social  hierarchy  and  economic
   relations. Possession of land confers  on  the  possessors  the  mutually
   reinforcing attributes of the political privilege  and  social  prestige.
   The aggregate pattern of land ownership, determines the manner  in  which
   land and labour are combined for production purposes,  with  consequences
   for the  quantum  distribution  of  the  product.  These  in  term,  have
   implications for the relative and absolute material  well  being  of  the
   population, particularly as food is the major product of land.


   Small farmers, tenants, sharecroppers and landless workers are among  the
   social groups vulnerable to hunger and poverty,  and  they  usually  have
   inadequate  access  to  land   and   other   productive   resources.   An
   International Labour Organization (ILO) study, suggests that agricultural
   wage workers,  for  example,  are  the  poorest  sections  of  the  rural
   population, and in many countries their real wages  have  fallen  despite
   rising agricultural productivity and trade. At the same time, much of the
   cultivated,  fertile  land  is  held  by  a  small  number  of   powerful
   landowners. Thus the social impetus for land and agrarian reform  is  the
   possibility of improved social justice and equity.


   The varieties of land and agrarian reform have been  informed  by  varied
   and historically determined  agendas,  mediated  by  clearly  articulated
   social and class exigencies.


   13.      SOCIAL MOVEMENTS


   13.1 Border Rural Committee


   Civil society has devised and implemented an advocacy strategy  aimed  at
   ensuring that victims of dispossession in the Eastern Cape are not denied
   the constitutional right to restitution. The strategy has taken  form  of
   the “Vulamasango Singene” campaign (open the door so  that  we  can  come
   in).  The campaign has three thrusts: community mobilization, building  a
   critical mass of organizational support, and negotiating with government.




   The Eastern Cape is the poorest province in the country and the  homeland
   are the poorest parts of the province. Over 70% of people in these  areas
   are poor. Unfortunately, the trend of  worsening  poverty  has  not  been
   arrested since 1994 – and as a matter of fact has been deteriorating. The
   efforts that government  has  made  to  address  the  problem  have  been
   inadequate.  Supplementary  programmes  and   strategies   are   urgently
   required.


   Progress to date


   Community mobilization: The key to winning the campaign is the extent  to
   which affected communities are mobilized. There are approximately  1  250
   communities in the former Ciskei and  Transkei  which  were  dispossessed
   through betterment. To date, approximately 200 of these communities  have
   been  organized,  and  collectively  constitute  the  foundation  of  the
   campaign.


   Building a critical mass of organizational support in the  Eastern  Cape:
   It is necessary to achieve united support for the  campaign  amongst  all
   important organizations in the Province. At this stage, the  campaign  is
   drive by collective leadership provided by the African National  Congress
   (Eastern Cape), the Border Rural Committee, the Congress of South African
   Trade Union (Eastern Cape), the Eastern Cape NGO Coalition,  the  Eastern
   Cape Council of Churches and the South African Communist  Party  (Eastern
   Cape).


   Negotiations with government:  campaigners  have  been  negotiating  with
   government for two years. Based on a joint commitment to resolve what  is
   mutually acknowledged to be a substantive problem,  government  committed
   itself to find  an  appropriate  solution  was  clearly  demonstrated  by
   Minister’s  signing  of  an  official  memorandum  on  the  lodgment   of
   betterment claims in the Eastern Cape.


   13.2 Regional Emergent Farmers Forum: Eastern Cape


   Challenges / problems


 • Access to productive land  with  water,  proper  fencing  and  affordable
   prices;
 • A land ceiling should be instituted and one farm should  be  allowed  per
   farmer;
 • Government should force farmers with more than one farm to sell  land  to
   emerging farmers;
 • Government must review land policies and all stakeholders to participate.
 • Game farms and foreign land ownership lead to job losses.
 • Problems with  municipalities  regarding  lack  of  support  to  maintain
   commonage land; and
 • There is  no  representation  on  municipal  local  economic  development
   structures.


   13.3 National House of Traditional Leaders


   The traditional communities are  underdeveloped  and  most  live  without
   access to services such as electricity, clean water, sewerage and houses.
   The setting is strictly rural and operate on not on a basis  of  cash  or
   monetary economy, but through agricultural activities.


   The issue of land, ownership and occupation has been critical for a  long
   time. Beneath that are the glaring issues of  housing,  unemployment  and
   infrastructure. For a long time, land has been the cornerstone of African
   life.


   Land ownership: in  South  Africa  over  80%  of  the  best  grazing  and
   agricultural land is in the hands of white people. The critical issue  is
   the fact that according to statistics about two-thirds of African  people
   live in the rural areas. The Constitution guarantees the ownership of the
   individual fixed property. Government can only buy land from  descendents
   of white colonizers on willing seller, willing buyer policy.


   Government, since independence in 1994 introduced land  reform  programme
   that  sought  to  redistribute  30%  of  land,  initially  scheduled  for
   completion before 2006. However,  the  land  reform  is  marked  by  some
   disappointments and frustrations. Land redistribution deadline is set for
   completion by year 2014. According to Department  of  Land  Affairs  only
   3.2% of this target  has  been  delivered.  Through  the  willing  buyer,
   willing seller policy this has cost more than R1 billion  in  restitution
   while more than R300 million was  spent  in  redistribution  and  tenure.
   Currently, 82 million hectares of arable land is owned by a minority.


   Therefore, the debate around land  occupations  is  tangled  with  racial
   politics and  in  turn  perceptions  have  largely  been  negative.  Land
   occupation in general is  associated  with  disorder,  political  strife,
   economic crisis and administrative failure on  the  part  of  blacks.  In
   Zimbabwe, for example, the recent land occupations have  been  synonymous
   with economic crisis and political failure.


   13.4 Landless People’s Movement (LPM)


   The LPM has demanded the land summit since  2001.  Various  meeting  were
   held with the Department.  The LPM believed that if the following demands
   are implemented, land crisis that has engulfed the nation and people, can
   begin to be resolved:


    • Government must ensure immediate moratorium on  all  rural  and  urban
      forced removals and evictions, whether from farms or other rural land;
 • End market led land reform and the willing buyer, willing seller policy;
 • Government must ensure to stop land sales to foreigners;
    •  A  mass-based  land  audit  to  identify  all  forms  of  unused   or
      unproductive land, as well as land of  abusive  farmers  and  absentee
      owners can be made available for land reform;
    • Government should provide post-settlement support in terms of markets,
      finance, training and inputs and use the land reform money to  support
      the landless;
    • Government must scrap the ESTA and LTA and replace these  with  a  law
      that must protect and give land to farm dwellers.
   13.5 South African Communist Party (SACP)


   The SACP hopes that the summit will reach some agreement and take forward
   the following issues:


    • The Summit needs to commit to a process to discuss the development  of
      a comprehensive state-led and people-centred  and  agrarian  strategy.
      Key elements of the strategy must be an effective linkage between land
      reform and agricultural development, to development,  land  for  human
      settlement, and building of a  progressive  agricultural  co-operative
      movement.
    • In order to achieve such as comprehensive, inclusive strategy,  it  is
      important to push government beyond just two pillars of land reform  –
      security  of  land  tenure  and  land  restitution  –   to   proactive
      acquisition of new land, including using expropriation and effectively
      regulate prices paid for land.
    • All other demands which include access to  land,  decent  working  and
      living conditions for farm workers, effective post-settlement  support
      must  all  be  subjected  to,  and  can  only  be  realized  under  an
      overarching  state-led  industrial  policy  on   land   and   agrarian
      transformation.
    • Review the willing seller, willing buyer policy and lay a basis for an
      alternative strategy and programme. Such strategy and  programme  must
      include expropriation and  all  other  instruments  contained  in  the
      Constitution and other legislation.
    • Central in land and agrarian transformation is  access  to  affordable
      and appropriate credit and the importance of linking the discussion to
      the struggles and processes for the transformation  of  the  financial
      sector; and
    • Review all local government Integrated Development Programmes in order
      to ensure to include land and agrarian transformation measures.


   13.6 Alliance of Land and Agrarian Reform Movements (ALARM)


   ALARM presented a memorandum which was  a  collective  contribution  from
   landless communities,  rural  dwellers,  national  and  provincial  NGOs,
   landless people’s organizations, small farmers and producer  groups,  the
   environmental sector as well as the South African  Communist  Party  with
   the following demands:


 • Government must scrap market-based reform;
 • Make another countryside possible: the state must drive land and agrarian
   reform;
 • The state must actively  and  aggressively  use  expropriation  for  land
   redistribution;
 • Re-open the date for land restitution claims;
 • End farm dweller evictions;
 • Review Communal Land Rights Act;
 • Promote and develop sustainable livelihoods; and
 • A consultative, representative and democratic post-summit process.


   13.7 Southern Cape and Karoo


   Given the failure of the current land reform programme to address  skewed
   patterns of land ownership and lack  of  meaningful  change  in  people’s
   lives within the democratic dispensation civil society has  been  calling
   for land summit for the past three  years.  The  call  is  for  a  summit
   seeking alternatives to the current market based  land  reform  programme
   and its inability to redistribute land for livelihoods. It is  with  this
   understanding that  the  landless  people,  emerging  farmers  and  rural
   communities  of  the  Southern  Cape  and  Karoo  districts  decided   to
   participate in the summit to contribute  towards  shifting  market  based
   land reform and land use. Issues to  be  addressed  by  the  summit  must
   include:


 • The imperative to facilitate access to  land  and  control  over  natural
   resources;
 • Post settlement support for sustainable livelihoods;
 • Decentralization and the effect on land reform;
 • Privatization of state assets and the effect on  land  reform  and  rural
   development;
    • Farm dwellers and the inability of the  current  policies  to  address
      tenure and livelihood for farm dwellers; and
    • Integrated Sustainable rural Development and Spatial Planning and  the
      effects on sustainable rural development.


   13.8 Trust for Community Outreach & Education (TCOE)


   Firstly, there are white farmers who have large pieces of land  and  also
   many farms, while on the other hand there are people without land even to
   put up an informal structure. The farmers in turn  employ  the  landless,
   where farm dwellers are exploited.


   Secondly, how land is sold –  the  willing  buyer,  willing  seller.  The
   principle is problematic because redistribution of private land can  only
   happen when there is a white farmer willing to sell. The  principle  also
   gives powers to white farmers to sell land at prices that are exorbitant.




   Thirdly, with regard to 30% land, government promises to redistribute  by
   2014. The question is what is the difference between 30% and the 13% that
   was given. The effect of the decision is that black people will  be  left
   with 43% land whilst white people will  remain  with  57%.  There  is  no
   difference because people who will benefit from  the  redistributed  land
   are more, because of population growth, compared to the people that  were
   allocated the 13% of land in  1913.  Land  was  dispossessed  because  of
   capitalist motives.


   14. REPORTS OF COMMISSIONS


   14.1 COMMISSION ONE


   THEME 1: Land Redistribution: Urban & Rural Development


   STRATEGIC DIRECTION


   Proactive role of the State


 • Consensus on rejection of willing buyer, willing seller (except AgriSA)
    • State must be the driving force  behind  land  redistribution,  rather
      than the present  minimalist  role.  Specifically,  more  staff,  more
      resources should be allocated for the  programme,  active  negotiation
      with landowners and expropriation where needed.
 • State must have right of first refusal on all land sales


   Who should benefit


    • Primarily the previously  disadvantaged  people  should  benefit,  but
      specific measures should be taken to target:  the  poor,  women,  farm
      workers and the youth.


   Land redistribution to promote urban & rural development


    • Land redistribution must provide land for production  and  settlement,
      in both rural and urban areas.
 •  Land  redistribution  needs  to  be   integrated   with   infrastructure
   development.


   Role of the State


 • Right of first refusal, with a reasonable timeframe
 • Land tax: supported by all parties except AgriSA
 • Budget: substantial increases in budgets, more staff
 • Actively promote subdivision to provide for smallholders
    • Reverse the growing concentration of landholding but disagreement from
      AgriSA on how for example, land ceilings or one-family one farm
    • Conduct a land audit on public and private land  (including  municipal
      land) and make this information publicly available at local level
 • Moratorium on sale of state land – except for land reform purposes
    •  There  must  be  speedy  and  just  administrative  action  in   land
      redistribution (cut the red tape, more capacity)


   Land Acquisition


    • Proactive acquisition by the state in response  to  identified  needs,
      through negotiated purchase and where necessary expropriation. This is
      the alternative to WBWS that must be scrapped.
 • Disagreement on the expropriation aspect from AgriSA.
 • There was rejection of paying market prices. Two views emerged:


          Use Constitutional  criteria  to  pay  below  –market  “just  and
          equitable” compensation
          Do not pay any compensation  that  is,  confiscate).  This  would
           require Constitutional amendment.


 • Strong support for moratorium on foreign ownership (but leasehold  is  an
   option) and address redistribution of land already  owned  by  foreigners
   and reparations.
 • Target unused and underutilized land, and land of abusive farmers.
    • Insert a “social obligations clause” in the  Constitution  to  protect
      those who occupy the above categories of land.


   Local Government


   Proactive role and responsibility for municipalities


    • Local government must play an active role in land and agrarian  reform
      – identify local needs, release municipal land and assist to  identify
      land to meet the needs of people, and provide services and support  to
      beneficiaries.
    • Ensure land reform in included in every IDP and define it as LED, that
      is part of the mandate of local government.


   Municipal commonage policy


 • Stop allowing commercial farmers to use commonage.
 • Promote access to  municipal  commonage  for  poor  people  and  emerging
   farmers.
    • Local land  forums  to  identify  land  needs  and  include  landless,
      municipalities,  Department   of   Land   Affairs,   Agriculture   and
      landowners.



   Land Use & Development



 • Revisit the dominant models of land use and agriculture.
 • Support the option of small-scale agriculture
    • People in informal settlements must be prioritized for access to  land
      and housing on nearby unused land.
    • Moratorium on new golf courses and new game farms  and  other  elitist
      developments, and privatization of state forest land.
    • Invest in coordinated and better –  resourced  post-transfer  support,
      including training, extension, access to markets and finance.
 • Urgent intervention to address problems in existing projects.
    • Disagreement about strategic  partnerships:  perpetuating  inequality?
      Better safeguards &  state  facilitation  must  be  put  in  place  in
      strategic partnerships.


   14.2     COMMISSION TWO


   THEME 2: Land Restitution: Balancing rights of dispossessed and  economic
   development


   Prices, affordability and quickening the pace


    • Expropriation: should be  applied  as  an  additional  instrument  for
      restitution purposes to speed up the process and  set  affordable  and
      fair compensation.
 • Review of the willing seller/ willing buyer principle.


   Sustainable Developmental imperative


    • Post-settlement support (must have a business plan for each  community
      should include pre and post transfer measures:


      - provision of training, mentorship (including capacity building)
      - development of SMMEs
      - development of bulk infrastructure in which community is involved
      - income from land has to be used for development of community


    • Nature conservation: communities must have  ownership  of  this  land,
      must be in partnership with conservation projects and  must  share  in
      benefits from the projects.
    • Urbanization: Restitution in urban areas has  to  be  integrated  with
      IDPs and provincial development programmes.
    • Obstacles in urban development of properties involved  in  restitution
      have to be addressed by relaxing by-laws, as a well as other forms  of
      support.



   Compensation



    • More options than the dominant cash model are necessary, for  example,
      land and housing in rural  areas  are  still  preferred  to  financial
      compensation.
 • Urban  areas  have  unique  situation  and  compensation  sometimes  more
   appropriate.


   Improved communication and consultation


 • Communication and reporting  strategies  to  communities  on  outstanding
   claims:


     - Require regular communication with communities regarding  outstanding
      claims already gazetted;
     - Concerns about failure to communicate  the  restitution  process  and
      requirements, and therefore missed opportunities to lodge claims (this
      is used as one justification to extend the restitution process).


   Comprehensive rights to beneficiaries


    • Complementary rights (mineral, forestry and water  rights)  should  be
      investigated: restitution should be extended to more than surface land-
      use rights.
 • There is need to involve relevant government Departments, communities and
   beneficiaries.


   Review of cut-off dates


 • Re-opening of restitution application process (extension of 1998):


         - Relatively low number of  applications  compared  to  number  of
           forced removals, especially in urban areas;
         - Communities were unable to apply  on  time  because  of  various
           factors, such as communication problems, the complexity  of  the
           process, the legality of it etc;
         - Extension backwards prior to 1913 considered  but  no  consensus
           (raises possibility of conflicting inter-ethnic claims);
      - Re-opening should not compromise existing settled claims.


   Partnerships


    • Restitution  cannot  make  a  difference  without  partnerships.  Both
      community and partners must benefit from the partnership;
    • Partnership development is a process, and initial unequal relationship
      must be addressed by ongoing empowerment;
    • Capacity building, financial resources, evaluation and monitoring  all
      require strategic partnerships.


   Kind of partnerships:


 • NGOs
 • Private sector: business and financial institutions
 • Inter-departmental partnerships in government
 • Former land owners


   Restitution Truth and Reconciliation Commission


    • Land is an economic asset, an emotional identity and dignity resource,
      a social insurance asset and more
    • Emotional and social trauma and polarization caused  by  dispossession
      have  to  be  addressed  by  Commission  similar  to  TRC  to  promote
      reconciliation and mutual understanding within South African society;
 • Healing and bringing closure.


   14.3     COMMISSION THREE


   THEME 3: Creation of a thriving economy in rural areas in the context of
             Land & Agrarian Reform


   Human and  Institutional  capacity  to  support  land  based  agriculture
   activity


    •  Establish  agriculture  training  institutions  (academies)  in   all
      municipalities. These are to be used to train the youth, women and the
      farmers in general.
 • Entrench Agriculture as part of the curriculum in schools.
 • Retool and re-skill the current extension service work force.
    • Promote mentoring  arrangements  but  ensure  that  these  have  clear
      service level agreements that are regular monitored.
 • Encourage joint ventures that are characterized  by  meaningful  business
   skills transfer.
    • Provide intensive training for beneficiaries of land reform. It should
      be noted that the current crop of successful commercial  farmers  draw
      their success from generations (four or more) of knowledge accumulated
      by their farming families.
    • Government to review redeployment of public service staff that support
      agriculture. Redeployment often has a  negative  impact  on  community
      that would have been served by that individual.
 • PAETA to prioritize land reform beneficiaries for  learnership  to  build
   skills.


   Provision of well-researched information on production


 • Comprehensive audit of land potential and viable  agriculture  activities
   on such land.
 • Government to provide  information  on  other  economic  activities  that
   agriculture can link to.
 •  Enhance  quality  of  transfer  of  agriculture   information   to   the
   beneficiaries of the land reform.
    •  Government  to  fund  development  of  new  technologies   that   are
      appropriate for small scale farming.
 • Information  to  be  provided  to  the  beneficiaries  in  user  friendly
   language.
 • Government to provide funding for research into indigenous technology.


   Develop appropriate market systems and support systems focus on RSA, SADC
   & AFRICA


    • Market responses needs to begin to delink from dictates  of  countries
      of the North and focus of RSA needs,  and  then  the  needs  of  other
      countries on the continent.
 • Enhance the quality of provision of information about markets.
    • Government to ensure that policy is responding  to  markets  that  are
      sustainable in the medium to long term.
 •  Promote  the  Proudly  South  African  culture  for   locally   produced
   agriculture products.
    • All spheres of government to facilitate  establishment  of  local  and
      district level markets as well as mobile market systems  for  handling
      of small volume produce.
    • All spheres of government to investigate the establishment of a mobile
      abattoir system for chickens and small livestock.


   Broaden establishment of cooperatives and enable sustainable  support  to
   them


    • Sustainable government support to cooperatives is desirable to  enable
      these not only to succeed but to also  remain  democratic.  Government
      withdrawal has in some cases  precipitated  a  situation  where  these
      entities are subsequently run undemocratically.
 • Enable integration of different types of cooperatives (finance, producer,
   marketing).
 • Government to consider applying a percentage  of  AgriBEE  allocation  to
   cooperatives.


   Transform the development financing systems (Land Bank and other banks)


    • Land Summit to resolve to constitute a session  at  which  development
      financing institutions will be required to  deal  with  the  issue  of
      instruments required to not  only  access  land  but  also  to  unlock
      profitable agribusinesses in rural areas.
    • Such Summit to include Land Bank, Commercial Banks, Treasury, IDC, and
      institutions falling under the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).
    • Government and financial institutions to come up with suitable options
      other than Credit worthiness when dealing with poor farmers.
    • Government to introduce policy that encourage financing institution to
      include provision of  financial  management  training  and  continuing
      support  and  mentoring   for   beneficiaries   of   their   financial
      instruments.
 • Repossessed or liquidated land to  be  made  available  to  current  farm
   occupiers.
    • Land Bank to immediately review the performance of all previously land
      bank funded projects and facilitate assistance where required.
    • MALA to transform the Land  Bank  Boards  to  be  inclusive  of  local
      leadership elected through public nomination


   Effect fundamental changes to patterns of land ownership


 • Government to remove the property clause.
    • South Africa to introduce user rights and move  away  from  the  title
      deeds system in the rural areas.
    • Government to effect an end to evictions – much  land  lies  idle  and
      current evictions cannot therefore be considered to be need based.
 • Idle land owned  by  state,  churches  and  private  land  owners  to  be
   immediately made available.
    • Government to effect fundamental change in South Africa’s  agriculture
      economy. Do not keep the old structure of  agriculture  in  place  and
      just populate it with black faces.
    • Government to affirm the concept of one farmer one farm. But effect  a
      change in the current farm  size  culture.  Draw  lessons  from  South
      African experience before the colonial era and from experience in  the
      rest of the Africa and in Western Europe.
 • Promote subdivision of agriculture land and ensure its agriculture use is
   sustained.


   Foreign Ownership of Land and business in South Africa


 • Government needs to immediately stop sale of land to foreigners.
    • This is to be followed  by  introduction  of  new  laws  and  policies
      regulating access of foreigners to land ownership in South Africa.
    • South Africa to effect law and policies that allow foreign  investment
      only if it contributes significantly to creation of sustainable jobs.


   Role of Government – National Sphere


    • Government to consider establishing of a Ministry of Rural Development
      which will house all elements needed  to  unlock  economically  viable
      activities in rural areas.
    • Ministry of Agriculture and Land  Affairs  to  urgently  embark  on  a
      Comprehensive Legislation and Policy review on the various land reform
      and agrarian reform addressed herein.
 • Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs to conduct land audit.
    • Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs to facilitate creation of one
      stop service centers for land and agrarian reform services.
 •  Ministry of  Agriculture  and  Land  Affairs  to  minimize  beaurocratic
   processes.
    • Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs  to  immediately  remove  the
      willing buyer, willing seller principle.
    • Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs to investigate  provision  of
      agriculture subsidies for emerging farmers as an  instrument  that  is
      addition to the grants.
    • Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs to  facilitate  establishment
      of Land Reform Forums with key stakeholders in each municipal area.
    • Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs  to  ensure  that  they  have
      requisite staff capacity and resources to deal with land issues.
    • Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs to investigate  reduction  in
      registration and transfer costs.
    • Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to participate  in  the  land
      reform process through instituting appropriate access to water  rights
      for irrigation schemes.
    • Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to expand  building  of  dams
      and sustainable maintenance thereof.
 • DWAF to enable general access to water by rural communities.
 • Government to investigate the establishment of Agrivillages.
    • Department of Land Affairs to implement a policy retaining  a  portion
      of the payment to the seller until it can confirm that all assets  are
      in intact at the time of occupation by the new owner.
    • Department of Trade and Industry to be part of the land reform  effort
      in  terms  of  providing  support  to  beneficiaries  with  regard  to
      agriculture enterprises and markets.
 • Department of Social Welfare instruments to become part  of  Land  Reform
   delivery.
    • Department of Environmental Affairs to be involved in the land  reform
      process to enable better planning with  regard  to  interface  between
      livestock and game.
 • National government to investigate impact of tourism industry on agrarian
   reform.
 • Tourism industry needs to be transformed  to  ensure  inclusion  of  land
   reform beneficiaries.
    •  Department  of  Agriculture  to  restructure  the  budget  investment
      patterns. Reverse the current allocation ration  between  current  and
      capital expenditure.
 • Treasury to substantially increase allocation to Agriculture and Land.


   Role of Government – Provincial Sphere


 • Review the work ethic of the extension workers, and must be visible.
 • Review the framework for engagement of extension officers.
    •  Extension  officers  should  either  be  transferred   /seconded   to
      municipalities or should work  as  enterpreuneurs  through  an  agency
      agreement.
 • Procurement arrangements to provide opportunities to emerging farmers.

   Role of Government – Local Sphere



    • National sphere of government to provide guidance and  adequate  funds
      to municipalities in terms of handling land related matters.
    • Enable collective participation of AmaKhosi, municipal structures  and
      farming communities  in  fast-tracking  Integrated  Development  Plans
      (IDP)
 •  Local  government  to  establish  land  and  agrarian  reform  units  at
   municipality level.


   Role of Transport Sector


 • Review various  transport  related  costs  to  minimize  cost  impact  to
   emerging farmers.
    • Fast-track road infrastructure development to improve access to  input
      suppliers and to markets of agriculture products.


   14.4 COMMISSION FOUR


   THEME 4: Security of Tenure on commercial farms and in communal areas


   Terminology


 • The Commission was not happy with the terms  “farm  dwellers”  and  “farm
   occupiers”.
    • An alternative term was not finalized,  although  one  suggestion  was
      something  along  the  lines  of  “indigenous   people”   or   “Abantu
      benolabuko.” However, in the report have continued  to  use  the  term
      “farm dwellers”.


   Urgent Actions


    • A moratorium on all evictions until new legislation and programmes are
      in place to properly defend farm dwellers. (Not supported  by  AgriSA:
      legal evictions should still be possible,  and  municipalities  should
      have programmes to accommodate those affected)
    • A Presidential Commission  of  Enquiry  into  the  situation  of  farm
      dwellers, including review of previous evictions and other  violations
      of people rights on farms.
   • Government must in partnership with civil society, develop  a  coherent
     and proactive strategy to secure farm dweller’s rights,  with  a  large
     and dedicated budget, and dramatically increase its  capacity  to  both
     protect rights and secure independent land for farm dwellers.


   Enforcing the laws


    • Department of Land Affairs, Department of Labour and Home Affairs (due
      to the abuse of illegal immigrants  on  farms),  police,  prosecutors,
      courts and the Legal Aid Board must  commit  themselves  to  enforcing
      people’s rights (land  rights,  protection  of  livestock,  access  to
      graves, visitors rights, freedom of movement) and providing free legal
      services to farm dwellers, with immediate effect.
    • Farm dwellers must be allowed to  participate  in  Community  Policing
      Forums on equal terms with farmers and  other  stakeholders,  and  get
      time off work to do so.
    • The abuse of the Trespass Act to evict farm dwellers must end,  as  it
      no longer applies to farm dwellers – it has been amended by ESTA.
    • Department of Land Affairs needs new powers for enforcement of  tenure
      laws and the  human  resources  to  use  these  powers,  as  do  other
      departments such Department of Labour.
    • Farm dwellers should not be forced to pay rent for living on  and  /or
      using the land for livestock and other purposes.
    • Transformation and monitoring of the police  is  urgently  needed,  to
      overcome their bias against farm dwellers and ensure immediate  action
      against farmers that violate the law (and in particular tenure laws).
   • Department of Land Affairs and the criminal justice system must  ensure
     prosecution and suitable sentences for violators of tenure rights.


   Amending the laws


    • Government must amend and amalgamate Extension of Security Tenure  Act
      and Labour Tenants Act by the end of this  financial  year,  with  the
      full involvement of all stakeholders. (AfriSA supports review of  ESTA
      and LTA provided that an inclusive consultative process is followed).
    • Amendments to LTA and  ESTA  should  strengthen  the  rights  of  farm
      dwellers, including the following:


   _ the current definition and rights of long term occupiers under ESTA  is
   not good enough, therefore create a  class  of  long  term  non-evictable
   occupiers with a revised  definition  (that  is  such  people  cannot  be
   evicted regardless of crimes or violation of agreements)
           - separate tenure rights  from  labour  arrangements-  dismissal
           should not lead to a person losing their home.
           - Create a direct legal route for farm dwellers  to  have  their
           tenure security (and other rights such as the right to visitors)
           confirmed.
           - End the discrimination against women that  positions  them  as
            minors whose land rights are  dependent  on  a  male  household
            head.
           - Create enforceable rights to service provision.
           - Ensure protection  of  farm  dweller’s  livestock  and  proper
            valuation and compensation for these.
           - Ensure strong burial rights and access to graves in accordance
            with people’s culture.  (AgriSA  cannot  support  the  proposed
            amendments without careful consideration; it could never  agree
            to the seperation of tenure rights from labour arrangements. It
            will make inputs on an Amendment Bill)


   Land


    • Government must proactively acquire land,  using  expropriation  where
      necessary, for  the  creation  of  sustainable  settlements  for  farm
      dwellers and to give long-term  recognition  of  their  rights  within
      commercial farming areas. (AgriSA in favour of off-farm rather than on-
      farm solutions and expropriations should be a measure of last resort).
 • To enable access to land of their own for farm dwellers the following are
   recommended:


      Review the property clause;
     - One person one farm rule;
     - Limitations of farm size;
     - The subdivision of large farms;
         - The end of willing buyer/willing  seller  approach.  (Agri  SA’s
           view is that the property clause is a critically important  part
           of the democratic compromise and should not be tampered with).
   Development


    • Land that farm schools are on needs to be  expropriated  in  order  to
      secure their future, and the state must provide adequate resources and
      support to ensure that  children  on  farms  receive  a  high  quality
      education.
    • Include farm dwellers settlements are part of  Integrated  Development
      Plans  and  ensure  service  provision  as  part   of   municipalities
      responsibility for the defence of farm dwellers rights and support for
      the development of long term solutions.
    • All development projects, particularly those requiring approvals  from
      departments of Environment and Tourism, must not be allowed to proceed
      without first securing the rights and getting  the  agreement  of  any
      farm dwellers on affected land. (AgriSA felt that farm dwellers should
      be consulted only  if  their  rights  are  directly  affected  by  the
      proposed development).


   Empowerment


   • Government and civil society must implement  well-resourced  programmes
     to build farm dweller organization and capacity, including education to
     defend their rights and engage effectively in development planning  and
     in driving their own development.
    • Farm dwellers must have complete freedom of association to join unions
      and other organizations that can inform their of their rights and help
      defend those rights.
    • Specific programmes are needed to empower women on farms  and  support
      them in asserting their rights.


   Accountability


    • A statutory structure must be created at the local level in  order  to
      monitor and enforce the implementation of the law; this should include
      all law enforcement agencies and farmers, who must play a more  active
      role in finding solutions and ensuring respect for people’s rights.
    • Stakeholders, government and farmers  must  subscribe  to  a  code  of
      conduct and be held accountable.
    • Farmers who abuse workers and illegally evict farm  dwellers  must  be
      expropriated. (Agri-SA did not agree to expropriation as a penalty).


   Communal land


    • Insufficient time to discuss communal land  (former  Bantustants,  for
      coloured reserves) or urban land tenure (informal settlements etc).
    • Strong feeling that Department of Land Affairs  must  further  consult
      with the affected communities.
    • One recommendation was that these consultations take place within  the
      Communication Strategy planned by the Department.
 •  But  some  felt  strongly  that  this  will  not   constitute   adequate
   consultation.


   Communal land – problems


 • Currently there is a lack of clarity on who owns “communal land”.
 • As a result people are experiencing problems with municipalities, who see
   it as state land.
    • Major problems in areas where land was transferred to “tribes” by  the
      former Lobowa government, and tribes are under traditional leaders who
      were former homeland government Cabinet Ministers.
    • Some communities have requested Legal Resources  Centre  to  challenge
      the CLARA  in  the  Constitutional  Court.  On  the  grounds  that  it
      undermines rather than secure their rights.


   14.5     COMMISSION FIVE


   THEME 5: Land Use Management and Spatial Planning

   Preamble


   The success of any land agrarian programme is, in a very  direct  manner,
   dependent on the effectiveness of  the  Land  Use  and  Spatial  Planning
   system within which it is implemented. As a country pauses to reflect  on
   the successes and challenges of the last ten  years  and  chart  the  way
   forward in land restitution and  redistribution  effort,  it  is  of  the
   paramount importance that we reflect on this important aspect.


   In doing the above, we should  seek  to  enhance  Land  Use  and  Spatial
   Planning to ensure greater  understanding  of  the  most  effective  land
   identification and acquisition models,  the  rural  /  urban  development
   continuum, the role and impact of change –of – land  use  patterns,  need
   for   sustainable   farm   settlements,   minimizing   land    invasions,
   rationalizing relevant legislation, creating institutional  capacity  and
   sound resource mobilization and management.


   Rural / urban immigration


 • Disjointed rural/urban planning
 • Resource allocation currently biased towards urban areas.
 • Land identification and acquisition


   Recommendations


 • Need for a National Settlement Strategy (Presidency).
 • Encourage rural –urban planning continuum
 • Reverse colonial/apartheid planning


   Change of Land Use


 • Too many laws and institutions (DFA, NEMA etc)
 • Game parks and golf estates spring up everywhere.
 • Excessive ownership of land leading to under utilization.
    •  Low  income  settlements  do  not  receive  required   prioritization
      compared, for example to environmental habitat.
 • Plans are prepared with limited regard to actual land.
 • Applications for change of land use take too long.
    • Community Property Associations (CPA)  not  sufficiently  equipped  to
      deal with land use and planning issues.
 • Subdivision requirements are outdated, expensive and tedious.
    • The role of traditional institutions in land use management not always
      clear and /or of  assistance  especially  in  regard  to  female  –led
      issues.
 • Willing buyer willing seller cannot address the historical land  problems
   sufficiently.


   Recommendations


 •  Rationalize  relevant  laws  and  enhance   institutional   coordination
   (National Government)
 • Moratorium on foreign land ownership (Department of Land Affairs)
    • Moratorium on change of land  use  to  game  parks  and  golf  estates
      (Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs).
    • Introduce incremental land tax systems  (Treasury  and  Department  of
      Provincial & Local Government)
 • Set land ownership ceiling (Agriculture and Land Affairs)
    •  Greater  prioritization  of  these  settlement  informed,  first  and
      foremost, by current national /political imperatives.
 • Every IDP to integrate strategically located vacant land.
    •  Remove  administrative  /  beaurocratic  bottle-  necks   (Provincial
      Governments and municipalities).
 • Enhance capacity building (Agriculture and Land Affairs).
    • Review requirements to  provide  for,  for  example,  smaller  farming
      enterprises and diversified farming practices  (Agriculture  and  Land
      Affairs).
 • Review and clarify role of traditional  institutions  (Land  Affairs  and
   DPLG).
 • Urgent need to review willing buyer – willing seller approach (Department
   of Land Affairs).


   Farm settlement


 • Disjointed planning, service delivery and support systems.
 • Limited agriculture and management skills within recipient communities.
 • Lengthy land delivery systems
    • Hardships experienced for example  evictions,  refusal  of  access  to
      roads and through fare services


   Recommendations


    • Enforcement of Integrated Development Planning to ensure land delivery
      and  support  for  small  scale  emerging  farmers  (All  spheres   of
      Government).
    • IDPs and  PGDS  (Provincial  Growth  and  Development  Strategies)  to
      incorporate land reform sector plans (dplg).
    • Conduct needs analysis and design and implement targeted training  and
      mentorship  programmes  for  new  emerging  farmers.   (National   and
      provincial Agriculture & Land Affairs).
 • Project cycle to shortened (Department of Land Affairs).
 • Place moratorium on evictions.
 • Review ESTA urgently (Department of Land Affairs).


   Institutional arrangements


 • There  is  a  gap  between  plans  and  community  understanding  of  and
   participation in such plans.
 • Weak farmer unions/ formation within emerging communities.
    • Financial institutions not taking responsibility for  the  quality  of
      their products and required back up system.
 • Land Bank is quick to repossess land from beneficiaries.


   Recommendations


    • Community participation requirements must be  complied  with  in  line
      with country’s constitutional and democratic principles (dplg).
    •  Capacity  and  resources  should  be  made   available   to   enhance
      organizational strength (Agriculture and land Affairs).
 • Package better quality products.
 • Play active role in capacity building among beneficiaries.
 • Assume greater social responsibility (Financial institutions).


   Land invasions


 • Commercial farmers encroaching on land of beneficiaries (land grab).
 • Landless people illegally occupying the land of beneficiaries.
 • Land owners are practicing “shack farming” for their monetary benefit


   Recommendations


 • Land boundaries must be clearly indicated by beacons.
 • Accelerate land reform.
 • Government to investigate the causes and forms of land invasions  address
   these.
 • Government must ban “shack farming”. (Department of Land Affairs).


   Legislation


    • Multiplicity of laws and related institutions which do not always  aid
      / assist effective land delivery and  development  (DFA,  NEMA,  ESTA,
      CLARA etc).
 • Water rights have not been sufficiently aligned with  the  land  delivery
   programmes.
 • Limited awareness of the provisions of legislation in some communities.


   Recommendations


 • Review and rationalize such legislation (all spheres of government).
    • Government to urgently address water and land issues simultaneously to
      ensure a full agrarian  reform  (Departments:  Water  &  Forestry  and
      Agriculture and Land Affairs).
    • Implement awareness programmes among communities and  interest  groups
      (all spheres of government).


   Resource management


 • State land is owned and managed in different pockets.
 • State land is not being disposed at sufficient pace.
 • There is uncertainty on extent, location and current utilization of state
   land.
 • Water needs not sufficiently dealt with in the land delivery process.
    • Women, youth and people with disabilities are left  out  the  resource
      allocation and management.
 •  Privatization  of  natural  resources  creates  hardships   for   worker
   communities.


   Recommendations


 • All state land should fall under a single national government department.
 • State land must be prioritized for  both  redistribution  and  settlement
   purposes.
 • A full audit of state land required urgently (Land Affairs).
    • Government urgently address water and land issues  to  ensure  a  full
      agrarian reform (Departments: Water, Agriculture and Land Affairs).
    • Target the disadvantaged groups for effective resource allocation  and
      management programmes (Departments: Water Affairs,  Labour,  DEAT  and
      Agriculture).


   RECOMMENDATION ON THE PRINCIPLE OF “WILLING SELLER – WILLING  BUYER”  AND
   GOVERNMENT’S APPROACH TO LAND REFORM


   NOTING THAT:


     1. There is currently no Constitutional requirement that restricts our
        approach to land reform based solely on the principle  of  “willing
        seller- willing buyer.”
     2. Nevertheless, the White Paper on South African Land Policy of  1997
        mandates  an  approach  based  largely  on  this   principle   and,
        therefore, much of government approach to land acquisition  has  in
        practice been based on acquisition at market  prices  from  willing
        sellers.
     3. Market-based land acquisitions entail reliance on the existing land
        market system which is characterized by a number of distortions and
        imperfections, such  as  restrictions  on  land  subdivisions,  the
        absence of an effective land tax, unequal access to capital markets
        and information, contradictory requirements in respect of municipal
        zoning regulations.
   4. The Constitution provides for the expropriation of land with just  and
        equitable compensation. In addition, the  current  legal  framework
        allows  government  to   expropriate   land   in   terms   of   the
        Constitutional parameters.
   5. Nevertheless, in practice government has only used expropriation in  a
        very limited number of cases.
   AND FURTHER NOTING THAT:


   6. South Africans have committed themselves to a target of redistributing
      30% of the land by the year 2014.
   7. International experience of the land  reform  programmes  demonstrates
      that the market on its own is unable to effectively alter the  pattern
      on ownership in favour of equity for  the  targeted  beneficiaries  of
      land reform as well as in favour of broader goals of job creation  and
      poverty reduction.
   8. South Africa’s own experience over the last eleven years confirms this
      international experience in that the pace  of  redistribution  to  the
      targeted groups has not been sufficient to realize our 2014 objective.


   THE LAND SUMMIT THEREFORE RECOMMENDS:


1. To reject the principle of “willing buyer-willing seller.”
   2.  The  instrument  of  expropriation  should  be  used   actively   and
      selectively in terms of the Constitutional  principles  which  provide
      for expropriation in terms of a law of general application and subject
      to compensation, the amount of  which  and  the  time  and  manner  of
      payment of which have either been  agreed  to  by  those  affected  or
      decided by or approved by a court.
   3. That, furthermore, amount of compensation should have  regard  to  the
      following Constitutional principles:


 • The current use of the property
 • The history of the acquisition and use of the property;
 • The market value of the property;
    • The extent of direct state investment and subsidy in  the  acquisition
      and beneficial capital improvement of the property;
 • The purpose of expropriation


4. That the state should actively intervene in  the  land  market  including
   through:


 • The use of expropriations;
 • Scrapping of restrictions on subdivision of land;
 • Extensive support for small –scale agriculture;
 • Reversing the growing concentration of land holdings;
 • Promoting the principle of “one farmer one farm.”
 • Changing the current large-farm size culture;
 • Regulating foreign ownership;
 • Imposing a land tax;
 • Regulating land use to optimize social benefit.


   5.  The  principle   underlying   our   approach   should   include   the
      decentralization of the land reform process, through participatory and
      people-centred  methods  which  are  area-based,  planned  and   which
      integrate land and  agrarian  transformation  into  wider  development
      priorities, particularly  through  the  Integrated  Development  Plans
      (IDPs).
6. South Africa’s land policy should consist of:


a) Programmes of state actions and land market interventions;
        b) A proactive and state led approach characterized by well planned
           and holistic but just and equitable methods;
A programme to attain the objective of a better life for all by  a  people’s
contract to create work  and  to  fight  poverty  through  urban  and  rural
development.


   15. RECOMMENDATIONS


   Having considered the Land Summit, the committee noted:


     a) The significant policy and implementation recommendations were made
        by the participants on how to  fasten  the  pace  of  delivery  and
        improve current delivery methods.
     b) Some of the recommendations relate to Policy, for example:


       -    Review the Willing Buyer, Willing Seller Approach;
     - Institution of the Right of First Refusal;
     - Imposition of a progressive Land Tax and other  incentives  for  Land
       Release;
     - Promotion of Subdivision of Agricultural Land;
     - Review of Restitution Cut-off dates.


c) Implementation issues relate to:


   _  Integrated Development Planning;
   _  Enhanced State Capacity;
   _  Communication and consultation strategies;
   _  New land acquisition methods;
   _  Resettlement models;
   _  Targeting of beneficiaries


   THEREFORE, THE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDS THAT:


a) The House note the Summit report; and also
   b) The House note the Department of Land Affairs is currently  developing
      a plan to implement the recommendations of the summit.


   2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land  Affairs  on
   Provincial Oversight Visit to Northern Cape, Free State and Eastern Cape,
   dated 25 October 2005:


   The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Agriculture  and  Land   Affairs,   having
   undertaken the provincial oversight visits to Northern Cape,  Free  State
   and Eastern Cape from 09 – 19 August 2005, reports as follows:


1. INTRODUCTION


    1. The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture  and  Land  Affairs  undertook
       provincial oversight visits to KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and  Limpopo
       from 1 – 13 August 2004. Subsequently to  that  visit  the  committee
       took a decision that the second phase  of  oversight  work  would  be
       early in 2005. This would be to the Northern  Cape,  Free  State  and
       Eastern Cape.


   2. However, the parliamentary programme in the first and second terms did
      not permit or have any space for such visits up to  the  end  of  July
      2005. On the 14th June, the Committee took a decision that  the  dates
      should be adjusted to 09 – 19 August 2005, which  was  also  time  set
      aside for oversight work according to the Parliamentary programme.


2. OBJECTIVES


   1. The purpose of the visit was two-fold.  It  was  to  oversee  projects
      funded by the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs, particularly
      on Landcare and restitution programmes;


    2.  Firstly, Land Care is one of the key rural development programmes of
       the Department since 1998. It is a programme that is informed by  the
       Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Strategy of the  government.
       Its objective is to foster community involvement in the management of
       the Environment and Natural Resources, while improving the quality of
       community life; and


   3. Secondly, the purpose was to focus on land restitution  projects  that
      have been transferred by the Land  Claims  Commission.  The  committee
      focused on restitution to evaluate the Economic Impact of the Restored
      Land to Beneficiaries.


   3. DELEGATION


   1. The multi-party  delegation  led  by  the  Acting-Chairperson,  Ms  E.
      Ngaleka (ANC), included Ms B.M Ntuli (ANC); Ms H.M Blose (ANC); Mr D.M
      Dlali (ANC); Mr S. Abram (ANC);  Adv  S.P  Holomisa  (ANC);  Mr  T.D.H
      Ramphele (ANC); Mr M.V  Ngema  (IFP);  Mr  J.  Bici  (UDM);  Mr  P.H.K
      Ditshetelo (UCDP). The Democratic Alliance apologized for being unable
      to attend due to prior commitments.


    2.  In Northern  Cape,  at  Goodhouse,  the  MEC  together  with  Senior
       Management of the provincial department welcomed the committee and in
       Kuruman, Member of Provincial Legislature from Independent  Democrats
       joined the committee.


    3.  In Free State province, Provincial Chairperson, Mr  H.  Nketu  (ANC)
       and Mr A.J Botha (DA) from Free State Provincial  Legislature  joined
       the committee. On  site  visits  the  committee  was  accompanied  by
       provincial Chief Director, regional managers and extension  officers;
       and


    4.  In Eastern Cape, Aliwal North the Provincial  Chairperson  Mr  Nkayi
       (ANC) and Ms Buka (ANC) from the  Legislature  joined  the  committee
       also accompanied the provincial Head of Department,  Adv  Nyondo  and
       Regional Managers.


   5. The following staff members accompanied the committee:  the  Committee
      Secretary, Mr J. Boltina; the Committee Assistant, Ms Z. Jara; and  Mr
      A. Mthombeni, Parliamentary Officer represented the Ministry.


   4. APPROACH OF VISIT


   In  evaluating  projects  performance  in  all  provinces  visited,   the
   committee  was  accompanied  by  the  Provincial  Standing  Committee  on
   Agriculture and Land.


   The following approach was followed in order to understand the  situation
   on the ground:


   1. On-site briefings by the managers of  the  Project  Committee,  inputs
      from  the  relevant  provincial  departments  and  in  some  instances
      municipality through Local Councillors. The briefings were focused  on
      the following areas:


 • Project history (year, size  of  land,  number  of  beneficiaries,  legal
   entity etc);
 • Extent of support by the department and other stakeholders (financial and
   technical);
 • Achievements, problems and challenges experienced by beneficiaries.


2. Questions and comments emanating from presentations; and
   3. A request for a detailed report of the project to be submitted to  the
      Portfolio Committee within 14 days of such visit.


   NORTHERN CAPE (09 – 12 AUGUST 2005)


5. PAPRIKA PROJECT – GOODHOUSE


   This project is located on a Transformation of Certain  Rural  Areas  Act
   (TRANCRAA) land and comprise of 12 farmers involved in  growing  paprika.
   It started in 1995 with a government grant of R90 million.  Farmers  were
   allocated  10  hectares  each.  The  money  allocated   was   for   water
   infrastructure and the Land Bank also came on  board  to  assist  farmers
   with a production loan of R57 million.


   Gili Company was appointed by the Provincial Government of Northern  Cape
   to manage the project. Problems started to develop  between  the  company
   and the farmers. The company is now liquidated and the MEC indicated that
   there will be forensic investigations to be undertaken and a new  company
   will  be  formed.  This  is  as  a  result  of  the   alleged   financial
   irregularities.


   A Paprika plant for processing and packaging paprika was  established  in
   Springbok but has ceased  operations.  The  plant  closed  down  and  the
   beneficiaries stopped producing. The  land  is  currently  idle  with  no
   production at all. In intervening, the Provincial government of  Northern
   Cape has undertaken to restart the project. The MEC also  mentioned  that
   the new company would be allocated R5 million to sort out the  irrigation
   scheme. The new project shall focus on  Lucerne  and  cotton.  The  first
   production of Lucerne should have been made in April 2005 and  Cotton  in
   October 2005. As a result of certain issues there are delays in  starting
   the project and a need arose to re-schedule implementation timelines. The
   company will have a Trust comprised  of  55  owners  and  the  Industrial
   Development Corporation (IDC) will be on board.   The  shareholders  will
   receive  dividends  and  workers  paid  salaries.   The   Department   of
   Agriculture will manage the project  in  the  interim  with  Agri-academy
   providing training.


   The  Project  leadership  stated  that  farmers  were  not   sufficiently
   consulted during the start of  the  project.  Land  Bank  loan  and  Land
   Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD) Grants were  deposited
   to Gili’s company. R5 million was used to buy 10 tractors.  No  financial
   reports  were  supplied  to  beneficiaries.  People  were  promised  R500
   salaries and another R500 for groceries but the company  reneged  on  its
   promises.


   5.1 Observations / Findings


 • The Project had collapsed completely.
      • The establishment of this  project  lacked  intended  beneficiaries
        participation and empowerment and therefore project ownership.
      • There is a challenge on institutional arrangements (that  is  Legal
        Entity and dispute resolution mechanism) in the  project  and  this
        affects sustainability of production.
      •  The  project   lacked   proper   security   and   maintenance   of
        infrastructure  and  equipment  resulting  in  abuse,  neglect  and
        wreckage.
 • Group conflict and infighting divided farmers into groups  of  “new”  and
   “old” farmers;
 • The forensic investigation proposed by the MEC received support from  the
   Committee.


   5.2 Recommendations


      • Portfolio Committee is to  follow  up  with  the  MEC  and  request
        updates on progress in the project  and  monitor  that  departments
        assist the communities involved.
 • Report back to the Portfolio Committee on progress achieved.
      • The Department must take an effort to establish a legal entity that
        would  entail  all  steps  necessary  to  deal  with  institutional
        problems that may arise, including exit strategy for individuals in
        case of impasse or where individuals walk away from the project  or
        roles and responsibilities of members as  well  as  decision-making
        processes.
 • There is a need to  address  training,  market  and  market  access,  and
   finance administration.
      • The project beneficiaries seem to struggle before the  project  can
        produce returns and there is tendency for  the  project  to  suffer
        with individuals taking from the project for food security.  It  is
        therefore recommended food security issues be addressed.
      • The Portfolio Committee supports the  forensic  investigation  into
        this project and shall keep observation of progress in this regard.
      • Maintenance and security of infrastructure and  equipment  must  be
        budgeted for because the risk of loss and wreck usually  negatively
        impact on projects.


   6. RITCHERSVELD LAND RESTITUTION PROJECT


   The Mayor, Mr Dan Singh indicated that the  municipality  fully  supports
   the claim though the State and Alexkor are defending  the  claim  due  to
   mineral rights. There are four councilors who are  beneficiaries  of  the
   claim.


   The CPA Chairperson indicated that there are  269  beneficiaries  of  the
   claim of about 85 000 hectares which went to the Constitutional Court  as
   they lodged the claim post deadline. The court has  ruled  in  favour  of
   beneficiaries. The pillars of the claim involve land  ownership,  mineral
   rights and a percentage compensation of what is taken  out  of  the  land
   (R1.5 billion), environmental damage (R1  billion)  and  labour  hardship
   (R10 million).


   The Beneficiaries future plans involve agricultural projects, small-scale
   farming and cattle farming. Beneficiaries  receive  benefits  from  their
   Park in which their Trust has approximately R100  million  unused  money.
   REQUESTED the Portfolio Committee to follow up the matter on their behalf
   with the Minister and the Department of  Land  Affairs.  The  outstanding
   matters being on the Act 9 Land and target time by which time  the  claim
   would be completed.


   6.1 Observations / Findings


      • The involvement of the Municipal Council and the Mayor augurs  well
        for local economic development and the  Portfolio  Committee  noted
        with appreciation the good relationship that  existed  amongst  the
        parties.
      • It was clear that  development  of  the  communities  was  part  of
        Council agenda and this bode well for locals in the IDP; and
 • The committee was concerned about the R100  million  lying  idle  in  the
   Trust Fund.


   6.2 Recommendations


      • The community indicated that the monies that were received from
        diamond mining was deposited in a Trust Fund and remained in
        accessible.


      • The Committee raised its concern and indicated that  the  community
        would be better served by these monies actually being accessed  and
        be used in development.


   6.3 Action


      • The Committee is to follow up this by  requesting  some  background
        and details from the Department of Land Affairs on this project.




   7. EILAND PROJECT – UPINGTON


   This project involves two female farmers who came second  on  the  female
   farmer competition and were allocated portions of the Research  Station’s
   land to do farming with an option to buy.
   The two are involved in cotton and Lucerne production on 17  hectares  of
   land through the assistance by the Department of Agriculture.  They  have
   produced 70 tonnes of Lucerne at R700 a ton during the  last  season  and
   also get R6 000 per hectare for cotton per annum. The cost of inputs  and
   for hiring seasonal workers was R42 000.


   Land Bank lent them a production loan of R50 000  (R25  000  each)  at  a
   prime rate of 17%. The  challenge  experienced  is  the  short  repayment
   period of the loan (that is seasonal repayment). They  have  applied  for
   CASP money for mechanization. They pay approximately R3  000  to  private
   people to till the land.


   The first and second years have been profitable for  their  business  and
   were challenged by Lucerne prices on the third year. The other constraint
   is a drainage system, which is blocked in the  field,  thereby  affecting
   proper irrigation. The other part of the farm needs fencing so that  cash
   crops can be cultivated.


   7.1 Observations / findings


 • The project is run with necessary extension  support  from  the  Research
   Station.
 • Farmers are in production of Lucerne and cotton.
 • It is difficult to assess  sustainability  because  of  this  strong  and
   continuous support.
 • There are no indicators that the project can survive in the market.


   7.2 Recommendations


      • There is need to expand the project as the project  appears  to  be
        too small to be run commercially.
 • The size makes it prone to very adverse impact by
      •  This  project  illustrates  the  extent  to  which  Department  of
        Agriculture need to give support  to  small  emerging  farmers  but
        balancing that with assessment of long-term sustainability


   7.3 Action


      • The Portfolio Committee shall liaise with MEC and  the  Station  to
        get up-dates on the project.

   8. TUMELO TRUST PROJECT


   This is a  youth  project  that  was  initiated  by  the  National  Youth
   Commission with 6 beneficiaries. Only 2 male youths still remain  in  the
   project. One female beneficiary has since joined the police force,  while
   the other indicated that  she was no longer interested in agriculture and
   left. There was another one who came during  harvesting  demanding  share
   though did not work.


   The project is involved in grapes and Lucerne production on 176  hectares
   of land divided into two portions and 38 hectares of land has been leased
   to a certain farmer with R2 000 monthly rental. The youths have  received
   start up money of   about R80 000 from the Land  Bank  for  training  and
   have a mentor farmer from nearby who claims R9 000  per  month  for  such
   service.


   The Department of Agriculture was not involved during the  start  of  the
   project and it is now on board  providing  extension  services  and  also
   allocated R80 000 for implements. There will be CASP funds to support the
   project.


   8.1 Observations / Findings


 • Due to conflicts the  project  is  not  in  full  operation  but  it  has
   potential;
      • The Committee is of the view that the youths that remain need  full
        support, motivation and guidance  in  order  to  take  the  project
        further.


   8.2 Recommendations


 • The project has to be given full support.
 •  Training  specific  to  vineyards,  marketing,  finance  management   is
   necessary.
 • Vineyard development is a highly skilled industry and so should  training
   match this need.
      • There is a need to clarify the position of those who abandoned  the
        project because there might be contractual issues that need  to  be
        sorted out to remove them formally  from  the  project  or  tighten
        their relationship with the project.


   8.3 Action


      • A letter should be directed to MEC  and  Provincial  Department  of
        Agriculture to establish a plan  being  developed  to  support  the
        project.
      • Emphasis should be put on the need to develop  skills  in  vineyard
        establishment  and   maintenance,   marketing,   farm   management,
        financial administration. Training  should  match  the  high  skill
        requirements of the grape / wine industry.
      • The Province should give report to the Portfolio Committee  on  the
        developments achieved and challenges for continuous support.
 • Network with other farmers should be encouraged but be monitored.
      • The “alleged” contract of R9 000 per month  with  the  “mentor”  be
        reviewed and possibly cancelled.


9. LOHATLA RESTITUTION CLAIM – KURUMAN


   The Portfolio Committee was welcomed by the Mayor of the area and he gave
   a broad overview  of  the  restitution  cases  in  the  municipality  and
   planning  processes  thereof.  Delegation  raised  questions  of  clarity
   ranging from relationships between the municipality and other spheres  of
   government, planning on commonages, councilors who  are  the  members  of
   CPA, the extent of budgetary constraints and post settlement  support  to
   beneficiaries.


   The Land Claim  Committee  members  were  concerned  that  the  Portfolio
   Committee was visiting them for the third time and they had  received  no
   feedback on issues raised on two previous occasions (that  was  1996  and
   1999 visits). Beneficiaries indicated that their claim of 62 000 hectares
   of land had dragged on for 14 years due to it having been occupied by the
   army. Claimants have agreed to alternative  land  but  nothing  has  been
   transferred. Claimants have heard that 5 farms have  been  identified  by
   the Department of Land Affairs, people have built squatter houses at  the
   entry of the army base to register their plight.


   The Regional Land Claims Commission reported that the Minister has signed
   the transfer of alternative land in July 2005. The Land  Claim  Committee
   recommended  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  that  the  Department  should
   consider recommendations made during the presidency of  former  President
   Mandela regarding the claim. Claimants were concerned about game  farming
   taking place on the military land,  the  need  for  permission  to  visit
   ancestral land. They required mineral and water rights, and  title  deeds
   to the land.


   9.1 Observations / Findings


      • The Committee felt that this matter should be  discussed  with  the
        Portfolio Committee on Defence at parliamentary level.
      • The role of the DLA and the  Commission  has  been  appreciated  in
        dealing with the matter. The delays seem to be coming from the Land
        Claimants Committee itself.


   9.2 Recommendations


      • The Portfolio Committee shall engage  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Defence about this claim.
      • The Northern Cape Regional Land Claims Commission must provide  the
        committee with sufficient written information on this claim.


10. KONO PROJECT


   The total size of the land is 10 785 hectares and was handed over to  450
   families in  December  1999.  Beneficiaries  are  involved  in  livestock
   farming (sheep and goats), vegetables and  broilers.  The  CPA  has  been
   formed and a  land  care  fund  has  been  allocated  for  infrastructure
   development such as for  fencing, the upgrading of the fountain canal and
   for the construction of new camps. Two dams have  been  built  with  land
   care money.


   The broiler enterprise has stopped due  to  poor  management.  The  women
   group involved in the  project  and  CPA  has  taken  over  and  will  be
   operational from 20th August 2005.However, the  livestock  and  vegetable
   enterprises are up and running. There is a mentor farmer involved and the
   Department of Agriculture provides  all  the  required  support  for  the
   project. The project received awards for the land care competition.


   10.1 Observations / Findings


      • The Committee was delighted with the project and  recommended  that
        the broiler building be expanded.




   10.2 Recommendations


 • The broiler building should be expanded.
      • The Department of Agriculture through marketing entity supported by
        the state should help with market access.
 • Agronomist should  be  involved  to  assist  project  with  cost  control
   (operational cost).
      • If possible the project should be  assisted  with  Branding  (Brand
        development in markets is critical and therefore  the  Agricultural
        Research Council (ARC) and National Agricultural Marketing  Council
        (NAMC) could assist).
11. HYDROPONICS YOUTH PROJECT – KIMBERLY


   The Committee was briefly taken to the youth  project  initiated  by  the
   National Youth Commission. The Project is on commonage  land  behind  the
   fresh produce market and is involved in the production of vegetables such
   as tomatoes.


   11.1 Observations / Findings


 • Due to time constraints there could  be  no  effective  analysis  of  the
   project.
 • The Committee found that the Department of Agriculture has taken over the
   project.


   11.2 Recommendations


 • The Portfolio Committee must be  provided  with  a  full  report  on  the
   project.




   FREE STATE PROVINCE (15 – 17 AUGUST 2005)


12. TIMO AGRI PARYS


   A Hydroponics vegetables (tomatoes) project is run by 10 youth  (5  women
   and 5 men). The beneficiaries were selected at local level  by  means  as
   stipulated  criteria  involving  matric,   knowledge   or   interest   in
   agriculture etc. This is a CASP funded project  together  with  Masikhule
   Project in Sasolburg to the tune of R2.5 million initiated by the  former
   MEC for Agriculture. It is on commonage land which is leased for 10 years
   with an option of a further 5 years extension. There is no lease  payment
   for the first year.


   Twelve tunnels erected by Kweneng Company of Mr  Thabang.  Two  boreholes
   are  used  for  irrigation.  The  Provincial  Department  of  Agriculture
   provides  support  through  the  Extension  Officer.  Beneficiaries  were
   trained on basic management skills except marketing skills.


   12.1 Observations / Findings


 • The project is on its first production;
      • The fact that the lease contract was not in place when the  project
        started and still today there is no written lease contract  between
        the beneficiaries and the municipality;
      • There is no specification for the project or written document as an
        agreement between the  Department  and  the  contractor  that  will
        indicate project implementation phases;
      • Project makes it difficult for the Extension Officer to monitor and
        evaluate the implementation as there is nothing to refer to;
 • The challenge of marketing the produce was raised by the beneficiaries;
 •  The beneficiaries also highlighted the transport as  a  problem  to  and
   from the township.


   12.2 Recommendations


      • The Committee requested the extension officer to submit a  detailed
        report on the project within 48 hours.


13. MASIKHULE PROJECT – SASOLBURG
   The hydroponics vegetable (tomatoes and lettuce) project is also  on  the
   Anelia Commonage land and is funded by Comprehensive Agricultural Support
   Programme (CASP) money together with Timo Agri Parys.  According  to  the
   business plan,  the  hydroponics  tunnels  were  constructed  by  Kweneng
   Company owned by Mr Thabang. Six youth are involved (4 men and 2  women).
   One beneficiary has since left to look for temporary work.


   The beneficiaries will sign the lease  agreement  with  the  municipality
   within 7 days. The youth come from various townships and need to have R14
   .00 transport fee to come to the project. Initially, they were promised a
   monthly allowance of R1000 each for a period of 6 months but it  was  not
   allocated.


   Some are not participating  in  the  construction  work  of  the  tunnels
   because they reject the R35 daily rates from the constructor  while  they
   demand R50. They are involved in erecting of a fence funded by Land  Care
   money from which they will be compensated.


   Beneficiaries have no legal entity (CPA or Trust) and still have to get a
   name for the project for registration purposes  with  the  Department  of
   Trade and Industry (DTI). Extension service is provided by the provincial
   Department of Agriculture.


   13.1 Observations / Findings


      • Beneficiaries are not fully participating in the daily  running  of
        the project, for example, in financial transactions  and  decision-
        making;
 • 4 tunnels have been constructed though damaged  by  cattle  due  to  non-
   fencing;
      • Production has not started  because  municipality  disapproved  the
        original land and subsequently identified an alternative land;
 • There was no separate CASP funding from Timo  Agri  Parys  and  Masikhule
   project;
 • There is no account opened for the project;
 • The project seems to be imposed on beneficiaries; and
 • There is no written agreement between  beneficiaries  and  the  strategic
   partner.


   13.2 Recommendations


      • There is a need for the provincial  Department  of  Agriculture  to
        consider issues relating to training needs  of  beneficiaries,  the
        ownership and marketing.


   13.3 Action


 • A detailed report has been requested from the Extension Officer.




14. COMMUNITY PROPERTY TRUST – ORANJEVILLE


   The project has 52 beneficiaries on 346 hectares cultivating the land for
   maize and sunflower. There are 6 permanent workers and most  are  looking
   for temporary work in town. Approximately  48  hectares  were  cultivated
   last season and produce 1 tonne sunflower and 5 tonnes of maize. This  is
   a Settlement Land Acquisition  Grant  (SLAG)  project  started  in  1997.
   Currently, the project is characterized  by  problems  related  to  group
   dynamics.


   Loan amounts of R145 000 for a tractor from Land Bank and R 61  000  from
   Vrystaat Ko-operasie BPK (VKB) were received. Repayments of the loans are
   problematic due to droughts during two successive seasons.


   The tractor, implements and a bakkie were repossessed in February 2003 by
   the VKB co-op to recover the money and  R36  000  is  still  outstanding.
   Beneficiaries also generate money by letting stands to holidaymakers  and
   also charge a daily fee for fishing as the farm fronts on  to  Vaal  dam.
   Beneficiaries envisage introducing livestock farming for the  trust  even
   though individual members have livestock. Vaal Collery Mine  has  donated
   R100 000 for implements this season.


   14.1 Observations / Findings


      • Committee identified  a  management  problem  and  lack  of  proper
        training for the beneficiaries;
 • The action of the VKB co-op to attach assets seem questionable;
      • Previous  records  regarding  financial  situation/loans  were  not
        handed over to the new Extension Officer.


   14.2 Recommendations


 • A detailed report has been requested from the Extension Officer.


15. DIKGOMO PROJECT – WESSELSBRON


   The Dikgomo is Land Redistribution for  Agricultural  Development  (LRAD)
   project started in 2002 following the combined effort of 5  families  who
   were involved in the buying and selling of  livestock  in  the  township.
   There are 15 beneficiaries involved in livestock and maize production  on
   482 hectares. The land was purchased at a cost of R300 000. An amount  of
   R160 000 has been borrowed from Land Bank to assist the beneficiaries  in
   production.


   The LRAD  grant  was  used  to  buy  two  tractors  and  implements.  The
   Department  has  currently  committed   R625   000   from   Comprehensive
   Agricultural  Support  Programme  (CASP)  fund  for  infrastructure   and
   mechanization  (boreholes,  fencing,  harvester,  compressor,  pipes  and
   repair of dam).  In  the  current  season,  beneficiaries  cultivated  60
   hectares of grain and harvested 80 tonnes which is now stored at  SENWES.
   The input cost for production was R26 000.


   Individual beneficiaries own 24 cattle  and  the  Department  donated  10
   heifers through CPF funds. Ms Puleng is the Extension Officer responsible
   for the project with Mr Rampulu as the Project Manager. The beneficiaries
   have unused money in the bank.


   15.1 Observations / Findings


 • The committee found that the project is successful and it has a potential
   to do even better;
 • Government support is evident  through  grants,  extension  services  and
   training;
      • Red-tape during the procurement process through the department  has
        a negative impact on the ground.
 • Beneficiaries need assistance in terms of grain and livestock; and
 • The implements such as tractors, trucks etc are still in good condition.


   15.2 Recommendations


 • The provincial Department of  Agriculture  should  monitor  this  project
   consistently.

   16.      KUTLWANONG FARM TRUST


   The project is a Settlement Land Acquisition Grant (SLAG)  project  where
   200 beneficiaries were settled on 4 000 hectares of land in 1996.  People
   borrowed about R1.3 million from Land Bank for production but it has been
   paid up at the moment.


   Two Executive Committees of the CPA were formed and disbanded as a result
   of group conflicts and a new one has been elected.   The  source  of  the
   problem relates to  non-reporting  on  the  financial  situation  of  the
   project to fellow  beneficiaries  and  mismanagement  of  funds.  In  the
   process of conflict,  the  title  deed  of  the  project  was  lost.  The
   beneficiaries had to pay R1 500 to obtain a new one and another R1 500 is
   owed.


   The project was characterized by five enterprises, namely  dairy  cattle,
   bakery, cash crops, broilers and maize. Only maize and bakery got off the
   ground. There was a season where beneficiaries  harvested  16  tonnes  of
   maize and pumpkins, which were sold locally.


   There are “allegations” that the previous Chairperson  of  the  Executive
   committee had taken R30 000 to start his own business. A rebate  of  R213
   000 was received from the South African Revenue Services (SARS) which was
   used to buy tractors.  There  are  also  proposals  that  the  department
   consider subdivision to ease group conflicts.


   16.1 Observations / Findings


 • The project is in a deteriorating state due to group conflicts.
 • The division among the beneficiaries is the obvious  when  engaging  with
   them.
 • The implements bought are not taken care of; and only
 • The 28 beneficiaries appear to be eager to  proceed  with  production  if
   subdivision becomes a reality.


   16.2 Recommendations


 • There is a need to strengthen institutional arrangements.
      • The Provincial Government must ensure there is  continuous  support
        and  clear  definition  of  roles  and  responsibilities   of   the
        membership.




17. MPHATLALATSANE LAYERS PROJECT – HENNENMAN


   The project started in 1997 following the initiative by 15  beneficiaries
   to  contribute  R100  to  start  a  poultry  (chicken  layers)   project.
   Beneficiaries use commonage land leased for 10  years  period  where  CPF
   funding was used to construct 2 layer houses and 2000 layers.  The  total
   grant was R550 000 which left a R9 000 balance, which  is  committed  for
   feeds and signage.


   The beneficiaries receive monthly salaries of R350 and there is a balance
   of R14 000 in the bank account. They spend almost R24 000  to  buy  feeds
   monthly at no discount.


   Beneficiaries received extensive training  to  assist  them  to  run  the
   enterprise. The products are sold locally at pension points and there  is
   a high demand for it. They experienced a problem for a stable market  for
   the products and they do not have proper grading systems and this affects
   profit margins.


   It was also reported that there is a study which is  being  conducted  at
   the departmental level to find ways of making the project sustainable  by
   introducing other agricultural enterprises for beneficiaries.




   17.1 Observations / Findings


      • The Committee found that the project has a potential to grow if  it
        can be fully monitored by the Department.


   17.2 Recommendations


 • There is a need for the beneficiaries to have an egg grader to  speed  up
   the work;
      • The Beneficiaries should be assisted to find a  stable  market  for
        eggs and to have a grading machine.


   18.      MODIMO – LERATO PROJECT - BLOEMFONTEIN


   This is a SLAG project started in 1998 where beneficiaries  were  settled
   on  935 hectares of land. However, there  are  few  active  members  that
   remained in the project, as a result, most of them are seeking  temporary
   jobs in town. There is a portion of land let for R3 000 a month of  which
   the money is used for the payment of electricity.


   The project comprises livestock farming,  cash  crops  and  from  poultry
   enterprises. Money generated from poultry enterprise was used  to  buy  a
   bakkie to transport beneficiaries to work and also to  sell  chickens  in
   the township. The vehicle has now broken down as it was  frequently  used
   for private purposes and is parked at the township.


   The department of Agriculture has allocated an  amount  of  R350  000  to
   purchase livestock and poultry. The Poultry unit was funded by  the  CPF.
   The project has 66  cattle  including  individual  stock  and  it  has  a
   carrying capacity of 100livestock unit. There is assistance from the Land
   care programme for infrastructure such as fencing  of  camps,  repair  of
   windmills and for water reticulation.


   The beneficiaries participate in donga rehabilitation and fencing as part
   of Extended Public Works programme and receive a  daily  compensation  of
   R45.   Beneficiaries  received  training   on   livestock   farming   and
   bookkeeping. They do not have a tractor to till the land,  especially  on
   the cash crop enterprises and were promised a tractor by the MEC.




   18.1 Observations / Findings


      • The Committee found that the project is not successful  and  is  in
        deteriorating state and requires  close  monitoring  due  to  group
        conflicts. For example, the poultry project is not operating;
 • Land Care money has brought life to the project;
 • There are clear  signs  of  mismanagement  of  funds  as  stated  by  the
   Extension Officer; and
 • The non-active beneficiaries fuel conflict within the group.


   18.2 Recommendations


 • The Department should  monitor  the  management  of  assets  and  funding
   injected in projects.




   19.      ITUMELENG PROJECT - BOTSHABELO


   This is a SLAG project started in 1998 with 16 beneficiaries (7 women and
   9 men) settled on 639 hectares of land. The farm was  purchased  for  the
   amount of R235 000. The  project  involved  livestock  farming  and  cash
   crops; and have a tenant leasing grazing land for 60 livestock at a  rate
   of R25 per livestock unit.


   The project carrying capacity is 90 livestock  units  and  they  have  14
   cattle for  the  project  bought  through  Land  bank  loan  and  16  for
   individual members. The loan balance is R 28 000 with 12% interest.


   The Department has injected R365  000  CASP  money  in  the  project  for
   fencing, 2 windmills and reservoir. Beneficiaries have  been  trained  on
   cattle   husbandry,   bookkeeping,   conflict   resolution   and   animal
   reproduction. There are problems of  access  to  road,  crossing  bridge,
   farmhouses and the  transport  of  beneficiaries  as  they  stay  in  the
   township.




   19.1 Observations / Findings


 • The  Committee  found  that  this  is  a  successful  project  with  high
   potential;
 • The Beneficiaries have prior knowledge of farming;
 • Onions are cultivated; and
 • The support from the department is evident.


20. TUSANO WOOL ASSOCIATION – THABA NCHU


   This is communal project started in 2003  through  collaboration  between
   Department of Agriculture and  the  National  Wool  Growers  Association.
   There are 28 beneficiaries involved in selling of wool in Port  Elizabeth
   market having about 450 sheep. On average, beneficiaries get R40 p/kg.
   In the first year they used BKB Company to market their products and  CMW
   Company in the second year. Beneficiaries had a good working relationship
   with the former. They contribute money to buy vaccines for livestock.


   The Department contributed CASP money to the tune of R2 million to  build
   shearing shed, fencing and reticulation of water in camps. The money will
   reach out for 218 direct beneficiaries, total of 5 shearing sheds  in  12
   communities.


   Due to high unemployment  rate  in  the  area,  the  Department  and  the
   Agricultural  Research  Council  (ARC)  introduced  egg  layers  in   the
   community for food security purposes. There is an existing committee  for
   the project but do not have an account for the project.


   20.1 Observations / Findings


      • The committee found that the  project  is  characterized  by  group
        conflicts  emanating  from  dispatching  of  funds  after  sale  of
        products;
 • The assistance by the department needs to be intensified;
      • Layers program has caused household to look for markets outside the
        community to sell surplus eggs;
      • The information on the financial aspects of  the  projects  is  not
        well disseminated to beneficiaries.


   20.2 Recommendations


      • There is a need to develop the scale of farming as it is clear that
        the size of the project constrains growth and potentially result in
        fights for little returns.
      • There is  need  to  strengthen  legal  entity  and  decision–making
        processes, transparency in management etc.
      • Good results of the Food  Security  project  gives  opportunity  to
        establish “Rural Market Infrastructure” of the ARC and NAMC.


   20.3 Action


      • The Portfolio Committee is  to  engage  the  ARC  and  NAMC  to  be
        involved in this project and make follow up.
      • Committee has heard that both institutions wish  to  develop  rural
        markets – they should give the committee plans and update  on  this
        project.
   EASTERN CAPE (18 – 19 AUGUST 2005)


   21.      STERKSPRUIT LAND CARE PROJECT - BILIKANA


   The land retrogression and soil erosion in the area dates back  to  1923.
   The project was launched on the 26th October 2004 with the  formation  of
   Land Care Committee and benefited about 196 people through  the  Extended
   Public- Works on R45 per day rate for fencing and donga control work. The
   Department is focusing on controlling water run-off,  fencing,  livestock
   farming  and small  irrigation  through  a  partnership  with  the  local
   community and municipality.


   In 2004/5 financial year the Department allocated  R1  million  to  kick-
   start the project and  currently  allocated  R6.5  million  of  which  R3
   million is for Blikana, R3 million to reimburse the volunteers  for  land
   care and R500 000 for social mobilization.


   The Land care  committee  stated  that  they  have  problems  related  to
   contours in the fields, tractors, although  Municipality  has  13  broken
   tractors, for municipality, sales pens,  dipping  tanks,  improvement  of
   shearing shed, dams for livestock, school vegetable garden, plantation of
   forestry on mountains. They  have  one  spinach  garden  and  others  are
   underway.


   The municipality has endorsed the project on its IDP  and  budgeted  R2.5
   million though it is not readily available.


   21.1 Observations / Findings


      • The Committee found that the project  is  progressing  well  though
        workers were not paid wages since May 2005;
      • The HOD assured the Committee that the problem would be  solved  by
        25 August, when people will be paid their money including the  past
        months (June, July & August);
      • The project has received R7.5 million and there  are  questions  of
        financial management and this needs attention.
      • There are negative actions by the youth who demanded the  expulsion
        of old beneficiaries in the project;
      • Land Care committee appeared to  be  lacking  financial  management
        related to the project; and
 • The beneficiaries started with training to be able to manage the project.
      • Sustainability is necessary and efforts should be  made  to  ensure
        that the R2.5 million budgeted  for  from  IDP  (Municipality  must
        create sustainability and good finance management in the  project).




   21.2 Recommendations


      • There is a need to address the probable bad perceptions coming from
        the  Youth.  Either  there  is  need  to  have  youth  involved  or
        initiation of youth projects through UMSOBOMVU.
      • Issues of agriculture equipment and infrastructure through CASP and
        other programmes need to be addressed.
      • There is a need to create strong project with probable  returns  in
        order to create sustainability of the project.


   22.      ALLEN WATER LAND CARE PROJECT


   The project consists of 59 beneficiaries involved in livestock production
   (cattle and sheep), vegetables, maize, pumpkins beans and peas. The  then
   Ciskei government started the project in 1983 on 1 900 hectares  of  land
   and the current government supported it since  1998  through  partnership
   between Department of Agriculture, National Wool Growers Association  and
   the Agricultural Research Council (ARC).


   The beneficiaries started the project through their own  contribution  of
   R500 each. The allocated funds at district level is  R300  000  for  Land
   Care programme, R160 000 for fence erection from provincial department of
   Agriculture; and R50 000 from Presidential project  fund  for  irrigation
   purposes.


   The Land Care project started in 2000. The Land care money  was  used  to
   repair a shearing shed, construct a dipping tank and 9 km fencing.  There
   are 18 camps, only 6 camps with water reticulation and 7 windmills out of
   which 3 were repaired.


   On livestock production, beneficiaries produced 28 wool bales in 1998, 55
   bales in the following year and currently produced 75 bales  for  BKB  in
   Port Elizabeth market. For the last produce they received R153 000  which
   will be shared by the beneficiaries.


   Beneficiaries have constraints of water in some camps and also for
   household purposes. The project has 300 sheep donated by Dohne Institute
   of ARC and individual members have their own stock. They have also
   received a top award for land care amounting to R10 000.


   22.1 Observations / Findings


      • The project is viable and well managed. This is shown by  the  fact
        that the community has saved R100 000 in their account  for  future
        development;
      • The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and  the  Municipality
        should come on board to address the drinking water problem  in  the
        community.
      • The Department of Agriculture could  learn  from  the  project  how
        community projects could be strengthened (that is the apparent good
        relations and management of the project).
      • Support of projects by government is necessary to  achieve  success
        (for  example,  first  the  project  was  initiated   by   homeland
        government and then new government built on the good of this).
 • Continuity with change is virtuous.


   22.2 Recommendations


 • There is need to ensure growth of the project.
 • Train the members as trainers to give mentorship as it appears  there  is
   good experience.
 • Need to strengthen institutional arrangements.


   22.3 Action


      • The Department  of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  (DWAF)  must  be
        contacted to respond to the needs of the project.


   23. CONCLUSION
   The  projects  visited  were  chosen  from  different  districts  in  the
   provinces and due to time constraints  and  vastness  of  provinces,  the
   committee was not able  to  visit  as  many  as  possible.  The  selected
   projects included both those that were relatively  successful  and  those
   that were struggling.


   The visit by the committee  has  highlighted  some  of  the  shortcomings
   experienced by provincial departments. One of the fundamental  challenges
   is the communication gap that exists between the  provincial  departments
   and beneficiaries. Again, there is no clear exit strategy to ensure  that
   when government withdraws, the projects will not falter. The collapse  of
   the projects would undermine the government programme of meeting the  30%
   target to transfer land to black people.


   The visit also indicated the lack of coordination and integrated approach
   by departmental units in dealing with projects and related policy issues.
   The committee does acknowledge that some  projects  can  experience  some
   measure of success if they can be provided with sufficient support.


   Therefore, in  the  opinion  of  the  committee,  what  is  required  for
   sustained success  of  the  projects,  the  provincial  Departments  must
   establish  strong  mechanisms  for  monitoring,  evaluation  and  regular
   interaction  with  beneficiaries  and  other   stakeholders   should   be
   prioritized.


   The Committee is satisfied that it  has  achieved  with  limitations  the
   objectives set out for the oversight visits. The assistance  rendered  by
   provincial departments, Legislatures and other stakeholders who  assisted
   and participated in the programme is sincerely appreciated.


