---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 12 April 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-04-12
---



                           TUESDAY, 12 APRIL 2005

                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 10:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

    That this House –


   1) noting the failure to publish the proper budget for the Mpumalanga
      visit, as required by section 21 (2)(c) of the Rules of this House;


   2) further noting the failure to publish the notice of motion given by
      the DA on this matter on 22 February 2005;
   3) questions whether the ANC is trying to hide the exorbitant costs of
      this exercise, and


   4) calls on the secretariat to immediately make available to all members
      of this House the full costs to the taxpayer associated with this
      visit, including accommodation, transport, food and refreshments,
      venue hire and all other specified items.

Ms D ROBINSON: Chair, I would like to give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day in terms of Rule 74:

    That this House –

        1) expresses its sympathy with all the residents who have suffered
           the loss of their homes and possessions during the storms that
           have lashed the Western Cape;

        2) thanks the emergency services and municipal structures for
           sterling services rendered, and

        3) calls on municipalities to be more proactive in preparing for
           winter storms by ensuring that drainage and other services are
           well maintained.

Mr G KRUMBOCK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of this House, I shall move:

   That this House –

        1) notes the unlamented death of the NNP from self-inflicted
           wounds;

        2) further notes that the members of the party, which created
           apartheid, are very comfortable in the party of neo-apartheid,
           the ANC;

        3) recognises that job reservation, race classification, nepotism
           and corruption are as much a part of the current government as
           they were of the old NP government, and

        4) gives the assurance to the people of South Africa that the DA
           will continue the struggle for true democracy and freedom for
           all the people who call themselves South Africans, irrespective
           of colour, language, culture or political affiliation.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

  That this House –

        1) notes the statement by the Chief Whip, hon V V Z Windvoël, on 17
           February 2005 that the matter of the budget for the planned
           Mpumalanga visit was deliberated upon more than several times in
           the multiparty Whips meetings and in the programme committee
           meetings;

        2) further notes that according to the minutes of the Whips and
           programme meetings the budget was in fact not discussed with the
           representatives of other parties at these meetings before that
           specific date; and

        3) therefore censures hon Windvoël for deliberately misleading this
           House and for insulting hon Watson in an effort to cover up his
           misrepresentation of the facts.


                    WELCOMING ALL NNP MEMBERS TO THE ANC


                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

    That the Council –

        1) notes that the NNP has over the past weekend finally agreed to
           close shop during the local government elections later this
           year;

        2) agrees that this brings to an end the past division between
           patriotic South Africans;

        3) accepts the admission of gross mistakes on the part of the
           leadership of the NNP in its futile attempts to recycle far-
           right political ideologies under the DA, and

        4) welcomes all past NNP members who agree with the vision of the
           Freedom Charter under the leadership of the movement of the
           people.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




                 PEACE-BROKERING EFFORTS IN THE IVORY COAST


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

    That the Council –

        1) notes the peace-brokering efforts of the President of South
           Africa in the Ivory Coast;

        2) expresses collective confidence that it leads to further
           reconciliation and peace in the region and that the stable
           conditions that the President’s efforts at ensuring peace have
           brought about, places the foundation on which free and fair
           elections can be held in the Ivory Coast, and

        3) commends the Presidency and the President for the successes that
           his sterling efforts have had in stabilising our continent so
           that Africa and its people can rise to the challenge of peace,
           development and vibrant democracy in future.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                        TRAGIC ACCIDENT NEAR RICHMOND


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –

   1) takes note of the tragic accident near Richmond in the Northern Cape,
      which happened during the Easter Weekend, where six schoolgirls and
      three teachers were killed;


        2) notes that the school netball team was on their way to a
           tournament in George when the horrific accident occurred, 30 km
           outside Richmond, and

        3) extends its condolences to the school, the families and
           everybody involved in the accident.

Motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, may I just please ask you to recognise my objection to
the motion read by Rev Moatshe. I was interrupted by the hon Themba so I
could not hear what you were saying and therefore my interjection. The
motion was objected to by the Whip of the DA in the meeting of the Whips,
as was agreed, in that motions of a political nature should have the
approval of the House, and we therefore wish our objection to that motion,
especially the contents in one paragraph, to be noted.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Watson, you will understand that I did put
a question and there was no objection. You say that you were interrupted,
but that is not my problem. I am sorry.
Ms J F TERBLANCHE:  Chairperson, on a point of order: Mr Krumbock raised
his hand and you did not note him. I saw him raise his hand and you did not
note him.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I did not see any hand.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: He tried to raise an objection and you did not take note
of him.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Ms Terblanche, please sit down. That motion
has been agreed to. We will continue with the work of the House.


                     MOURNING THE LATE POPE JOHN PAUL II


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, it is unfortunate that some
people sleep during their breakfast and then wake at lunchtime and demand
their breakfast again.

Chairperson, on a more serious note, I wish to move without notice:

  That the Council –

        1) notes with sadness the death at the age of 84 of Pope John Paul
           II on Saturday, 2 April 2005;

        2) recognises the Pope’s role in the pursuit of global peace,
           development and co-operation among the world’s nations;

        3) recalls that he played an active and leading role in promoting
           human rights and dignity for all;

        4) acknowledges the role he played in the support for Africa’s
           development and renewal, and

        5) joins the Catholic Church and the entire religious community the
           world over in mourning the loss of this great icon.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                            DEATH OF TATA MPAHLWA


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A T MANYOSI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House –
   1) notes with deep regret and sympathy the death of Tata Mpahlwa, the
      father of the Minister of Trade and Industry, and


   2) extends its condolences to the Mpahlwa family.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Debate on Vote No 25 & 29 – Agriculture and Land Affairs:

NGCONCOSHE WETEKULIMA NETEMHLABA: Mphatsisihlalo, malunga eNdlu
lehloniphekile, ngicolise bengingati kutsi kantsi sekukhona lapho kufanele
sime khona nasikhuluma. Bengisacabanga kutsi kusenjengobe ngagcina
nangikhuluma kulendlu. Ningicolele kakhulu-ke bantfu bakitsi.

Angisho nje, ngisengakacalisi kukhuluma, kutsi kuyintfokoto kimi kutsi
Lendlu yente umkhankhaso wekutsatsa iNdlu Yesishayamtsetfo iwuyise
ebantfwini. Ngekwenta njalo yelekelela natsi, tsine hulumende kutsi sati
kutsi ngabe bantfu kahle-hle bafunani. Ngabe tinhlelo lesitentako tentani
emiphakatsini kuphucula timphilo tebantfu? Ngabe bantfu yini labatentela
kona kubonisa kutsi lamatfuba lesiwavulako ngekushaya imitsetfo nangetimali
lesitihlatiyako nasikhuluma ngekwabiwa kwetimali batisebentisa kanjani.

Ngibonge-ke Sihlalo neNdlu yakho kutsi nami ngiyiNdvuna neNdvuna
yaseMphumalanga lephetse tekulima satfokota kakhulu ngemhlangano
lowawuKwaMhlanga. Ngiyati-ke kutsi nami sengisika nje emantjontjo ngobe
loku akusiyo indzaba yekwabiwa kwetimali. [Kushaya tandla.] (Translation of
Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon members of
the House, I want to apologise, for I was not aware that there is now a
podium where we should be standing when giving our speeches. I thought it
was the same situation as the last time I spoke in this House. I hope
colleagues will pardon me for that.

Before I start with my speech, I would like to say that it was a pleasure
for me to see this House in its campaign of taking Parliament to the
people. By so doing, it also helps us as government to know exactly what
people need. It also helps us to know if the programmes that we put in
place do help people, and how it meets their needs. What are people doing
to help themselves through the laws that we make, and how does our
budgeting work for them in making their lives better?
I also wish to thank your House, hon Chairperson. We, the national and the
Mpumalanga provincial Ministers for Agriculture and Land Affairs, were very
pleased to witness the meeting that was held at KwaMhlanga. I know that I
am diverting to another debate because this has got nothing to do with
finances.]

Chairperson, hon members, as we make increased progress with the
implementation of both agricultural and land reform programmes, one thing
has become very clear, and that is that the success of our programme’s
implementation depends largely on governmental relations. In other words,
co-operation among the three spheres of government, and with other
government departments, becomes even more important.

Co-ordination is sometimes severely lacking in this regard. It is our view
that the newly proposed legislation of the Department of Provincial and
Local Government on intergovernmental relations is of great value to my
department, especially since the provisions for protocols between different
spheres of government open the way for healthy relations.

I want to thank the members of the executive council responsible for
agriculture for the way in which they have understood the importance of
such a relationship among the various spheres, and also for the way in
which they have undertaken their task; particularly if one recalls what
happened to us as a country last year. We were, actually, confronted with
animal diseases in areas of the Eastern Cape, with avian influenza, foot-
and-mouth disease in the area of Limpopo, and now in the Western Cape the
pigs’ disease, as well as the Newcastle disease.

The collaborative way in which they have worked in combating these diseases
was enormous. The MECs were willing to share their expertise with other
provinces. They shared their people who moved from one province to the
other to assist and, indeed, I must say that we worked as a team and that
is how we succeeded.

Also, last year, on realising that we were not spending the resources that
were allocated for the comprehensive agricultural support programme in
time, the national department dispatched a team to the provinces in order
to ensure that we work together in resolving whatever challenges there may
be. This exercise has revealed certain challenges that we will have to
address, as well as the capacity of the state at various levels in order to
meet our transformation objectives as a country.

At our February Minmec, which is, the meeting of Minister, Deputy Minister
and members of the executive council, we agreed that the heads of
departments in the provinces responsible for agriculture and the senior
management in the Department of Agriculture, as well as that of Land
Affairs, will work together to identify what capacity needs we have and
make proposals on what we need to do.

It is our view that this process will add value to the work that the
President gave to the forum of the directors-general. This work is aimed at
undertaking an investigation on the levels of capacity that is there in
government and its entire team, and what needs to be done. We therefore
hope that the work that we will be doing sectorally, will in some way
contribute to this larger work.

Building relations within government is just one element in trying to meet
the challenges of the transformation of our country; the other is to build
relations with civil society, as well as with the private sector.

The agriculture sector plan, which was approved some years ago, was an
outcome of such a working relationship. However, it is true to say that
such a relationship continues to be threatened in one way or the other, and
therefore we need to put all our effort in ensuring that we sustain it and
work at it.

Just yesterday, hon members, in one of our national newspapers, the
Business Day, it was reported that farmers do not think that the deadline
of producing an AgriBEE Charter will be met; alluding to certain processes
which they think are slow, and alleging that there are fundamental issues
around which there is no agreement amongst stakeholders.

I must say that it is indeed worrying if these statements are true. The
individuals who are cited in the same paper are the very individuals that
I, as a Minister, appointed to the steering committee - a steering
committee whose responsibility is to drive this consultative process
amongst all the stakeholders before a consultative conference is called
where such a document will be approved.

It is therefore interesting that some of these members have chosen to go to
the media and attack the process and display their differences within the
steering committee when they actually have a collective responsibility to
report to the Minister and the public about their work. I must say that
should any of the deadlines have been met, as they have alleged, they all
share a collective blame in this regard.

Secondly, I want to refer tO issues where they say there are differences,
as it is alleged in the same newspaper. I must say that I am surprised,
because in my view there is not even a reason to raise these matters or
even to undertake some kind of a debate. These are the issues on which we
agreed as a country, and even as this Parliament, when we adopted the
reconstruction and development programme as our policy statement in 1994.

In that document we asserted that we would have to redistribute 30 per cent
of agricultural land. We have enunciated this very statement in the AgriBEE
framework document. Today, some other members are starting to question the
wisdom of this agreement that was reached then. We want to remind those
people who somehow feel uncomfortable about these targets that these are
the targets we agreed to as a country and these are the targets we will
have to meet.

We do appreciate that indeed there might be a challenge on the issue that
is raised in the document with regard to the ten per cent access to land
for farmworkers. Indeed, this is a new issue, but it’s a new issue which,
in our view as government, is a matter that needs deliberation, because the
farmworkers in our country are the most vulnerable among our society. The
majority of them have no tenure security to the land on which they stay.
Therefore, it is a matter that, in my view, we must rather be debating in
public to be able to find modalities of how we can resolve to, indeed, put
to rest one of the legacies of apartheid in our society where some among us
cannot claim a secure tenure to land.

I am raising these matters in the context of the relationships that I
referred to earlier that need to be built, because if we are not able to
work continuously at such relationships, they don’t bode very well for
building a united nonracial and nonsexist society.

As you may be aware, much of the work that we have undertaken in the areas
of land reform, in particular with regard to restitution, relies on the
networks that we have with civil society organisations which, in most
instances, will work with claimant communities in assisting them in various
ways. Others were instrumental in mobilising communities to lodge their
claims, while others have been there during the processes of research and
verification.

We believe, therefore, that the civil society organisations are important
elements in the land reform process. It therefore follows that our
relationship with these institutions must be worked at and strengthened
where they are weak.

At our last Minmec in March this year, we agreed that in the second quarter
of the celebration of the Freedom Charter we would mobilise our communities
to engage in a dialogue on land and agricultural issues. These will be,
among other things, the popularisation of our programmes that relate to
agriculture and land, such as restitution, LRAD, commonages, land care, and
a comprehensive agricultural support programme.
The very discussions will, amongst other things, include assessment of the
pace of land reform in the past ten years; the blockages in the
implementation of such a programme; the land market in South Africa and how
it operates; how we deal with the issues of land that is laying fallow and
not having landowners who reside in South Africa, even those who are
resident in South Africa and are not using it, and how we can come up with
interventions that will help us to improve our delivery mechanism.

I want to announce to this House that we will end this mobilisation
campaign by hosting, at the end of June, the land and agricultural summit,
which, as you know, has been called by a number of stakeholders for us to
be able to assess how far we have gone.

In the 8 January statement of the ANC, we are reminded to focus on the
local sphere of government to ensure that local government, including
elected representatives, ward councillors and other forms of structures are
there to ensure public participation. In so doing, we will be able to
genuinely realise the Freedom Charter at local level, that indeed, the
people shall govern.

It is through this work of local government, in our view, that the issues
of land access and ensuring that land is shared among those who work it can
also be best realised.

I must say that we are fortunate that the efforts of the Ministry and the
departments of working together with local government over a number of
years have proved successful. We want to ensure that we build on these
relationships.

Time and again we are realising that a number of local municipalities are
faced with the challenge of livestock in urban setting. We want to ensure
that these communities who use some of these livestock for their livelihood
are actually given an opportunity to work on the urban edge through
commonages so that, by so doing, they can supplement what little income
they have. Also, some of them can use these commonges as a springboard for
becoming fully fledged farmers.

In this regard we want to commend a majority of municipalities. Amongst
them is the Lesedi Municipality in Gauteng, which, not so long ago, worked
with the farmers in the surrounding area, together with their farmworkers,
to ensure that there can be access to land for those people who, for a
number of years, were workers and the tillers of the land. Today they are
land owners. They have access to land and they can produce food, not just
for themselves, but also for the market. [Applause.]

The commendable achievements by restitution cannot go unnoticed, having
settled 57 908 claims as at 28 February 2005, benefiting 863 138
individuals. All of these beneficiaries have thus far had access to 854 000
hectares of land.

We are aware that one of the challenges that continues to face us in the
area of restitution is to ensure that those who receive land are able to
use it productively. I want to say to these hon members in this House that
the MECs of agriculture, working together with the national Department of
Agriculture, are finding ways through Casp, as one of the programmes, and
other programmes in the provinces to lend support to these beneficiaries.

We have settled major claims in some parts of the country last year. One of
those was Umkhambathi in the Oliver Tambo District Municipality, where
about 5 960 households got 17 400 hectares of land, which is one of the
most biodiverse in our country. They will use this land, both for
agriculture, as well as tourism, working with the local environment
department in the province of the Eastern Cape.

I want to say that some of these claims are very important because, in a
way, they respond to the challenge that was laid before us by the President
on how we can actually create economic opportunities for people in rural
areas. I want to say that some of these claims that we have prioritised are
those claims that are in the integrated sustainable rural development
nodes.
Others are claims such as Hlahlindlela in KwaZulu-Natal, Umsuluzi, Nkaseni,
Charlestown, Mazengwenya Forest, as well as Siqakatha, Masilonyane
Municipality in the Free State. We want to say that the municipalities that
have been impacted by these claims will in some way find better
partnerships with the communities to ensure that they can improve the
economic viability of those communities who would have received such land.

The replacement of the settlement land acquisition grant programme by LRAD
has definitely contributed positively, because of its shift from a
household to an individual focus, which has broadened our base to include
women and youth. Of the 23 520 beneficiaries who benefited from LRAD, 90
per cent of these were young people, while 34 per cent were women who today
are not just workers or supporters of their husbands on land, but they’re
farmers in their own right.

The improvement of young people’s involvement in agriculture is also
starting to deal with the stereotype that agriculture is for the old, not
for the young. Here I want to mention one of our beneficiaries who is a
woman, Ms Mpopi Sethlare, who benefited from our land reform for
agricultural development programme. She is a co-owner of the Thaba Bosiu
Dairy in the Magaliesburg area. The farm has 11 dairy cows and produces 120
litres of milk a day in summer and about 80 litres in winter. From the
profits of the sale of milk, Ms Mpopi Sethlare has bought a milking machine
and a trailer. She and other beneficiaries have added two Nguni heifers and
three ewes to their stock, and after lambing they now have nine sheep.
Their farm is progressing very well and they intend venturing into cheese
production. The farm, as we speak today, has actually added to the
employment challenge by employing two people who otherwise were not
employed on a full-time basis. This is not the only success story.

On a larger scale the Mpumalanga provincial land reform office has assisted
about 419 former farmworkers through LRAD to buy a Kudu farm which has a
vast sugar cane plantation in the district of Barberton. The majority of
beneficiaries were people who used to work on these very farms before.

The strength of the project is that it also has a public-private
partnership with Transvaal Suiker Beperk, which is known as TSB. It is also
funded by the Land Bank.

If one looks at some of these success stories, I think we can say we have
turned the tide against poverty, but it is also important for us to
indicate that while we do have success stories, we do have certain
challenges.

The Inala Farm in Mpumalanga remains to be one of those challenges that, in
my view, with the investment that the state has made, we will have to
continue to find a way in which we resolve it so that we remove some of the
issues and are able to continue to support those who need our land most.

The Communal Land Rights Act, which was enacted on 16 July 2004, has
actually been one of the important steps towards ensuring the security of
tenure for people living in communal areas. This also created an enabling
environment for sustainable economic development in these areas. In our
budget for this financial year, as you will see, members, the Communal Land
Rights Act has actually been given about R12 million which will assist us
in piloting the project in KwaZulu-Natal.

The reason why we’ve selected KwaZulu-Natal, other members may want to
know, is because of the experience we have accumulated over the years
through the Ngonyama Trust, administering the Ngonyama Trust Land. I want
to say that Ngonyama Trust Land, through its tenure, has been able to
survey all communal land in KwaZulu-Natal.

They know exactly which land belongs to KwaMasane, which land belongs to
EmaChunweni, as well as the extent of hectarage and the inhabitants.

Ehhe, KwaMasane uma uya ngale KwaHlabisa. [Yes, it is towards KwaHlabisa.]

This process will make it easier for us to ensure that we can affirm the
ownership to the rightful owners. It is also important that the phase
approach is meant to allow us to ensure proper training, as well as
communication on the legislation content, and the setting up of the Land
Rights Board.

At a provincial level, I want to say it would be necessary to ensure that
we have administrative structures that can actually support this process of
transformation.

I’d like to thank the University of KwaZulu-Natal which has assisted us in
designing a training programme for land administration clerks. It has also
allowed us to use that institution to undertake this task.

Our Directorate of Surveys and Mapping will also establish real-time base
stations in support of the surveys for the Communal Land Rights Act.
Surveying and registration of the outer boundaries of communal areas, in
terms of the Communal Land Rights Act, will receive priority. This will
enable communities who were previously excluded from the benefits of
landownership to take formal title to their land. Maps of aerial
photography coverage in the rural areas, particularly within the integrated
sustainable rural development nodes, will also be updated.

In KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga about 1 449 labour tenant claims have been
finalised in the financial year 2004-05. To date, 10 329 claims out of 21
448 have been settled. We plan to settle all the labour tenant claims by
the end of 2006-07.

What, therefore, is our programme in the coming year? As part of the
ongoing discussion with national and provincial departments we shall over
the next three months embark on the following government programme of
action. We will mobilise farmers and land users to commit to the land use
and resources management programme.

In Mpumalanga, for instance - I’m sorry to take the thunder from you,
colleague, I know you’ll be able to articulate this – they will be
launching a programme, the Masibuyele emasimini campaign, to ensure that
people in rural areas can again go back to tilling the land, not only for
food production, but also for the market.

In Gauteng province, the provincial department of agriculture and
environment will mobilise communities around issues of AgriBEE, as well as
land reform policies.

In commemorating Workers’ Day in May, all of us, collectively, as the
provinces and national government, will focus on the plight of farmworkers,
with various problems, such as evictions, issues of minimum wage, as well
as issues of safety and security for farmers, farmworkers and farming
communities.

We will work, together with our social partners, AgriSA, Nafu, Tau, as well
as Fawu, in order to ensure that the protocols that we agreed on regarding
labour, particularly by farmworkers, are actually respected and
implemented.

We shall also be working with the Departments of Home Affairs and Social
Development to ensure that all births on farms, those children are
registered and those who qualify for social development grants actually
have access to them. [Applause.]

During the month of June, we will be focusing on issues of the youth and
women agriculture, as well as start to prepare for the August celebration
of women in agriculture. We are mindful of the critical skills shortages
that continue to threaten our sector. We shall continue to promote the
voluntary mentorship programmes that exist between established farmers and
the new entrants. I must say that through this programme we can see the
spirit of Vukuzenzele being alive on our farms.

We will continue to issue the title deeds that are remaining to land users
who qualify for ownership. Where such title deeds have not been transferred
we will actually make those a priority.

It is also important that we must engage the Department of Defence, as well
as the municipalities, in auditing and verifying the status of use of the
various land passes that they have, because it is our belief that such land
that is not used, particularly by the Department of Defence, should be made
available for land reform.

Also, for municipality land, we would actually argue that it is important,
before such land is sold, to look at whether there are no needs for such
land in the various municipalities, either for housing programmes or even
for agricultural development, because it is in our view that the long-term
investment in this regard surpasses the short-term gains of getting
millions of rands from one developer.

I want to say, apart from these things that I have mentioned, we would want
to indicate to you that the micro-agricultural finance scheme, Mafisa,
would actually be launched this May, and it is our hope that people who
otherwise before never had access to land would be able to do so.
This work will also enable us to continue to engage with the financial
services of our country, particularly our financial sector, to ensure that
the commitments that they made in the financial sector, of releasing R 1
billion for land reform, is actually realised.

I want to indicate to you that also we will improve our capacity on the
implementation of the agricultural support programme, as well as the land
care. To this end, we’ve done extensive work in ensuring that we can
support some of the projects of land reform, particularly in these specific
areas where these meet the criteria.

I want to make some examples of the work that we’ve done. We’ve repaired
and upgraded irrigation infrastructure and created ten temporary jobs in
the Kalahari-Kgalagadi nodal point, at a cost of R110 000. We’ve improved
livelihoods of the amaHegebe tribe in the area of the Eastern Cape, through
the appropriate technologies for solving production problems.

We’ve erected stock watering systems and created 24 food gardens within the
Carnavon district, again in the Kgalagadi. There are many other programmes
that some of my colleagues, the MECs, will refer to and that will show
these members how far we have come.
In my view, food security remains a challenge that we as a country have to
continue to deal with. It is true that we in South Africa cannot be happy
in a country that belongs to all who live in it, black and white, if there
are still many at our back door that go without food at the end of the day.

We will therefore work continuously with municipalities, as well as with
our departments of agriculture in the provinces, to ensure that as many
vulnerable people as is possible are actually captured, and that we are
able to assist them in one way or another.

I also want to indicate that we are conscious of the challenges of drought
that continue to befall some of our provinces. The Western Cape is one such
province where, I think, we, as a country and a government, will have to
work together with our farming communities to look at what other ways there
are of adapting so that we can plan in the long term, because it’s clear
that climatic change is here for us, and here to stay. What is required is
to find adaption methods which can enable our farmers to cope in this
regard.

Be that as it may, we as a government, have released about R126 million to
eight provinces affected by the drought. This year again we have earmarked
about R100 million which will be used for fodder, as well as drilling to
ensure access to water for stock farmers.

Chairperson and members, as I end, I want to indicate that the work that we
do is in part a commitment to our people. We, this government they’ve
elected, are not going to leave them in the lurch. We will work
continuously to change their lives for the better, and we will continue to
be true to the spirit of the Freedom Charter that says that South Africa
belongs to all who live in it, black and white, and that, indeed, the
wealth of this country shall be shared among everybody. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, o buile go tlala seatla [you
have said a mouthful], officials of the department, MECs, special
delegates, hon members, we have closed the chapter on our 10-year
celebration, and have moved to face the challenges of the second decade of
our democracy. This debate takes place in the year of the 50th celebration
of the Freedom Charter. As we celebrate the 50th year of the Freedom
Charter, mindful of 10 years of democracy, we need to ask ourselves how far
we have come in realising the visions of the Freedom Charter.

Ditekanyetso-kabo tsa lefapha tsa ngwaga wa 2005-06, ke kabo e maikaelelo a
yona e leng go tlhasela le go kgatlhameletsa morago maparego a tlala le
lehuma go batho ba ba kobo dikhutshwane mo Aforika Borwa. Malapa a ka
thuswa ka dipeo ke lefapha “starter packs” go jala merogo e e ka thusang ka
dikotla tse di ka ba sireletsang kgatlhanong . . .  [Tsenoganong.]
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[The 2005-06 budget of the department intends to fight and push back the
frontiers of poverty and hunger of poor South Africans. The department can
help families by providing them with “starter packs” to plant vegetables
that can supply nutrition, which prevents . . . [Laughter.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon member. I don’t hear the English
interpretation. Are hon members able to hear the interpretation? Can
somebody check on the English interpretation, please, so that members can
hear? Yes, I am sure there is a problem up there. I am not blaming you, hon
member. Please, continue.

Moruti P MOATSHE: Ke ne kere malapa a ka thuswa ka dipeo “starter packs” go
jala merogo e e ka thusang ka dikotla tse di ka ba sireletsang kgatlhanong
le malwetse a methalethale. Dikolo di tshwanetse go tlhotlhelediwa go
simolola ditshingwana tsa merogo go nna le seabe mo lenaneong la phepo ya
barutwana ke Lefapha la Katlaatleloloago. Ditshingwana tsa baagi “community
gardens” di tlhotlheletswe ke lefapha la naga, diporofense le dipusoselegae
go jala merogo go lwantsha tlala. Go dumalanwe gore, “each ward”, nngwe le
nngwe e nne le “data” ya gore go na le ditshingwana di le kae mo wardeng
ego. Baagi ba ikopanye ba dire ditshingwana. Ba simolole go ela tlhoko gore
ke yona tsela e re ka lwantshang tlala ka yona.

“Aquaculture” ke bua ke nnosi jaanong. [Setshego.] Le reeditse?
“Aquaculture” . . . [Tsenoganong.] (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[Rev P MOATSHE: I was suggesting that families be supplied with seed
“starter packs” to enable them to plant vegetables that can provide
nutrition that protects against various diseases. Schools should be
encouraged to start vegetable gardens as a way of participating in the
feeding programme for learners by the Department of Social Development. The
national departments, provinces and local governments should encourage the
cultivation of community gardens as a means to fight hunger. It should be
agreed that each ward keeps a record to indicate what quantity of
vegetables there are in that ward. Let communities come together to start
vegetable gardens. They have to begin to realise that this is the way to
fight hunger.

“Aquaculture” . . . I am now talking Greek. [Laughter.] Are you listening?
“Aquaculture” . . . [Interjections.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I want to apologise to the members. I am told
there is a technical problem in the booth. I would suggest that, hon
Moatshe, you give your speech so that it can be translated and circulated
to the members. You can continue.

Rev P MOATSHE: “Aquaculture” le go thuthuswa ga ditlhapi “fish breeding” e
tsamaelana le ditshingwana tsa merogo. [Aquaculture and fish breeding go
hand in hand, like the cultivation of crops.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, I am sorry to disturb you so
often. The English interpretation of the speech can now be heard on channel
eight. Continue, hon Moatshe. I am sorry about that.

Moruti P MOATSHE: “Fish breeding” e tsamaelana le ditshingwana tsa merogo.
Metsi a a thuthusang ditlhapi a ka dirisiwa go nosetsa ditshingwana tsa
merogo gore batho ba rona ba seke ba lebelelwa ke tlala mo matlhong. Kgetsi
ya tsie e kgonwa ke go tshwaraganelwa, go ka fenya tlala le lehuma. Tona ya
lefapha, molaotsamaiso “policy” ka ga thuthuso ya ditlhapi o tlhokega jaaka
maloba-a-maabane. Re ka itumela fa re ka tsibosiwa gore o tla bona letsatsi
leng.

Fa mokgatlo wa batho o tsaya puso ka ngwaga wa 1994, o ile wa tsaya moruo o
o neng o le mo tsamaisong ya basweu e le fa matshwititshwiti a baagi ba
Aforika Borwa a ilediwa ditšhono tsa go tsaya karolo mo moruong. Ba ne ba
ilediwa go tsaya karolo, ditswammung tsa naga tota le go baana le mafatshe.
Se mokgatlo wa batho o itlamileng ka sona fa o tsaya puso, e ne e le go
busetsa matlotlo a naga le boswa jwa Maaforika Borwa go batho botlhe jaaka
go bonwa ka leitlho la Lekwalo la Tokologo “Freedom Charter”.

Ngwaga di le 50 tse di fetileng re rile: Aforika Borwa ke ya batho botlhe
ba ba tshelang mo go yona, bantsho le basweu. Se se tshwanetse go
fitlhelelwa tswee-tswee. Puso e e tsamaisiwang ke mokgatlo wa batho, e
dirisa didiriswa tsotlhe tse e nang le tsona go busetsa serorumo go bao ba
neng ba kgothositswe mafatshe le ditshwanelo tsotlhe. Go fetisitswe
melaotsamaiso “policies” le manaane go kampana le tlhaelelo ya tekatekano
go tsa mafatshe le tse dingwe. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[Rev P MOATSHE: Fish breeding is related to the cultivation of vegetable
gardens. The water from the fish breeding can be used to water vegetable
gardens to alleviate poverty and hunger. Many hands make light work. This
should be the case if we want to fight hunger and poverty. Hon Minister, a
fish breeding policy is necessary, like there was in the past. We would
appreciate being made aware of your availability.

When the people’s movement became the government in 1994, it inherited an
economy that was under white leadership which denied the majority of South
Africans the opportunity to participate in the economy. They were barred
from sharing in the mineral resources of the country, and even from owning
land. What the movement committed itself to, when it took over the
government, was to return the wealth of the country and heritage to all
South Africans, and this is from the perspective of the Freedom Charter.

For the past 50 years we have said: South Africa belongs to all people who
live in it, black and white. This must indeed be realised. The government
is led by the people’s movement. It uses all the resources at its disposal
to restore the dignity of those who were robbed of their lands and denied
rights. Policies were passed and programmes put in place to take up
challenges brought about by the inequality of land and other issues.]

We have a restitution programme to redress the past atrocities of forced
removals and seizure of land. Through restitution 57 527 claims were
settled by December 2004, benefiting 164 103 households. With the
additional allocation of R6 billion in this year’s budget, we will ensure
that all claims can be settled within three years. This shows the
commitment of government to close the chapter on restitution. We can then
concentrate on other land reform programmes.

However, one of the main challenges for restitution is that farmers are
charging high prices for their land. Exceptionally high prices are charged
in Limpopo, Mpumalanga and the Western Cape. From Mpumalanga it was
reported that government paid 300 per cent more for properties than the
market value. This led to the Minister appointing a team to investigate
land prices, which reported that government officials have collaborated
with evaluators to ask high prices for land.

I appeal to the Minister to make sure that money allocated for restitution
is not to enrich farmers, evaluators and corrupt government officials.
These kinds of practices need to be completely uprooted, because they
undermine our goal to return land to the people.

Progress has been made with regard to redistributing land to the people
under the redistribution subprogramme known as LRAD, Land Redistribution
for Agricultural Development. I admit that progress in the beginning was
slow, but it has improved since 1999. However, we are to meet government’s
vision of redistributing 30 per cent of the land available for agriculture
among previously disadvantaged citizens. By 2014 we need to fast-track the
process of land delivery.

In terms of land tenure, although government has passed legislation to
prevent eviction of farmworkers, we are still lagging behind in making sure
those laws become reality, and not just remain on paper. Every day we hear
of farmworkers being evicted and maltreated on the farms. We would like to
see our justice system really take up this matter to ensure that those who
undermine the law are punished. As the ANC, we need to ensure that there
shall be work and security for farmworkers.

It is a good thing that this budget will be used to consolidate the Labour
Tenants Act and the Extension of Security Act. I believe this will help to
tighten up this Act and ensure that there are no loopholes that farmers
could take advantage of to undermine the human rights of farmworkers. I
appeal to those farmers who still undermine the rights of farmworkers to
respect them and to treat them as important, and as co-developers.

While on this issue, let me commend those white farmers who have taken the
initiative to ensure that what we declared in 1955 becomes a reality, by
sharing their land and expertise with farmworkers and labour tenants.
Initiatives by growers and millers in the sugar industry and the ones by
wine farmers in Paarl are good examples of this. Through the Bouwland Share
Equity Scheme, 60 farmworkers are now the owners of a wine farm.

The Agricultural Black Economic Empowerment, AgriBEE, framework launched in
July this year, will take this further. It will increase the participation
of black people, women, youth and people living with disabilities in the
agricultural sector. It is good that this budget has set out an additional
allocation for the implementation of AgriBEE. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Nkk M N OLIPHANT: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe woMnyango wezoLimo nezeMihlaba,
malungu ahloniphekile ale Ndlu, inkulumo yami izobheka izinto esizenzile
siyikomidi ngenkathi sivakashele izifundazwe ezahlukene.

Njengoba sigubha iminyaka engama-50 kaSomqulu weNkululeko, abantu
baseNingizimu Afrika bathi, “Bonke abantu baseNingizimu Afrika bayoba
nesabelo emnothweni wale lizwe”. Namhlanje uMnyango wezoLimo unohlelo
owalusungula ngokusemthethweni ngoJulayi 2004 olubizwa ngokuthi i-AgriBEE.
Inhloso yalolu hlelo ukulwa nendlala nokubhekana nokunciphisa ubuhlwempu,
bese lwakha usikompilo lokuzimela ngokuthi sibe nezivande ukuze imindeni
ikwazi ukuthola ukudla okunomsoco. Kanti futhi lolu hlelo luzokwenza ukuthi
bonke abathanda ukusebenza umhlabathi bakwazi ukungena emkhakheni wokuba
ngosomabhizinisi.

Lokhu-ke sakubona eMpumalanga njengoba sasihambise iPhalamende ebantwini.
Savakashela i-transbridge agricultural project lapho safica kunentsha
eyisihlanu nabantu abane abadala, abanye abasebenzayo abafuye izinkukhu.
Okwasihlaba umxhwele ukuthi akuthi uma bethola inzuzo ngokomkhiqizo wabo
bese beyintshobontshela imali kodwa bayazi ukuthi isisu sibekelwa
ngaphandle, futhi bayazi ukuthi ukuze bathuthuke baye phambili kufanele
ingxenye yenzuzo yabo bayisebenzise ekutholeni izimbewu ukuze bakwazi
ukuqhubekela phambili.

USomqulu weNkululeko-ke ubuye uqhubeke uthi: “Kuyoba nokwabelana ngomhlaba
phakathi kwalabo abawusebenzayo”. Uphinde uthi, “Uhulumeni uyosiza
ngezinsizangqangi ezifana nembewu, ogandaganda kanye namadamu ukulondoloza
umhlabathi kanye nokusiza abawusebenzayo”.

Sibonile futhi-ke siyikomidi ngesikhathi sivakashele eNyakatho-Ntshonalanga
endaweni ebizwa ngeModimola lapho sifice khona kunemindeni engama-48
esebenza ohlelweni olubizwa ngokuthi i-household food security programme.
Umndeni ngamunye unikezwa amachwane angama-20 nokudla kwawo, imbewu
yokutshala nomanyolo, ithange eligcina amanzi angamalitha angama-210,
amapayipi enkasa abathi phecelezi i-irrigation system pipes kanye nesigubhu
esigingqwayo sokuthutha amanzi.

Sibonile-ke futhi KwaZulu-Natali lapho uMnyango wezoLimo uthengela abantu
udedangendlale wepulazi. Lo mphakathi ubuyingxenye yokulisebenza leli
pulazi futhi uMnyango ubuye wabanceda ngokuthi bathole imali ukuze bakwazi
ukulungisa amapayipi khona bezokwazi ukunisela umoba wabo. Ngokunjalo-ke
futhi, umnyango ubuye wasiza umphakathi wakwaNongoma ngokubanikeza imbewu
kanye nezinto zokulima. Ngikhuluma nje ikhaba lommbila liyakhephuzela.
Zikhona-ke ezinye izinhlelo zokusiza umphakathi owabuyiselwa umhlaba
wobabamkhulu bawo ukuze bawusebenze ngempumelelo. Ngikhuluma phela nge-
agricultural credit scheme ne-Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme.
Lokhu-ke kuyinkomba yokuthi uhulumeni oholwa uKhongolose uyakwazi
ukubhekelela abantu bakhe njengoba isinqumo sathathwa abantu baseNingizimu
Afrika ngo-1955, noKhongolose wayeyingxenye yalokho.

Ngokohlelo olungaphansi kwe-Expanded Public Works Programme, indawo
yaseMoutse engaphansi kweNkosi uMathebe, eMpumalanga, inohlelo lokuhlenga
umhlabathi owaguguleka. Inhloso yalolu hlelo, ngokusho komphakathi, ukuthi
babuye bakwazi ukuwusebenzisa njengamadlelo emfuyo kanye nezivande.

Thina-ke, singuKhongolose, sithi sisayibambile Ngqongqoshe. Yebo, siyazi
singuhulumeni ukuthi kunezinselelo esibhekene nazo. Yize kunjalo kuzomele
sisebenze ngokubambisana, ikakhulukazi ohlelweni lokuqeqesha umphakathi.
Ngalokho siyobe siqinisekisa ukuthi umphakathi wakithi uthole impilo
engcono futhi izinhlelo zisebenze ngempumelelo.

Inkinga esinayo-ke uma sivakashele ezinye izindawo ukuthi sisuke sihambe
njengamalungu ekomidi. Kodwa kunamanye-ke amalungu ekomidi asuke eqhamuka
mhlawumbe kwelinye iqembu – engicabanga ukuthi wonke umuntu uzozibala
izibalo bese iyaphuma impendulo – okuye kutholakale ukuthi ngenkathi
sivakashele izifundazwe abawenzi umsebenzi ngendlela efanelekileyo. Kodwa-
ke ngiyethemba ukuthi umhlonishwa ozokhulumela i-DA uzokhuluma ngazo zonke
izinto ezenzakalayo ngoba sasihambe naye ngenkathi sivakashele izifundazwe.
Naye wayeyingxenye yokujabulela ukuthi uhulumeni uyasebenza.

Kodwa-ke futhi kufanele singakukhohlwa ukuthi kwesinye isikhathi kukhona
abantu ababanga umsindo ngenxa yokuthi abahambisani nezinhlelo zokuthi
uhulumeni enze izimpilo zabantu zibe ngcono. Uma singabheka indlela
yokufuna kwabo ukuthi kuthiwe bayi-official opposition, umbuzo uthi: Yini
le abayiphikisayo ngoba selokhu babakhona bayaphikisa, ngisho nakuhulumeni
wobandlululo babephikisa, nanamhlanje basaphikisa izinhlelo zikahulumeni
zokwenza izimpilo zabantu ngcono? Thina-ke esikwaziyo ukuhlupheka kwabantu
nokubhuqwabhuqwa yindlala siyasixhasa isabiwomali salo mnyango. Ngiyabonga,
Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mrs M N OLIPHANT: Chairperson, Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs,
hon members of this House, my speech shall be directed to the things done
by the committee when we visited different provinces.

As we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter, the people of
South Africa said: “All people shall share in the country’s wealth.” Today
the Department of Agriculture has a programme that was launched in July
2004, and is called AgriBEE. The aim of the programme is to alleviate
poverty and to reduce hunger, to create a culture of independence so that
households can have gardens to obtain healthy food. This programme will
ensure that those who are interested in agriculture get a chance to become
farmers.

We saw this in Mpumalanga when we were taking Parliament to the people. We
visited the Transbridge Agricultural Project where we found five youths and
four adults. Some were farming with chickens. We were amazed by the manner
in which they run their business. When they get a profit from their
produce, they don’t spend it.

They are aware that they are supposed to keep it. They know that in order
to make progress they should keep part of their profit and use it to buy
feed. The Freedom Charter states: “Land shall be shared amongst those who
work it.” It states further that the government shall help with
infrastructure, like seed, tractors and dams to store water, to conserve
the soil and to assist those who work it.

The committee saw something else when we visited North West, at the place
called Modimola, where we found 48 families engaged in a project called the
Household Security Programme. Each family received 20 chicks and mash, feed
and manure, a tank that contains 210 litres of water, irrigation system
pipes and a rolling water container.

In KwaZulu-Natal the Department of Agriculture bought a farm for people.
The community are the workers on that farm, and the department assisted
them by giving them money to repair pipes so that they could irrigate their
sugar cane plantation. The department has helped the Nongoma community by
giving them seeds and ploughing materials. As we speak, the mealies are in
their prime.

There are programmes in place to assist communities with restoring to them
the land of their forefathers to be used profitably. I am talking about the
credit scheme and the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme. This is
an indication that the ANC-led government is able to look after people as
South Africans made a decision in 1955 and the ANC took part.

In terms of the Expanded Public Works Programme, the Moutse area under
Inkosi Mathebe in Mpumalanga has a programme to deal with soil erosion. The
objective of this programme is to enable them to reuse the land as grazing
land for livestock and also for gardens.
We, the ANC, are saying that everything is on track, Minister. We, the
government, know that we face many challenges. Be that as it may, we have
to work in partnership, especially on community development programmes. In
so doing, we shall ensure that our people get a better life and that
programmes are effective.

The problem we have is that sometimes we visit areas as committee members.
Some committee members come from other political parties. I hope that
everyone will make calculations and find answers. It has transpired
sometimes, when we visited other provinces, that work has not been done
properly. I do hope that the member of the DA will talk about these issues,
because we were with him when visiting these provinces. The member was a
party to praising the government as working.

We should not forget that at times there are people who would make noise
because they are opposed to programmes made by government to ensure better
lives for all. When we look at their attempts to be called official
opposition, the question is: what are they opposing? Since their inception
they have been opposing, even during the times of the apartheid government.
Today they are opposing programmes for the betterment of life for all. We
know of the plight of our people and their fight against poverty, and we
therefore support this Budget Vote of this department. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Ms N P MAGWAZA (Western Cape): Mhlalingaphambini, Mphathiswa wethu wezoLimo
nemiHlaba namalungu ale Ndlu, ndiyabulela ukuba ndifumane eli thuba nami ke
ndizowuhlahluba kolu hlahlo-lwabiwomali loMphathiswa wethu wezoLimo.
[Chairperson, hon Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs and hon members
of this House, I would like to thank you for affording me the opportunity
to take part in the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs Budget Vote
debate today.]

Minister, once again you have displayed the vision, compassion and
understanding of all issues affecting agriculture and land affairs. I want
to take this opportunity to apologise for the absence of the MEC Jacobus
Dowry. He is leading a Westgro delegation to the Netherlands, together with
a group of emerging farmers to open export markets for these farmers. This
will be a proud achievement for the Western Cape.

The challenge for the Western Cape department of agriculture is the
alignment to national aims and targets, as well as the provincial iKapa
Elihlumayo strategy and the provincial growth and development strategy, and
to ensure that the issues of and challenges for the emerging farming sector
are represented, but also addressed through various departmental processes.

We are aware of and accept the large responsibility we have towards the
creation of sustainable rural development. As part of this responsibility,
a renewed focus has been placed on the farmworkers of this province. The
farmworker community, a special sector of the agricultural sector, has for
years been subjected to manipulation, disadvantage and discrimination.
These resulted in the farmworker community being enslaved, not only
physically, but also psychologically.

Bear in mind that agriculture will grind to a standstill without the more
than 200 000 farmworkers. Without their input the large commercial farms
that export their goods earning millions of rands of revenue for the
province will cease to operate. They are indeed an invaluable cog in the
mighty agricultural machine.

The provincial department of agriculture has identified the upliftment and
development of our farmworker communities as one of its main priorities and
has launched various initiatives to redress the discriminatory situation of
the past.

The first line of action involved the establishment of a subprogramme
especially for farmworker development, with a specific aim of effectively
co-ordinating the delivery of services to farmworker communities.

You will note that I say co-ordinating the delivery of services, and you
will agree that successful and sustainable service delivery to farmworkers
will only be possible through a holistic integrated government approach.
Health, social services, poverty alleviation, education and various other
role-players will have to join hands with agriculture in order to achieve
the goal of creating better living conditions for the farmworkers.

We have started a process that will culminate in the development of a
strategic plan for the farmworker community with clear policies, aims and
actions identified for each focus area. We should also make provision for
the effective implementation for the reason that the strategic plan will be
accompanied by a monitoring and communication plan. With the Farmworker
Indaba that took place at Elsenburg on 17 and 18 August and 2 September
2004, we wanted to create an opportunity for farmworker communities to
enter into a dialogue with role-players, thus accepting co-ownership of the
process of determining their future, hence the theme of the indaba was:
“Farmworkers in Dialogue.” Topics such as education, economic empowerment,
violence and safety social structures and sports facilities, the value of
labour legislation, housing, health issues, women and children and persons
with disabilities were discussed during the indaba.

The need articulated by farmworkers at the indaba and the regional
conferences presented a clear view of the enormous backlog in the service
delivery experienced by farmworkers as South African citizens. The
discrepancy with regard to access to the most basic services on the one
hand and the citizens in towns and cities on the other hand confirms the
widely held view that farmworker communities present some of the most
marginalised communities in South African society.

The lack of effective communication of rights and services by the service
sector and or farm management was a recurring theme and requires action to
ensure transparency. The numerous social problems among the youth on farms
to be attributed to various factors, such as lack of healthy recreational
facilities; a lack of career pathing for especially the agricultural
sector, and poverty could well result in the perpetuation of the vicious
cycle of poverty and underdevelopment.

In order to align service delivery for farmworkers within the Western Cape
government’s objective to make the Western Cape a home for all, it is
essential that steps are taken to address the unique needs of farmworker
communities, especially their disadvantaged position.

The farmworker development subprogramme has already funded several projects
in 2004-05, including a project by the women on farms - those are NGOs - to
assist with the capacity building of seasonal female workers in the Boland.
This financial year will see the completion of the strategic plan on
farmworker development in the province, roll-out of staff in four regions,
the funding of several projects, and the farmworker development challenge.

Allow me to briefly turn to the subject of land reform. We are in the
process of appointing more than 60 new agricultural development officers to
decentralise our service to the emerging sector and beneficiaries of the
land reform process.

Another critical issue is the alignment of working procedures between the
Department of Land Affairs which transfers the land, and the Department of
Agriculture which assists the newly settled farmers. Together we have to
ensure that the target which was set in 2004, of 7 000 land beneficiaries
within five years, will be met within 2005.

Much positive progress has been made in this regard. The activity by the
provincial department is, however, hampered by the fact that the equitable
share of the Department of Agriculture is now on the levels of 1996.

The land reform targets for 2014 are at 30 per cent for transfer of land.
In order to achieve this, the department of land affairs in the Western
Cape will need approximately R1 billion a year till 2014 to purchase the
land. This year their budget is only R70 million. It is the mandate of the
provincial department of agriculture to service the newly established
farmers or recipients of land.

Once there is new momentum within the Department of Land Affairs, I am
afraid that the Western Cape budget will not be sufficient to service the
new farmers right now. I can assure you that agriculture and all role-
players remain committed to the vision of a home for all and iKapa
Elihlumayo strategy. I am confident that everyone is committed to this
process, including organised agriculture, commercial and emerging farmers,
officials and everyone in the value chain of agriculture. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the House should
consider itself lucky, because I don’t feel well and so I am not in a
fighting mood today. [Laughter.]

In most developing countries, or developed countries rather, where
agriculture is an important component of the economy, and where land as the
natural resource for the industry is of major importance, debates are
normally dominated by production and marketing, and optimal land use.

These days the government in South Africa seems to have forgotten these
important growth indicators, and is hellbent on redistribution at all cost.
Having said that, I must again stress what has been emphasised by my
colleagues in the NA over and over again. The DA fully supports the
objectives of restitution, reform and empowerment. We do, however, differ
with the ANC’s objectives of numbers only; numbers of people resettled and
the numbers of hectares involved. The DA believes that measurable
sustainability should be the first objective, which must be regularly
measured and assessed in terms of success rates.

On our recent visit to Mpumalanga, to a number of farms where we visited,
emerging farmers were settled in terms of the settlement programme and a
lot of things were observed. Let us just analyse the status quo at two of
these farms: one at Hereford near Groblersdal, where things were going well
for some time, but now those farmers are in dire straits. For more than
four years now, Minister, they have been promised, and have been waiting
for title deeds to the ground on which they farm, but nothing has
transpired yet.

In the meantime, a number of factors have impacted negatively on their
venture, most importantly, the repairs to the Loskop Dam irrigation scheme,
which all contributed to a total crop failure. They now face total ruin if
they are unable to access financing soon. Without the security of title
deeds they are, however, unable to get help.

The other example is Lesedi, which I personally know very well, and I can
therefore testify as to how successful this farm under the Loskop
irrigation scheme near Groblersdal really was.

In 2002, however, the farm was bought lock, stock and barrel for the 32
persons of the Lesedi Trust. Today, I regret to say, the farm, which was an
economic success just three years ago and employed 32 full-time workers, is
lying barren and no crops are planted anymore.

These are just two examples of rushed resettlement without proper after-
sale service. If proper measures of sustainability and success had been in
place, things may have been better, but there is also the case of the cake
being too small for too many eaters.
It is quite evident the many failures across the country can be traced back
to some of the following truths: too small land allocations per individual
– only 12 per cent of the people who have received land were actually
trained to farm; too little, or no working capital available; finance from
the state too late or absent and no extension; little after-service care,
and no sufficient infrastructure.

Dit wil egter ook vir my voorkom of daar nie genoeg gepraat word met die
huidige sowat 46 000 kommersiële boere nie. Ek bespeur ‘n groot mate van
welwillendheid onder die boere van die verskeie georganiseerde landbou-
organisasies. Hulle beskik oor die kundigheid om die Minister en haar
departement by te staan, maar dit word net nie benut nie.

Kom ons staan net weer vir ‘n oomblik stil by ons besoek aan Mpumalanga: ‘n
Halfdag van die program is afgestaan aan boere, maar geeneen van die twee
georganisseerde landbou-organisasies in Mpumalanga is genooi nie. Die vyf
kommersiële boere wat wel teenwoordig was, het ek persoonlik oorreed om van
so ver as Machadodorp te kom vir die vergadering nadat ek gehoor het hulle
weet nie daarvan nie.

‘n Verhouding van vyf tot etlike honderd kan mos nie bydra tot gesonde
gesprekvoering nie. Daar sal ook wyer gekyk moet word om potensiële grond
vir opkomende boere te kry om hulle te kan vestig. Ek is bly om te hoor van
die Minister dat dele van die talle hektaar grond van die Departement van
Verdediging ook nou geoormerk word vir die vestiging van nuwe boere.

Ek het onlangs egter ‘n kaart bestudeer van die verskillende toestande in
ons land, en ek het natuurlik my aandag toegespits op my provinsie,
Mpumalanga. Wat my die meeste getref het, was die enorme oppervlak van hoë
potensiaal landbougrond wat tans net bewoon word en wat as die voormalige
tuislande bekendstaan.

Ek besef dat die meeste van hierdie grond kommunaal deur gevestigde
stamowerhede beheer word, maar ek aanvaar nie dat dit ‘n probleem is nie.
Die mense wat daar woon en die stamhoofde wat in beheer van die grond is,
het ook ‘n behoefte aan vooruitgang en ontwikkeling. Ek is oortuig dat ‘n
plan gemaak kan word.

Ek is verder oortuig dat my stelling seker weer aangeval gaan word, omdat
ek sogenaamd deel van die ou stelsel was. Ek dink egter dit het tyd geword
dat ons ophou om die geskiedenis as wegkruipplek te gebruik. Ons leef in
die hede en die toekoms lê voor. Kom ons vergeet nou die foute van die
verlede en bou op die suksesse van die toekoms. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[However, it also seems to me that there is not enough discussion with the
present approximately 46 000 commercial farmers. I perceive a significant
measure of good will among the farmers from the various organised
agricultural organisations. They have the skills to assist the Minister and
her department, but it is not being utilised.

Let us pause once again for a moment at our visit to Mpumalanga: Half a day
of the programme was allotted to farmers, but not one of the two
organisations for organised agriculture in Mpumalanga was invited. I
personally persuaded the five commercial farmers who were, in fact, present
to come to the meeting from as far away as Machadodorp when I heard that
they did not know about it.

A proportion of five to several hundred cannot contribute to sound
discussions. There also will have to be a wider search to find potential
land for emerging farmers to settle on, and I am glad to hear from the
Minister that sections of the many hectares of land belonging to the
Department of Defence are now also being earmarked for the settlement of
new farmers.

Recently, however, I studied a map reflecting the different conditions in
our country, and naturally I focused on my province, Mpumalanga. What
struck me most was the enormous area of high-potential agricultural land
that is at present only being inhabited, and these are known as the former
homelands.

I realise that most of this land is communally controlled by established
tribal authorities, but I do not accept that this is a problem. The people
who are living there and the tribal chiefs who are controlling it also have
a need progress and development. I am convinced that a plan could be made.

Furthermore, I am convinced that my view will be attacked again because I
was ostensibly a part of the old system. However, I think that the time has
come for us to stop using history as a hiding place. We live in the present
and the future lies ahead. Let us forget the mistakes of the past now and
build on the successes of the future.]

The programme launched in Mpumalanga, to get back to tilling the soil, as I
call it, is a good start and must be applauded as the one example that
could be followed elsewhere in the country.

The commercial face of South African agriculture is not smiling at all,
Minister. The debt ratio of farmers has increased. The strong rand has
ended income and profits. Drought conditions in some areas and
overproduction in others have a serious influence on the survival ability
of many farmers.

The commercial agriculture in South Africa operates in a market-related
environment without subsidies. However, the South African agricultural
market is being distorted by the import of subsidised agricultural
products.

It seems as if the Minister and the Department of Agriculture, and other
related departments, turn a blind eye to this problem. I hope that’s not
true. Why, however, did it take three years for grain farmers to be heard?
Only after mass action was instigated, did the relevant departments agree
to listen and to investigate the problem.

Minister, did you take note of what happened in Centurion, Gauteng, and in
Bellville when thousands of farmers – communal, black, white and coloured -
gathered in an orderly way? Did you hear their message?

They asked the Minister to see to it that government complies with its
responsibility to prevent the dumping of overseas products on our markets.
They asked the Minister to champion their cause as she has the
responsibility to maintain the conditions for the free market in which the
farmers operate. We can compete with any farmer in any country, they say,
but we cannot compete in the market with Uncle Sam and other countries
which subsidise their products and undercut the prices on the market.

Please take heed, Minister. Do not lose the trust of the farmers. They have
a stubborn nature which can make life very difficult for you. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M MASUKU (Mpumalanga): Chairperson, Minister for Agriculture and Land
Affairs Thoko Didiza, fellow members of the NCOP, colleagues, MECs from
various provinces and honoured guests, I’m glad to participate in this
debate on land and its use for livelihood in a year that marks the 50th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter, a programme which guides the
development plans of the glorious movement, the ANC, that I am a member of.
Last year we celebrated ten years of freedom. However, before I go into
this, I want to mention that counter-revolutionary and antiprogress
tendencies will not triumph and have never triumphed over progressive
ideas.

I also want to indicate that the framework for this freedom was defined in
Kliptown some 50 years ago by the people of this country, and over the
years that followed. People, young and old, committed themselves to
fighting for this freedom side-by-side until it was attained, no matter
what it would cost.

Forces of darkness and counter-revolutionary forces have been there in the
past, and they continue to exist in a different form. I would like to
illustrate that in this format. Firstly, Utata uMadiba, for instance, vowed
in the 60s that he was prepared to die for the ideals that are in the
Freedom Charter.

Secondly, before Comrade Kalushi Solomon Mahlangu was executed in 1979, he
passed a message to the people of South Africa through his mother, that he
was prepared for the cause and that he was sacrificing his life so that his
blood could nourish the tree that would bear the fruit of freedom for the
people of South Africa.

Thirdly, Comrade Chris Hani mentioned in an interview in 1990 that he knew
that for years he had been living under a cloud of death throughout his
life, and that he wanted a democratic and free South Africa, an ideal he
was prepared to lay down his life for.

These heroes that I have quoted above would not have said the things they
said if they didn’t know that there are counter-revolutionary forces. I
want to say that, even today, as we progress, there will be counter-
revolutionary forces trying to counter the progress.

Primary to all the freedoms mentioned in the Freedom Charter is the issue
of land, which all development theorists agree is key to all freedoms,
because the basic need for livelihood for all creatures is a platform on
which stages of livelihood take place: a source of food, a water basin, a
platform on which shelter is built, a source of material required for the
erection of shelters, and these are a base for a flourishing economy.

This is probably the reason wars were, and still are, fought all over the
world, because of the quest to access and control land and its products. In
some other places, these wars were passed from generation to generation.

In this case we are blessed, because in South Africa the Freedom Charter
prevented the possibility of another civil war by defining ownership of
land as belonging to all who work it, which rules out the possibility of
racial, ethnic, gender and class domination - if there are people who
doubted this - because every day we hear people making noise over this
matter. The Freedom Charter has closed that chapter.

This is an ideal that the Minister and us in the provinces are working on,
and we shall work side by side until it is realised. We are grateful for
the framework that the Minister has set up within which the struggles
should be waged. There would never have been any other framework that would
have had a mixture of such complementary programmes as the one we are using
under your guidance, which seeks to extend land ownership to those
previously dispossessed masses and also improve the productivity of land,
support farmers through the comprehensive agricultural support programme,
research and market access, Mr Watson.

The South African agricultural strategy itself mentions market access as
part of the things that are supposed to be worked on. It also includes
issues of veterinary service and early-warning systems. This programme,
ordinary as it may seem, has benefited many people in my own province.

Minister, we shall recall that the first time you interacted with the
people of Mpumalanga, eNkomazi, babe khombisa [at Nkomazi, they were in] a
fighting mood over the lack of finance because funding institutions did not
finance agricultural production projects in former homeland areas.

You came up with a programme that kick-started these farmers through LRAD
and some adjustments in the status of the Land Bank. Today this group of
farmers is a symbol of success in the sugar cane industry and more
opportunities have opened up for them.

Owing to the level of success among some of these farmers, TSB, a sugar
company in Mpumalanga, told me that they intended awarding some of their
farms to the best performing farmers to help them realise their full
potential. This is a discovery that was made by hon Mr Watson over the
years we stayed in Mpumalanga, but he has not realised that the people who
lived in homelands didn’t have access to farming. [Applause.]

At Nkangala Region we heard that ubabe uMngomezulu went to a great deal of
trouble in 2000 to tell you how black farmers were disadvantaged by being
banished to dry-land farming by the apartheid system, while fertile state
land just next door was left fallow as it was reserved for white farmers.
That was also the case with the Pankop farmers who had no land to put their
farming ambitions to practice.

Members of this House will recall that the music that was sung in the NCOP
during the campaign Taking Parliament to the People in KwaMhlanga was quite
different. uBabe uMgomezulu was heard saying that he was put on the fertile
land, he was supported, but now he is crying for ownership. This is also
the case with the Pankop farmers: they have found land implements,
production grants, pack houses through Carrs, and they are supported
professionally by extension officers, research agricultural economists and
engineers, and they have access to further markets. They are exporting and
are being supported, hon Mr Watson. They now say they want the Minister to
get these professionals on a full-time basis, and they want the
administrators to buy them fuel.

To us this may sound weird, but it is an expression of appreciation and
trust, a communiqué that says, thank you for having brought us to where we
are. We are doing well. However, we are now engaged with these new
challenges, but we will not mind if you could help us, if you can, because
we know that you have resolved difficult problems before, and these ones
will just be child’s play to you, Minister.

There are many more people who are celebrating ten years with tangible
things in their hands. However, we have raised certain issues and
challenges. We are also sharing them. Your concern regarding price hikes,
which are slowing down the process of restitution, coupled with corrupt
tendencies among officials, farmers and those whom you regard as
professionals - the evaluators - are actually a disturbing factor. My
province has been hit hard by these tendencies, and I hope we will speedily
resolve them so that we can be allowed to roll out the support programmes
that the needy need.

We welcome the proposal of a land summit and hope that we will be able to
resolve a number of issues that are still remaining behind, and we are
planning to hold our own in the province. Together with the acting
Provincial Commissioner, ubab’ uThozi, and the land affairs collective in
the province, we are holding various meetings to plan how we can
collectively project on the challenges ahead and how we can join hands to
tackle them. We intend to include the ARC and Land Bank in order to enhance
co-ordination. Through this co-operation, we believe that we will come up
with a solution on Nala as well, Minister.

This year we are also embarking on the Know Your Land Campaign. Through
this campaign we are expecting that extension officers should be allocated
sections of where they are supposed to work in terms of hectares, and we
are expecting that they would be able to know what is on their land, define
who is there, the farmers who are involved there, and the kind of business
that they are involved in. In this way, they will be able to identify the
different challenges of these farmers and the products that they will need.
In this way we will be able to address a number of projects.

Lastly, we want to say the “Masibuyele emasimini” campaign for all is going
to benefit a number of people. The province has set aside R15 million, and
62 hectares of land, belonging to survival farmers, will be ploughed
throughout the year. We will be assisting them with tractors, implements,
seeds and fertilizers to get them moving. We will also be interacting with
established farmers so that we can address issues of AgriBEE challenges.
Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chair, hon Minister and the hon House, agriculture is
a significant contributor to the South African economy through its effect
on the GDP and employment, as well as rural development and food security.

In the North West province, this sector comprises a dominant commercial
farming sector and a large subsistence and emerging farmer segment. This
emerging farmer segment is important because of its contribution to poverty
reduction and job creation in the rural areas.

In the wetter eastern parts of the province, agriculture comprises largely
livestock and crop farming. The central and southern regions are dominated
by wheat and maize farming, whilst livestock and wildlife farming occurs in
the semi-arid western region of the province. For instance, in the
Kgalagadi node and the Moses Kotane Municipality, a programme for improving
the production and the quality of goat meat has been rolled out.

There are a number of successes, too many to mention within my time
allocation. Suffice it to say that the re-establishment of the agricultural
credit scheme within the department, together with the phasing-in of the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, is most welcome to the
farming community.

However, the maize price management issue is a matter of great concern to
the crop farmers. This matter cannot be laid at anybody’s door, but it is
the result of overproduction and the accumulation of a huge surplus, which
has no available market to absorb it. This type of problem could be avoided
by establishing effective early-warning systems to warn farmers in time to
take appropriate marketing decisions and to keep them informed of how their
actions would affect their future markets.

On the land affairs side, many communities in our province have regained
their ancestral land, and state farms are on offer to suitable potential
buyers.

Whilst we wish to congratulate the hon Minister on this magnificent
achievement, we also wish to raise our concern that up to now, some of this
land and farms are not yet being used to their maximum potential. Not
withstanding this, the UCDP supports these Budget Votes. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs, special delegates,
and hon members, “Land is might; land is right; land is water; land is
shelter; land is dignity, and land is honour.” These are the words of the
women at a recent Women’s Resource Programme Workshop in India.

This debate takes place in the second quarter of 2005, which also marks the
50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter, a period which, according to the
ANC’s statement of 8 January, should focus on the following two clauses of
the Freedom Charter: “The people shall share in the country’s wealth”, and
“The land shall be shared among those who work it”, both of which are
fundamental to the furtherance of our young nation’s democracy and to which
the ANC is committed.

In his state of the nation address of 11 February 2005, the President gave
a directive that additional resources would be allocated over the next
three years to cover claims in the land restitution process. In line with
the President’s directive, the Commission on the Restitution of Land Rights
committed itself to settling the 12 872 outstanding urban claims in the
2005-06 financial year, and the remaining 4 991 outstanding rural claims by
31 March 2008.

In order to accelerate the settlement of the 17 866 outstanding claims
within the three years, the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights
embarked upon a restitution high drive 2008 process to settle these claims.

The Minister of Finance announced in his Budget Speech of 23 February 2005
that R6 billion has been allocated to complete this land restitution
process. This is a clear indication that the ANC-led government is serious
in its commitment to the Freedom Charter, and shows the importance it
places upon land rights. It also embodies the words of the women at the
workshop in India, namely that land is might, right, water, shelter,
dignity and honour.

The second decade of democracy is therefore about fast-tracking the
implementation of land reform in the context of vision 2014. It is also
about eradicating poverty and underdevelopment within the context of a
thriving and growing first economy and the successful transformation of the
second economy.

To this end, this ANC-led government and the Department of Land Affairs, in
particular, have laid a solid foundation for the implementation of land
reform programmes. Just over 3 million hectares of land had been delivered
by 28 February 2005 through these programmes. These include land delivered
through restitution, redistribution and state land. The total number of
individuals that have benefited from land reform is 1 028 876. The
contribution per programme is as follows: redistribution, 1 780 260
hectares; restitution, 854 444 hectares; tenure reform, 170 555 hectares,
and state land, 772 660 hectares.

Government faces serious challenges in reaching its target of
redistributing 30 per cent of commercial agricultural land by 2014. Amongst
these are: high land prices and unco-operative sellers. As honourable as
this government’s intentions may be, I am concerned about the growing
danger signs of increasing resistance by the current landowners to
participate positively in the process of land redistribution.

The resistance is evident in the high valuation of land offered for sale by
some greedy owners, some of whom have also invoked the Constitution to
protect their rights.

It is common knowledge that commercial farmers are constantly complaining
of their financial plight caused by continually increasing input costs
against decreasing market prices for their produce, especially in the maize
and dairy production areas. Hon Watson confirmed this. It is therefore
difficult to understand how a growth in the value of agricultural land can
be justified under these circumstances. This does not conform to generally
accepted market forces.

I would therefore urge hon Minister to appoint a further commission of
inquiry into the matter to establish, firstly, how landowners justify these
prices and, secondly, who and what are the driving forces responsible for
this situation.

Whilst expropriation is constitutionally possible, the current use of
negotiation is still the preferred option. I therefore call on organized
agriculture to participate more positively by demonstrating more concrete
commitment to land reform and to instil a culture of respect for land
rights of vulnerable groups like labour tenants, occupiers and other farm
dwellers amongst its membership.

I also want to refer to the scare tactic used by some opposition parties
that South Africa’s land redistribution policy will turn this country into
a second Zimbabwe. These remarks are irresponsible and dangerous for the
development of our new democracy, and also far removed from the truth. I
urge these parties to rather participate positively in nation-building by
being more responsible and responsive in their approach towards land
reform. [Applause.]
Creating a South Africa in which all the inequalities of the past are
eradicated is a journey upon which this government has embarked and we have
not yet reached our final destination. We have a sound route planned and
implemented. What we need to do now is to ensure that we reach the intended
goal, namely prosperity for all South Africans. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G NKWINTI (Eastern Cape): Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, my
colleagues, MECs, hon members of the House, the last time I addressed this
House I was pleading, as MEC for housing, local government and traditional
affairs, for support for an intervention at Qawukeni Local Municipality.
[Laughter.] Now I am here to support the budget statement of the hon
Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs on Votes 25 and 29 as MEC for
agriculture.

The International Pineapple Symposium is taking place in the Eastern Cape
in a small town called Bathurst, along the coast. One of the most notable
participants this year is the Peddie Pineapple Trust, a company whose
enterprise, the Peddie Pineapple Company, was launched by the hon Minister
a few years ago.

The shareholdership of this company is interesting: 40% workers, 40%
community and 20 per cent mentors. Now it is contemplating purchasing
shares from Summerpride. That is how far people can go with determination
and support. The hon Minister must be very pleased with this. I am saying
this because I thought we should give her a sweet surprise. She has played
a very important role in the forward movement of this company. [Applause.]

Our President, in his state of the nation address, reminded us of the
importance of preparing the second economy for participation in the
mainstream economy. What I have just described is probably very, very close
to what is required of us. To this end, it is our belief and firm
conviction that we, the people of the Eastern Cape, must begin with
developing agricultural production, agroprocessing and market access
mechanisms for this sector. Agrarian transformation and the strengthening
of our sole food security programmes are fundamental in the revitalisation
of our economy, in creating jobs and fighting poverty in the province.

The Eastern Cape Provincial Growth and Development Plan rests on
agriculture. Our hon premier, Mrs Balindlela, also alluded to this during
her state of the province address this year when she said that, like
anywhere else in the world, the strategic path to industrial development
and investment growth in the province lies in agriculture.

It is our further belief that the necessary economic infrastructure should
be brought to the masses of the people in the villages where they live, the
previously disadvantaged involved in communal farming and subsistence
agriculture.

It is unfair that, despite the province’s ability to produce large
quantities of maize, its residents have to buy maize meal from other
provinces like the Free State. We intend to revive the Butterworth silos
and other similar processing plants in the province. An amount of
R28 million has been spent on the Kei Fresh Produce Market, but this market
gets its produce from outside the province. This must be corrected.

This R28 million was handed over by the provincial department to the O R
Tambo District Municipality, which is running the market very, very well.
The market structure has been completed, and trading started in February
2004. In this short space of time, the market has been making a turnover of
R1,5 million per month. This facility provides an essential outlet for
projected produce to come from the revitalisation of irrigation schemes and
for local upcoming producers.

We need to put more emphasis on local economic development in the province
and raise food production in the eastern part of the province so that it
can match its counterpart in the western part. The main focus of the
service-delivery perspectives is subsistence agriculture because, in our
view, it is here that we can produce a massive amount of food, or produce
food on a scale that is required to feed our people.

The rolling out of the agrarian transformation of our province is referred
to as the green revolution. I don’t know why they say this. I am happy that
they do, though, because I hear my colleague in Mpumalanga is talking about
masibuyele emasimini. [Let’s go back to working the fields.] I think it
means the same thing.

We intend to revolutionise formerly unproductive areas and processes to
achieve a staggering increase in crop and animal production in the
province. This green revolution will be carried out in a
multipronged way with a view to banishing hunger and radically reducing the
unemployment ravaging our province.

We have identified, among other things, the national programmes being the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme – Casp - the Land
Redistribution for Agricultural Development programme and agricultural
black economic empowerment as key strategic programmes in this regard.

The Casp budget was decentralised to districts in the province as from 1
April this year. The intention is to assign staff at head office and
districts to the Casp. The tender evaluation committees are now to meet at
least twice a month and have already been constituted in all districts.
Districts are to submit implementation plans with timeframes by Friday 15
April 2005. The implementation plans are going to be monitored by the head
office. For 2004-05 contractors have been employed and projects will be
completed in June 2005.

Our Constitution states that South Africa belongs to all who live in it,
black and white, united in our diversity. In this context, we will continue
to support our commercial agricultural sector to ensure that it maintains
its national and international competitiveness for the good of the economy
of our province and its people.

Severe economic constraints have led to significant structural changes on
our farms and in our farming communities. The victims of this economic
metamorphosis are the farmworkers who, all of a sudden, find themselves
without jobs. It is therefore imperative that the massive amount of food
production will, in fact, have to come from the subsistence agricultural
subsector, as white commercial farms are turned into game farms.

Another important sector that merits the government’s serious attention is
the peri-urban subsector. It straddles both the commercial and subsistence
subsectors. However, the sector lacks capital, technology and land. These
are the aspirant farmers who have been evicted from the commercial farms
that have been turned, in the main, into game farms. The rural people often
lack urban work skills and are therefore unemployable in urban settings.
The government must and will intervene in this regard.

For our green revolution to succeed we need a couple of things to be put in
place. We need strong partnerships. We need to have the necessary
resources. We need mentoring programmes and expertise. We need to
communicate effectively with our communities. We need an investment
strategy, of course, for agriculture and we need special projects that
include household production units.

We will adhere to the requirement of the Constitution that stipulates that
government makes progress in the socio-economic rights of our people, as
enshrined in Chapter 2 of the Constitution. We will also adhere to Batho
Pele and good governance principles. Thank you very much, hon Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Deputy Chair of Chairs, Minister, MECs, special delegates and
colleagues, when we take part in the debate on agriculture . .
.[Interjections.] . . . we need to look back to where we have come from.
For some of us, agriculture was something that we learnt at school had no
significance in having any future for the black communities because of the
laws of the time. The main reason was that no black person could own land.
The help of the Department of Land Affairs to deliver land to the
disadvantaged and marginalised people resulted in a receipt of funding by
the agricultural support component of the Land Redistribution for
Agricultural Development programme.

Angeke ngisho futhi ngiqinise ukuthi sekuyantwela ezansi. Esikhathini
esifishane . . . [I wouldn’t say and affirm that the dawn is setting in
yet. In the short time . . .  ]

. . . in 2004 July the broad-based black economic empowerment charter in
the agricultural sector, AgriBEE, was launched. The most important thing
was that in November 2001 President Mbeki published the strategic plan for
South African agriculture with a vision of a united and prosperous
agricultural sector, whose main strategic goal was to generate equitable
access and participation in a globally competitive, profitable and
sustainable agricultural sector, thereby contributing to a better life for
all.

I-IFP iyasixhasa isilinganiso sesixamali esinikezwe lo mnyango. Iphakamisa
futhi ukuthi uNgqongqoshe abophe isifociya ngakho konke ukuze lokhu
esikubiza phelezi “AgriBEE” ibe yimpumelelo. [The IFP supports the budget
allocation for this department. The IFP would also like to ask the Minister
to pull up his socks in every respect so that AgriBEE can be a success.]

With regard to Land Affairs, while the IFP supports the budget, it must be
remembered that land is a thorny issue. It is acknowledged that land reform
includes the disposal of state land, tenure reform and increasing the pace
of delivery of the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development
programme.

Singakhuluma sigeqe amagula kodwa okusalayo ukuthi azikabuyi emasisweni.
Lashonaphi elikaMthaniya? Angikaze ngizwe Ngqongqoshe kukhulunywa ngoLundi
olumahlikahlikane. Umbuzo-ke yilona wokuthi ayebusa liphi izwe amakhosi
aKwaZulu? Angisho ukuthi kufanele sikhulume ngomlando waKwaZulu kodwa
kuyoba kuhle ukuthi izizukulwane zazi ngezwe lokhokho bazo. Kusantuleka
izindawo zokuhlala ngenxa yokweseleka komhlaba. Abahlala emaphandleni
basahlushwa ukuthi imfuyo yabo ayinamadlelo. Azibuye emasisweni, sikhombe
ngophakathi futhi sidle izaqheqhe. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We can talk until sunset, but the fact is that we haven’t yet received
what is due to us. What about our land? Minister, I did not hear anything
regarding Ulundi? The question is what land was governed by the amakhosi
then? I am not saying here for a minute that we must talk about the history
of KwaZulu, but it would be good for the generations to come to know about
the land of their forefathers. There is still nowhere to reside because of
the shortage of land. Those living in the rural areas are still having
difficulties because their livestock do not have any pasture. Let us get
what is our due, so that we can live in comfort and enjoy the fruit of the
land. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms Y NAHARA (KwaZulu-Natal): Thank you, Chairperson. Let me add my voice to
the many others who have thanked the Minister for the budget presented to
us here and for the statement she made in which she pointed out the
programmes. Anyone who knows what poverty and struggle are will not really
have any problem in saying: “Phambili ntomb’nkulu nomsebenzi wakho!”
[Forward with your work!]

Angisho nje ukuthi siyawubonga umsebenzi owenziwa uNgqongqoshe kwezomhlaba
laphaya KwaZulu-Natali. [I must say that we are grateful for the work done
by the Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal.]

This is because if you talk about freedom, but you have no land and food,
then you haven’t started talking. Therefore, in KwaZulu-Natal we have
launched the Siyavuna programme to try to address the problem of food
security and also of poverty. I can happily say in this House that in the
few municipalities where we have been this is producing fruit. We haven’t
done everything, but the little we have done has given results.

However, one of the concerns I have is regarding the land claims. “Ungathi
kukhona abantu asebebone i-jackpot lapha kuhulumeni.” [It appears as if
there are people who have found the jackpot in the government.] Land is
becoming more and more expensive from the so-called willing sellers. It is
a concern for us in KwaZulu-Natal. “Mningi lo mhlaba ohleli . . .” [There
is lot of land that is not being utilised . . .] . . . which is not being
used, but we cannot access it. We are therefore saying that if the Minister
and the other MECs could also look into this issue in terms of which we are
becoming a jackpot for those people . . .

“. . . abathanda imali . . .” [. . . and those who have money . . .] . . .
whilst government is being kind enough . . . “. . .  ukuthi awuthenge lo
mhlaba ngoba ungowethu vele.” [. . .  must buy this land because it is
obviously ours.]

Apart from that, in trying to address the issues of our people and
unemployment, we have quite a number of farmers who would like to go into,
or have already started, stock farming. The problem we have and a very
serious one . . .

. . . ukwebiwa kwemfuyo yabantu. [. . . stealing of people’s livestock.]

It was quite surprising having the police tell us that stock theft was so
rife, particularly in the areas of Umsinga and Underberg. However, the
question is: What have they done about it as they . . .
“. . . bathi akungenwa laphaya futhi ngeke ubuye uma uke wangena.” [. . .
they say that that is a no-go area and you will not return once you enter
it.]

It has been a concern of the portfolio committee. Of late, maybe two weeks
ago, we appointed two members of my portfolio committee to be part of this
farm security which has all along been just for whites. We want to form
partnerships with them and understand how they used to avoid these
problems, because people who are mainly affected by this theft . . . “. . .
yibona abalimi laba abasafufusa.” [. . . these are the emerging farmers.]

And that we are trying, together with the MEC, and I think even the premier
will take up this issue. Furthermore, we think there are quite a number of
challenges we are facing in the programme of feeding our people in the
province. It is still a bit difficult for the people who live on the farms
or on communal land to access the programmes we have. This is either
because of a land problem or because the farmer just doesn’t want to see
anybody talking to his people.

Those are the few challenges I thought maybe I could share with this House
and with my many colleagues here. Maybe other provinces have come up with a
solution for problems such as this one, which are brought about
deliberately.

However, one of the successful issues I can talk about here - maybe in
terms of what the Minister has done . . . “. . . ukubuya komhlaba
wakwaNdelu.” [. . . restitution of land to the Ndelus tribe.]

This is something I really praise the department for, which was the most
successful I’ve ever come across. This was the land that was under the
control of the church. Everybody was saying . . . “ . . . ngeke uze ubuye
lo mhlaba ngoba kuthiwa uphethwe abantu bakaNkulunkulu.” [. . . this land
will never be restored because they say missionaries control it.] When we
went there last week to hand over the land to the people, one of the old
ladies – I remember . . . “. . . wathi: ‘Wema! Ave kukuhle. Intandane enhle
umakhothwa unina.’” [. . . she said: “He stopped! It is good. Mother is the
caregiver.”]

This expression told me that these people had lost so much hope today that
it was a surprise to them. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Dr H MATEME (Limpopo): Chairperson, from your kind heart, I hope all the
time saved by the speakers above, if need be, will be passed on to speaker
number 12. As regards language, I will use Sepedi, English, Xitsonga,
Tshivenda and IsiNdebele, if necessary, typical of the province.
[Interjections.]

Ka segagešo ba re ngwana yo a sa llego o hwela tharing. Re le Limpopo, le
rena re be re theeditše ka ditsebe tša go hloka merulana ka gare ge mmagwe
setšhaba a ala ditaba tša lefase le tša temo mo Lekgotleng le.

Re lemogile gore mohlomongwe meragelo ya kua Limpopo yeo e ngwadilwego ga
se e fihle gabotse ofising ya mohlomphegi mmagwe setšhaba. Bjale ka ge ba
re makhura a ngwana ke go rongwa, le rena re be re holofetše gore lehono mo
re tla tlotšwa makhura, ra bethwabethwa mo magetleng ka tše dingwe tša tše
dibotse tšeo re di dirago ka kua gae. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs
follows.)

[It is said in my culture that, if you do not complain, no one will give
you attention. As Limpopo, we were also listening attentively when the
mother of the nation presented this country’s agricultural issues in this
House.

We have realised that the written reports from Limpopo probably did not get
to her office accordingly. As we were also sent out to do this and that, we
were hoping to receive compliments today and be patted on the shoulders for
what we have achieved back home.]

Having said that, I also feel that certain statements made in this House
cannot go unchallenged. Figuratively and literally, the Minister for Land
and Agriculture in the Republic of South Africa, does not have a blind eye.
Those who don’t know can take a look at her. No blind eye. [Laughter.] As
such, figuratively and literally, she cannot turn any blind eye to
anything.

Our committee went to New Zealand last month, and the ministry of
agriculture in that country reassured us that they, hand in glove with our
Minister, are fighting very hard at the World Trade Organisation meetings
to make sure that those countries that subsidise agriculture stop doing so
or, at least, minimise their subsidies so that the likes of us can be
relieved from the dumping of agricultural products in our own countries.
Therefore, I think the hon member surely wasn’t speaking about the Minister
that I know.

Secondly, our Deputy President once visited us and advised us.
A re batho ba bangwe le bona ba na tokelo ya go fafatla.[She says that
other people also have the right to talk nonsense.]

I don’t have the English equivalent to this expression, but it means that
people get disorientated in time and space and do not know exactly where
they are. [Interjections.] This is the impression I got when the hon member
Watson said that the ruling party, the ANC, to which I belong, has a policy
of numbers only. I don’t know that policy and I would, therefore, urge the
hon Minister to invite the likes of Mr Watson to come and witness events
such as the Female Farmer of the Year and others, which indicate that the
ruling party also strives for quality. [Applause.]

I tend to agree with the Chair of Chairs who spoke here and said that for
all the years before democracy and even after democracy, some people have
been members of the opposition, but it looks like they are not quite sure
what it is that they are opposing. Therefore, perhaps the time has come
that they changed their name to members of the supporting group for the
ruling party because, truly speaking, there isn’t much that they need to
oppose.

The Limpopo province, like the rest of the country, is also engaged in the
celebrations of the 50 years of the Freedom Charter. At our imbizos we are
taking the farmers on board. We are also surprised; we’ve borrowed from the
partially abled people. We have this phrase that says that we are going to
do nothing for farmers without farmers. That is our approach.

Allow us, as Limpopo, to invite this august House to share in our mourning
for the passing of one of the most abled farmers in our province, Bertie
van Zyl, who had put our province on the world map as regards tomato
production. While we mourn his passing, he was not a selfish person. Our
people also carefully studied what he was doing and, therefore, we have
able and up-and-coming future tomato producers in our own province. For
that, we say he has not lived in vain.

We are very much in step with the programmes of the department. The
department of agriculture in our province has more than 100 learners in our
learnership programmes, and some of them have already been employed
elsewhere in this country, as people always poach from Limpopo, but we do
not regret that.

As we will be celebrating the Youth Month, that is June, we are also going
to make sure that the young people participate fully in the programmes of
this department. We would particularly like them to focus on programmes
such as NERPO, because research has indicated that the programme on red
meat has some good percentages as regards income.

Once more, as a province, we would like to share with this august House
that we are proud of our capacity and capability, and we feel there is no
challenge in agriculture which we cannot meet successfully. This has been
evidenced by the way we dealt with the foot-and-mouth disease which
frequently visits our province, understandably so, because we are very
close to the Kruger National Park. The buffalo, which is a natural carrier
of that virus, gets through the fence from time to time and interferes with
our livestock. However, we have dealt with that challenge and hope we will
continue to deal with it as successfully as we’ve been doing.

We have defined for ourselves some specific areas of focus for this coming
financial year. We feel that we are going to continue with our
rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes and we also intend completing, at
least, the rounding up or the restructuring of the Arrowhead Regional
Development Council or ARDC projects. This is a monster which we have
inherited from the past, and which we intend to kill and resuscitate in a
new form, and we are succeeding in performing that miracle. We also are
very determined to implement the promotion of the AgriBEE, which our
province needs very much.

We are also planning the development and implementation of succession
planning. One of the speakers before me has indicated that, in some areas,
it looks like agriculture is only intended for the very old people. Now, we
do have a programme to take the youth on board, and we also feel that we
will have made considerable progress at the end of this financial year.

The rest of the plans that we have are well espoused in our strategic plan,
which I think we can make available for the records of this House here. All
in all, our plans and programmes are in line with what the national
Department of Agriculture is doing and are also in line with the policies
and principles of the ruling party.

Lastly, I would like to indicate that our MEC is not absent here because
she did not want to come, but because there is so much to do in
agriculture, and the principle of collective leadership directed that I be
here today. I hope that our province has been well explained, particularly
to Mr Watson, whom we still wish to invite to come and see what we are
doing in Limpopo.

Finally, Limpopo supports the budget of the department and our Minister.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs T JOEMAT-PETTERSON (Northern Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister,
members of the House, comrades, honoured guests, ladies and gentlemen, I
bring you revolutionary greetings from the Komani San who believe that the
restoration of their human rights and dignity is an ongoing process and
that their collective future is amply enshrined in the capable process of
the Budget Vote of the Minister, as well as the processes they engaged in
when they entered the contract and signed it with the ANC-led government
for a better life.
The women of the Northern Cape say to you, Comrade Minister: “Wathinta
abafazi, wathinta imbokodo”! [You strike the woman, you strike the rock!]
They thank you for taking them away from growing vegetables in the
backyards to cultivating commercial crops, as well as having cattle farms.
We also bring you, quite ironically, revolutionary greetings from our
commercial farmers who thank you for the drought-relief funds which you
amply made available for them. They recognise that, without the drought-
relief funds, the commercial farmers in our province would have been
devastated and ruined.

We bring you greetings from our illiterate farmworkers who thank you for
the Abet programmes you have announced, and believe that the cycle of
poverty they are entrenched in will finally be broken. Our youth in the
province are mindful of the fact that June 2005 will be the culmination of
our ANC government’s January 8th commitment to ensure that the wealth
redistribution of our country happens, that job creation is sustained and
that we share in the land of our country.

The youth of our province are also mindful that June does not only
represent the youth month, it also represents the month of the Freedom
Charter. And, ironically, it also represents the month in which the 1913
Land Act was promulgated.

It is with this hope that the Northern Cape believes that your Budget Vote
has crystalised our collective responsibility towards advancing the
national development agenda through a vision of humanism and people-centred
development. The betterment of our lives in the Northern Cape and in our
democracy must extricate us from the unequal distribution of resources in
the past.

Our collective future revolves around our ability to expand ownership
within agriculture by means of stimulating entrepreneurship, employment
equity, skills development, targeted procurement and corporate social
investment. Our devotion to the causes of economic freedom, as envisaged in
the Freedom Charter, should serve to inspire us in curtailing the
inequalities between urban and rural communities, and developing the forces
of production for the integration of the second economy into the first
economy.

Your Budget Vote mirrors the spirit of the Freedom Charter through
programmes that speak into a political, social, economic and moral vision
for agriculture and land reform. Our agenda is not accidental; our agenda
is deliberate. It is that of making poverty history and of pursuing
development as our absolute principle in creating a dawn of good living and
prosperity for those that have been subjected to an early dead end of
intolerable exploitation.

Those who are sceptical of our transformation agenda within agriculture -
we have heard enough of them today, and I don’t even need to give them the
honour of mentioning their names - need to understand the demands of
transformation of the means and mode of production. They need to understand
that it is only through black economic empowerment that South Africa will
succeed in responding to the challenges of harnessing increased
participation of workers in determining their own economic destiny.

In June this year we will engage all commercial farmers, commercial unions
and various industry stakeholders to discuss with them the revolving
implementation of our AgriBEE charter in the Northern Cape.

We are committed to ensuring that 30 per cent of land, not dry land, but
irrigable and productive agricultural land, will be in black hands in the
next nine years - and no longer ten years. So the mobilisation of our
masses for global competitiveness serves as a catalyst of stimulating
transformation through viable and sound enterprises within agriculture. In
this regard, a number of monumental efforts have been undertaken in placing
agriculture, the apex of rural development, into the sustainable growing
provincial economy.

As far as the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme is concerned, we
have managed to spend 92 per cent of the R10,5 million cash budget of 2004-
05. With six of the nine projects having been 100 per cent complete and two
due for completion in May 2005, we hope to report, in fact, in this House
next year that projects will be 100 per cent complete and 100 per cent of
our money spent.

The type of support includes stock-watering systems, fencing, training and
capacity-building for farmers. A total of 777 people, who are mainly land
reform beneficiaries, have benefited from Casp and more than 1 000 jobs
will be created through this programme alone. To other provinces this might
sound as being little, but in the Northern Cape, which has only two per
cent of the population of our country, this is a huge improvement in job
creation.

During this financial year, we will implement 15 land-care projects to the
value of R2 million; a further 150 jobs will be created and 714 farmers
will benefit through our sustainable resources management programme. The
civil society mobilisation programme, which will be rolled out in May 2005,
is intended to, amongst others, increase participation of emerging farmers
and increase awareness about land care, and by so doing promote the
sustainable use of our natural resources.

With the persisting drought in our province, we need to ensure that we
fight for the prospect of increased food security because it is the poorest
of the poor, the vulnerable and our rural women who often suffer the most.
An amount of R1 million was set aside for the creation of food security
projects, and 87 beneficiaries, who were predominately women, benefited
from this intervention. The development of customised commodity strategies
will ensure an alignment of the provincial and national strategies for
agricultural growth and transformation, and will include projects in the
Northern Cape, such as the commercialisation of goats.

Through the commercialisation of goats programme, we have registered and
continue to support 30 co-operatives. We believe that, through the co-
operatives’ development in our province and the sharing of workers through
workers’ trusts in the ownership of their own destinies, we will assist not
only emerging farmers but also workers by providing them with quality
breeding material and also assist them to enter the economic programmes of
our government.

Our livestock improvement programme has not only seen us redistributing
goats, but will also see us training farmers and workers through the Paeta
training programmes. Our access to land and security of tenure rights for
mostly rural people is critical in ensuring economic empowerment and
participation of the previously marginalised in the mainstream economy. The
department will continue to give support to land reform programmes, Land
Redistribution for Agricultural Development and restitution by co-
ordinating both pre-settlement and post-settlement support to ensure that
development programmes are aligned with land reform projects in order to
make our land productive.

Comrade Minister, we are humbled that in your Budget Vote you addressed
capacity problems in our province in terms of skills shortages. In our
struggle to recruit certain skills, we will ensure that we, in fact, train
our black learners as veterinarians and engineers, and ensure that this
sector that was primarily dominated by white professionals will no longer
be exclusive domains for them. The process has been started in order to
ensure that we have a uniform salary structure so that we can retain some
of these skills in the public sector.

The department will also continue to engage the services of other
stakeholders, NGOs and political organisations in order to ensure that,
through training and capacity-building of farmers, we don’t train them to
remain emerging farmers, but to become part of the mainstream of the
economy.

In conclusion, may we remind one another about our commitment towards
cultivating land activism among urban and rural dwellers. Let us act in
unison in advancing farmworker-rights awareness among our exploited and
unappreciated toiling rural masses as we approach May Day. Let us continue
to make the clarion call in order to mobilise our people to share in the
country’s wealth. “Ke a leboga.” [I thank you. “Enkosi kakhulu.” [Thank you
very much.]
“Dankie.” [Thank you.] Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr S V NAICKER (KwaZulu-Natal): Madam Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs and
hon colleagues, it is questionable as to what extent this particular budget
should be politicised. If we take that into consideration, and we take into
account the two terms that I heard here this morning - one from the hon Mr
Van Rooyen who used the term “nation-building”; the other term from my
colleague, Mrs Nahara, who spoke about poverty and used the term “poverty
alleviation’ - one can understand my emphasising the importance of this
particular budget.

At the outset, having some background in this particular field, I hasten to
congratulate the Minister and support the budget. It is no easy task, in a
period of transition, to find overnight all the answers that we want on a
subject of this nature.

We all have agreed on several occasions that KwaZulu-Natal, where I come
from, is an important province that has a very strong agricultural
potential which has not been utilised to the full. For this to be achieved,
a series of measures need to be undertaken where there will be serious and
continuous co-operation and co-ordination between commercial agriculture
and community-driven agriculture, as stated by the hon Minister. No
government, no individual and no institution can survive in isolation.
There has to be total co-operation, and I hope that will materialise.

Having said that, I want to focus on some of the practical issues, in view
of the time constraints. The distribution of state land and the restitution
process needs to be speeded up both in terms of growth and the development
of subsistence commercial farming. This is a problem that we have
repeatedly touched upon. We are very aware of the monetary, technical and
substantial problems associated with land affairs and distribution, but
inevitably there cannot be sustainable development without the urgent,
systematic and equitable solution. We don’t want to go back in history. We
are here to address and bring about an adjustment to history.

I now come to the role and significance of the Land Bank. Let us touch on
this very important subject. Obviously, we have a Land Bank, and then we
have the commercial institutions. Unfortunately, however, one wants to know
what benefit there is with an institution like the Land Bank, because the
interest factor is the same as with a commercial bank. If one goes to a
commercial bank and one has a good rating, obviously one will probably get
an interest rate a few per cent below the prime rate, but at the Land Bank
we do not have that situation.

Therefore, one of the important factors to be considered, taking
agriculture and the various levels of the agricultural sector into
consideration, are the commercial farmers.  However, for now let us rather
look at the subsistence farmer. If the true history of agriculture is to be
written in South Africa, then the main chapter will contain the survival of
the subsistence farmers, and therefore the importance of the Land Bank
should be considered and even, if necessary, a particular agricultural
board should be established to help this situation.

Let’s come back to the drought that we have been facing recently. In
KwaZulu-Natal, thank the Lord, we have been blessed with rain, but let us
take into consideration the green drought. I don’t want to lay any emphasis
on the green drought, but it is a subject that must be taken into
consideration.

We all need to think about new innovations to save water. The Cape Town and
Western Cape cases have shown us conclusively that the dams are only 28 per
cent full, and agriculture, which uses up to 68 per cent of the fresh water
supply, will face the negative consequences of this reality.

I want to remind the hon Minister, with great respect, that there is
something that for the past 65 years has been on the agenda in KwaZulu-
Natal, namely the Tugela Basin. The Tugela Basin was introduced by a Mr
Torrington-Smith, one of the greatest town planners from England, who
planned Richards Bay. At some stage, there was interest from different
international communities to help the people in the Tugela Basin. It has
such potential. One day, if I am privileged to come back here, I would like
to give the background to the Tugela Basin, and the hon Minister must
please take note of that and go and see it.

If one goes back to the other river, our former Water Affairs Minister, Mr
Asmal, spoke about the possibility of the establishment of a dam there,
which is absolutely important. All those aspects can be looked at, and they
will be absolutely beneficial to the entire province.

We need to urgently find the missing link between national and provincial
priorities and competencies in terms of agriculture. We need to rethink and
prioritise the urgent needs of our people, especially the poorest of the
poor and the perpetually disadvantaged.

Let’s look at these aspects. Yes, in this process of restructuring, KwaZulu-
Natal has . . . [Time expired.]
Mnr F ADAMS: Geagte Voorsitter, Minister en kollegas, die geboorte van die
nuwe Suid-Afrika 11 jaar gelede, het ook vir landbou ‘n nuwe uitdaging
gebring. Dieselfde sektor wat vir jare alleen deur ‘n relatief klein
groepie suksesvolle kommersiële boere oorheers is, het nou van hierdie
boere gevra om betrokke te raak by die vestiging, ondersteuning en
bemagtiging van nuwe opkomende boere uit voorheen benadeelde gemeenskappe.

Dit is verblywend om te kan kennis neem van die Minister en die departement
dat hierdie proses reeds op dreef is, en dat dit elke dag met groter
toewyding aangepak word. Grondhervorming moet die hoogste prioriteit geniet
in ‘n poging om die ongelykhede van die verlede aan te spreek.

Dit bring my by ‘n sekere punt. Sekere mense wat ook in die regering was,
wat ook in die regering gedien het, wat ook in die Raadsale van die
Parlement gestaan het, en wat ook voorheen Ministers was, laat my nou vra:
Hulle kom kla hier, maar wat het hulle destyds gedoen? Ek wil weet wat die
agb Naicker gedoen het, as hy kan luister na wat ek sê en ophou om rond te
loop sodat ons ‘n bietjie respek in hierdie Huis kan hê. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, Minister and colleagues, the birth of the new
South Africa eleven years ago brought with it a new challenge for
agriculture. The very sector that had been dominated for years by a
relatively small group of successful commercial farmers, has now called
upon these farmers to become involved in establishing, supporting and
empowering new, emerging farmers from the previously disadvantaged
communities.

It is gratifying to hear from the Minister and the department that this
process is already on track, and that it is daily being tackled with
increasing dedication. Land reform must be accorded the highest priority in
an effort to address the imbalances of the past.

This brings me to a certain point. Certain people who were also in
government, who served in the government, who also made themselves
available to serve in the Houses of Parliament, and who formerly also
served as Ministers, now lead me to ask: They come here and complain, but
what did they do at the time? I would like to know what the hon Naicker had
done, if he could listen to what I have to say, and stop walking around, so
that we might have a little respect in this House.]

We’ve got discipline in this House.

Hon Naicker, what did you do when you were in government? The government is
trying its utmost to uplift our people and instead of working together, I
can classify you as one of those full-time, fault-finding people.
Daar is ‘n groot verskeidenheid van modelle waarin bemagtiging van
plaaswerkers besig is om plaas te vind, hetsy individueel of in
goedbeplande projekte saam met kommersiële boere of saam met ander
opkomende boere.

Daar is baie werkers wat weet hoe om te boer, en sal kan wys wat in hulle
steek as hulle net die geleentheid kan kry om te boer.

Daar is wonderlike sukses vir hulle waarop ŉ mens trots kan wees. Kom ons
kyk na die provinsie wat ek in hierdie Huis verteenwoordig. Om net ŉ paar
voorbeelde te noem, Koekedalplaas se boere pluk al vrugte vir die
uitvoermark, en daar is Bolandplaas wat al wyn in die buiteland bemark.
Verskeie plase spog reeds met wynmakers wat in Boergondië opgelei is, en
wat reeds kampioen wyne produseer.

So is daar verskeie projekte waar of deur die regering of deur private
inisiatief hulp verleen is aan mense wat die grond lief het en nou die
geleentheid kry om hul ideale te verwesenlik. Die regering doen darem iets
vir ons mense. Hy kla nie net en sit op ‘n hoop en sê vir sy mense, “Ek wil
die alternatiewe regering word”, soos die DA, en dan niks doen nie.

Nie eens as alternatiewe regering kan hulle iets vir Suid-Afrika beteken
nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[There are a large variety of models in terms of which the empowerment of
farm labourers is already taking place, either individually or in well-
planned projects in co-operation with commercial farmers, or jointly with
other emerging farmers.

There are labourers who know how to farm, and would be able to show what
they are made of, if only they had the opportunity to farm.

They have achieved some wonderful successes of which one can be proud. Let
us look at the province that I represent in this House. Just to name a few
examples, the farmers of Koekedal Farm are already picking fruit for the
export market, and then there is Boland Farm which has already started
marketing wine abroad. Several farms are already boasting wine-makers who
were trained in Burgundy, and who are already producing champion wines.

So there are various projects where, either by the government or by private
initiative, support was provided to people who love the land, and who now
have the opportunity to achieve their ideals.

At least the government is doing something for our people. It does not only
complain and sit in a heap and say to its people: “I want to become the
alternative government”, like the DA, and then does nothing.

Not even as an alternative government could they mean something to South
Africa.]

As we speak here, the Minister of agriculture in the Western Cape here, Mr
Cobus Dowry, is leading a Wesgro agricultural trade mission to the
Netherlands. This mission, consisting of ten previously disadvantaged
individuals and agricultural companies, is essentially the implementation
of an Agri-Match agreement, signed between the Western Cape department of
agriculture, the South African-Netherlands Chamber of Commerce and the SA
Agri Academy.

It is anticipated that the mission participants will gain invaluable
information and experience with regard to international trade and quality
requirements, which will result in the empowerment of these participants,
thus creating a better future and life for the historically disadvantaged
communities.
I want the DA to take notice of that.

It has been proven, both in theory and in practice, that agriculture can
act as a catalyst in the process of economic development. As a result of
the realities of South Africa’s Constitution, farm-level knowledge and
experience is situated in the public service in the provinces.

In the development of an agricultural strategy for Africa, this source of
knowledge and expertise should be shared and mobilised. Moreover, South
Africa as a country has, particularly through our hon President Thabo
Mbeki, played an influential role in the world, especially in the
developing world and particularly in Africa. The NNP supports the Budget
Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, as we conclude our
contribution to this Budget Vote, it is important to take into account that
as a committee, we note the challenges and opportunities that present
themselves to the department. Such challenges are informed by the
international environment and reflects that which comes out of the
continent and those that are self made as a result of practices by some
farmers who are still hell-bent to perpetuate practices that do not conform
with the objectives of the democratic dispensation.
It is in that regard that we are not surprised by the arrogance displayed
by Mr Watson, and I want to put it to this House that we must note that it
is not for the first time that he comes to the podium, raises very
important issues that need to be responded to and the next thing, he
leaves. In that particular process, he would continue to do the very same
thing.

However, it does not mean that in his absence we cannot respond to some of
the issues that he raised, quite misleading the nation. Of course it is
important that Mr Watson, representing the DA, must note that history is a
good instrument that we use to learn and that assists us to be able to
reflect and to be able to chart a proper way forward. Therefore, it is
misleading to ignore the history of apartheid, which is a history of
colonialism and land dispossession for which our people are suffering from
until today.

Our people are, in actual fact, impatient and hungry for land in order to
feed themselves and their families. If he wasn’t there in KwaZulu-Natal
when we took Parliament to the people, let us remind Mr Watson and the DA
of the cries of the ordinary people, women and children who were
challenging government and saying that government is a bit slow in the
process of land redistribution in order for them to plough “amadumbe” [a
kind of African potato] in order to feed their families. I think it is
important for him to learn that.

Therefore, it is misleading to suggest that we should rush the process of
land redistribution. In actual fact, ours is not necessarily to rush the
process of land redistribution, but to accelerate our land and agrarian
transformation process.

It is unfortunate that the DA’s Mr Watson once more focused his energy and
speech on failures of government, thereby losing a very wonderful
opportunity to reflect on the successes and challenges that our country is
faced with. He also failed to appreciate the successes we achieved amidst
all these difficulties that our country is faced with. His concentration on
market-driven land and agrarian transformation on its own, fails to accept
our government’s developmental objectives and the arrogant attitudes
expressed, which he claims to represent here. He forgets to tell the nation
that those who still own the majority of the South African agricultural
land continue to inflate their prices in order to ensure that they
frustrate the objectives of our government’s land and agrarian
transformation programme.

In his response to the state of the nation address debate, the President
asked a set of strategic questions in which we as a nation need to give
responses to. I shall therefore take the liberty to reflect on a number of
them in the context of this debate, such as: How many black people are
impoverished by farmers who consistently abuse them on their farms? How
many black people are employed and unemployed, dismissed and abused by
farmers on a daily basis? How many young black children are still forced to
work for farmers instead of sending them to school in order to become
better parents when they are ready? How many young women and men continue
to be abused by farmers, and when their productive levels drop, are thrown
off the farms and advised to apply for government disability grants and
housing subsidies? And the one that stands out as a key question is the one
that asks: How many black people have gained access to land? As a
committee, we took the question much further, to ask how many of them have
in actual fact gained access to agricultural land?

The above present to the department serious challenges in as far as land
and agrarian transformation is concerned. As a committee, ours is a total
transformation of the above reality through the acceleration of land and
agrarian reform to benefit the workers, the unemployed, the young, the
disabled and in particular women. We also appreciate the fact that our
government has made enough strides in this regard, and as such can be
attributed to the sectoral strategy for agriculture.

It is our view that in fighting rural poverty and food security at local
level, it is important to base our land and agrarian reform strategy in the
first instance on accelerated transfer of productive land for household-
based subsistence farming. Having noted the problems that our people
experience as a result of lack of post-transfer support, as well as in the
provision of agricultural input and support services, we would want to see
a more greater role played by the department in assisting our people in
order for them to be able to engage on the challenges they are consistently
faced with.

In addition, we would also want to see other forms of small-scale farming,
principally the building of agricultural co-operatives owned and run by
workers, youth, women and the poor to be strengthened and capacitated in
order for them to be in a position to address the objectives that were and
will be established for once the Bill is finalised. In actual fact, it is
our view that the department should start to put processes in place that
will ensure that our people are prepared for this kind of operations.

We raise this issue due to the fact that if not properly guided, co-
operatives by their very nature can also be counter-revolutionary.
Therefore, it is important that processes must be put in place to assist
our people so that once the Bill has been finalised, they are ready and
understand the character and content of co-operatives.

We are proud to note that, as a people’s government, guided by the people’s
charter, committed to building a contract with our people in fighting
poverty and creating jobs over the next five years, we do not lie to our
people. Last year, not unless the hon Watson was not present, of course,
during her budget vote debate in this august House, the Minister of
Agriculture and Land Affairs, hon Comrade Didiza, made mention of the re-
establishment of the Agricultural Credit Scheme in the Department of
Agriculture. We are proud to say that our people were not lied to.

For those who are still waiting for the moon to come down before they
believe that our government is a government at work, R1 billion has been
made available to start this particular scheme. This will provide capital
to increase support to agricultural activities in communal land areas, as
well as other small-scale agriculture and therefore relieves the Land Bank
of this particular responsibility.

It will also endeavour to work with financial institutions to implement the
provisions in the financial charter relevant to the development of small
and medium-farming enterprises and in the process accelerate sectoral
initiatives, including the comprehensive farmer support programme and
tourism enterprises or programmes, Mr Naicker.

We therefore call on the department to ensure the process should be
properly guided. We say this because, in most instances, these institutions
at times tend to be abused. We raise this because at times we find that the
target is missed, and the people who must benefit tend to lose out of these
processes. It is our belief that this scheme will primarily be used as an
instrument by the department to meet its developmental objectives. It is
important that we guard against processes in which the people who must
benefit from the scheme are left out in the cold and, instead, the long
established are the ones that benefit from this scheme.

The scheme must respond to the questions put above and in those terms seek
to build the second economy and affirm our people, and in particular women.
I thank you very much, hon Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much,
Chairperson, and hon members for participating in this debate, particularly
my colleagues, the MECs, as well as special delegates from the provinces.
Of course, it is befitting that all of them participated in this debate to
give the reflection on the provincial activities and how the provinces
themselves in support of this budget will undertake the work in the
agriculture and land sector.

It indeed affirms what I said earlier. The way in which my colleagues, the
MECs and we, Minister and Deputy Minister, are working and will continue to
work for these five years, will ensure that we deliver on the promise that
we made to our people, namely that their lives are going to be better from
year to year.

It is a pity that hon Watson is not here. I hope that next time he will be
able to sit until the end of the debate to get answers to his questions or
concerns. He did not ask for any apology, as Mr Naicker has done, to say
that he will not be here when I respond.

It would probably be interesting just to remind all of us in this House of
the history of the African farmer in South Africa. Somehow, from the way in
which the debate is approached from some quarters, it is as if African
peasants and African farmers, in particular, were never successful. During
the 19th century and the early 20th century, the African farmer was
thriving, producing even more than the white settlers who, at the time,
were starting to engage on the land.

However, as time went on, and gold was discovered, there was a need for
labour. What happened? Many black farmers, in particular, were actually
taxed very highly as a way of moving them off their farms. Many of them
resisted even then, but certain measures were used which finally culminated
in the 1913 Land Act, which was promulgated by the then parliament on 19
June 1913.

I must say, some of you really ought to read Colin Bundy who wrote “The
Rise and Fall of the African Peasantry”. I think it would give a very
interesting history of where African farmers come from. However, it would
also be quite interesting for all of us to go back to the 1930 Carnegie
Report on the poor white farmers, which will tell the history of how the
Vaalharts Scheme and many other schemes were put in place in order to
support the white farmers of this country.

Mr Watson speaks as if there has been no programme by government to support
those who are settled. He says that we are doing a numbers game in our
measurements. I want to say, as my special delegate from Limpopo indicated,
I don’t know of such a policy. For us the quality and the quantity in this
instance matter. We cannot speak about redressing the imbalances of the
past lest we measure how far we have gone. That can only be done by
calculating how many hectares we have delivered and how successful those
farmers are.

One of the things that Mr Watson, I’m sure, has conveniently forgotten is
that, prior to 1994, when the then South African government talked about
agriculture, it only talked about white agriculture. It never bothered
about what happened in other areas of our country. The levels of subsidies,
support, consolidation of debts in the agricultural credit schemes and the
agricultural Land Bank were all done in support of white farmers.

A majority of the African farmers, even in the former homelands and the
self-governing territories, were scraping by with whatever minimal
resources they had through the development corporations. It was only a
section of our society.
When this government took over, it was true to the promise of the Freedom
Charter, which stated that South Africa belongs to all who live in it.
Also, we did not just talk about it - we meant it, because in our
programmes we have sought to balance the need of those who were our
oppressors and those who were victims.

It’s not an easy balancing act, because as much as you have to deal with
the farming sector, you still have to deal with people who need access to
potable water, a basic need that they’ve never had before. As you deal with
the issues of land and agriculture, you’ve got to deal with the issues of
access to primary health services, which were never there in a number of
rural areas.

When Mr Mzizi spoke earlier on, he said: Liyobuya nini elikaMthaniya? [When
will the land of Mthaniya be brought back?] It’s true. A majority of
Africans, in particular, in this country today are still looking back and
thinking - with all our generosity of making South Africa belong to all who
live in it - how will this be of benefit to us? When will we ever have a
secure tenure? When will we ever plough and graze our livestock in a land
that we can truly say is ours?

I want to say to Mr Mzizi that we will continue to strive until one day
even the people of Ulundi will say that, yes, the land belongs to all who
live in it. [Applause.]
Again, I want to say that Mr Watson raised another important issue when he
said he wonders whether the Minister turns a blind eye to the problem of
the grain farmers in South Africa. Maybe Mr Watson forgot to reflect on one
thing, namely for the past two years, when there was a drought in the
region, who were the people who benefited the most from the purchases of
the World Food Programme? Maize that was distributed in Zimbabwe, Zambia
and Malawi was bought from South Africa’s white farmers who are on grain
production, in particular, at a dollar rate. When we had to intervene as a
result of the impact of the famine to food-insecure households, our farmers
benefited.

We are not holding a grudge because of that benefit because we understand
how the market mechanism works. However, by the same token we’re equally
saying to them it’s important to plan ahead. When we engage with the
farmers and say, don’t only take advantage of what is happening now, which
is short term, in terms of the drought, remember what is likely to happen
when you start to shift to other production areas where maize was not grown
before the impact of the surplus that is going to be created in this
economy. A number of them indeed turned a blind eye.

We have not stopped. We continue to engage – and we will continue to do so
– whether there are strikes or not. Whether there are mass mobilisations by
farmers, we will continue to do what we have done. As Dr Bundy had said, we
have engaged our international partners to fight for the removal of
subsidies and export subsidies in the OEDC countries. We do so, not for our
sake, but because we care about the importance of a free market for our
farmers in the world trade regime.

We’ve been participating, and I’m sure Mr Watson has not asked AgriSA in
particular, because I was with one of their members in Colombia just two
weeks ago, in the canes group meeting – a forum of developing countries
mobilised together to ensure that we continue to fight for further trade in
the world regime. He forgets, I’m sure.

However, it is important to indicate that people who think like the hon
Watson need to give themselves a little bit more time to understand our
government’s programmes so that they can articulate better what we do and
what we do not do.

We have not shied away from issues where we’ve had weaknesses. We’ve
acknowledged the importance of support, hence the Comprehensive
Agricultural support programme; Mazibuyele Emasisweni from Mpumalanga; the
Siyavuna programme and the Green Revolution. All those are mechanisms to
ensure that we can support those who’ve gone back to the land.

I want to take note of issues that were raised, particularly by our
Chairperson, hon Rev Moatshe, with regard to the issue of aquaculture. He
has raised that issue extensively, if I remember, for the past three years.
Indeed, hopefully this year we will finalise a policy in conjunction with
the department of environment and fisheries on aquaculture production in
South Africa. We have also, through our integrated production system,
looked at ways in which we can link aquaculture with other crop production
in our environment, and I am sure that it will help us to realise this
important element of our farming sector.

I want to say to this end that it is very interesting – and I heard this in
the NA and I am hearing it now through Mr Watson - that the communal areas
are the most productive. What has happened? Why did the former RSA
government then push us onto 13 per cent of land if it was so highly
productive? I will welcome this research from Mr Watson so that I can
educate myself. It’s news to me. However, if that is the case, thank you
very much for having put us there. Maybe we will find a better use for that
land now.

I also want to applaud the work that a number of provinces are doing. The
focus in the Western Cape is on farmworkers, because this is one of the
important elements in terms of our production sector. They are a core
resource through which we can ensure that we can become successful in the
agricultural areas.
I also want to highlight some of the issues that have been raised by hon
Joemat with regard to issues of capacity-building and changing the face of
our professionals in agriculture. Last year, when I met with the veterinary
council, I raised this issue about their human resource development
strategy; and I hope that this year one would be able to find results, both
in terms of how they accord people the status to practise as veterinarians
and also what strategy they put in place to build new veterinary scientists
in the field of agriculture.

Lokunye nje, ngiyatsandza kuphindza ngibonge kuMhlon Mzizi. Babe Mzizi
ngiyabonga impela ngemsebenti lotsi utasisita ngawo wekwenta kwekutsi
labalimi nabo labasahluma bakwati kuhlephula kulo AgriBEE. Ngoba phela
ngempela nguyona-ntfo leyo lesifuna kutsi yenteke, kutsi labalimi bakitsi
nebantfu labafuna kungena kuloluhlangotsi
lwetekulima bakwati nabo kutsi batimele bakwati kuhlephula. (Translation of
Siswati paragraph follows.)

In addition, I would like to thank hon M Mzizi again. Mr Mzizi, thank you
for the work that you promised to do in helping the emerging farmers so
that they also could get a share of the AgriBEE. In actual fact, the
objective is that our black farmers and all those who want to venture into
the agricultural sector should be able to take part and be independent
farmers who benefit from the BEE.]

I again want to refer to the issues that have been raised by the hon
chairperson with regard to stock theft. Indeed, these are some of the
issues that we will take into consideration and ensure that, working with
our safety and security colleagues, as well as those in the defence force,
we are able to deal with the issues of stock theft, particularly those that
relate to cross-border theft.

I would like to thank the majority of members who participated in this
debate.  We will take all the issues that they have raised into
consideration so that we are able to report back to this House next year as
to how far we have gone.

I would like to thank the officials of the department of agriculture. Some
of them are seated there on the right and some of them are there in the
gallery. Our directors of agriculture from all the provinces are here to
hear for themselves what you are saying about the challenges and the issues
facing agriculture. Without this leadership at an administrative level, the
work that we do would not be this successful. Thank you very much, hon
Chair. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Ms S J LOE: Madam Chair, if I may, I think it’s important that the hon
Minister knows that Mr Watson is ill and that he informed the ANC Chief
Whip. [Interjections.] I know, hon Minister, that Mr Watson holds you in
the highest regard and that he did apologise to your ANC Chief Whip. He
should have informed this House. Thank you. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Loe, can you please take your seat.
Hon Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, in terms of the debate, once
the Minister has replied, the debate is closed. There is nothing which has
been raised. So, if you sit down, sleep through your breakfast and wake up
during lunch, and still want that breakfast, it’s too late for tears.
[Laughter.]

Debate concluded.

Proceedings suspended at 13:05 and resumed at 14:00.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, it’s time for questions. Before
we go to questions, I just want to make a statement directed at our Deputy
President.

Deputy President, I do not know whether you do have time to celebrate your
birthday, given your very busy schedule. Nonetheless, on behalf of the
NCOP, I would like to extend our hearty birthday wishes to you. This is a
very important day, not just to you and your family, but also to all South
Africans. Today we celebrate the day on which our Deputy President was
born. Congratulations! [Applause.][Singing.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I have not finished my statement.
[Laughter.] Even on your birthday you did not try to find any reason not to
honour this afternoon’s appointment with this House. Deputy President, for
you to come and answer questions is very important to us. We know that you
take the work of the NCOP very seriously and we want to congratulate you
for that.

Let me take this opportunity to wish you all of the best in the work that
you are doing for South Africa and for our continent in ensuring that the
lives of our people become better and that we all live in peace.

Deputy President, compared with the time when you were born, South Africa
is now a better place to live in for its entire people. You have fought for
us to live a better life and you are now leading us even further into those
greener pastures that we have been expecting.

On the continent front, we are also seeing positive developments towards
peace and democracy because of the work of people like you. If you were not
here, we wouldn’t be seeing all these developments. I want to congratulate
you once more, on behalf of the Council, for the wonderful work that you
are doing on the entire continent of Africa. Even the Pan-African
Parliament has hailed South Africa for the wonderful work that is being
done on the continent.

Your selfless contribution to the struggle for freedom and the work that
you and your government are doing for the betterment of our people’s lives
is a gift to our nation. May you have many more years to come! We are
looking forward to your continued outstanding leadership and contribution
to the cause of the masses of the people. I, once more, Deputy President,
wish you well.

Inkosi ikuphe amandla! Usiphilele izinsuku eziningi ezizayo futhi ukwazi
ukusihola size sifike emadlelweni aluhlaza ngoba yikhona singena!
Siyabonga, Msholozi. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[May God give you strength! May you live for us for many more days to come
and may you be able to lead us till we reach greener pastures, because we
are only entering them now! Thank you, Msholozi. [Applause.]]

Hon members, we now proceed to the questions as printed on the Order Paper.
For the Ministers, the time allocated to reply to a question is five
minutes and the time to reply to a supplementary question is four minutes.
The time to ask a supplementary question is two minutes. The number of
supplementary questions allowed is four and nothing more than that. Did
everybody get that? All right, we will now continue with the questions
addressed to the Deputy President.
QUESTIONS AND REPLIES – see that book.

The Council adjourned at 15:46.
                                 __________



                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           TUESDAY, 22 MARCH 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 17 March 2005:


        i) Division of Revenue Bill [B 8B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
           76)

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


            i) Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
               published in Government Gazette No 27047 of 10 December
               2004.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as
         referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 23 March 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


3.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Social Development


            i) Bili yA Maqheku [M 68 – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 76)


         This is the official translation into Southern Sotho of the Older
         Persons Bill [B 68 – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 76).
National Council of Provinces
1.    Membership of Committees
     The following changes have been made to the membership of the Joint
     Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests:

         Appointed: Matlanyane, H F (Limpopo) (ANC)
         Resigned: Ndalane, N A (Limpopo) (ANC)


                           TUESDAY, 29 MARCH 2005




TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Transport

     Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road Transport
     Agency for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 200-2004].

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2005 to
     2010.

     (b)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture for 2005 to
     2010.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate E T
     Khenisa.

National Council of Provinces
1.    The Chairperson

     Progress report from the MEC for Housing, Local Government and
     Traditional Affairs (Eastern Cape) on the intervention in Elundini
     Local Municipality, in terms of section 139 of the Constitution, 1996
     (Act No 108 of 1996).



                          WEDNESDAY, 30 MARCH 2005



TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
for 2005-6 to 2009-10.


                           THURSDAY, 31 MARCH 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      Consolidated Financial Information of National Treasury for the year
      2003-2004, including the Reports of the Auditor-General on the
      Consolidated Financial Information of National Departments,
      Constitutional Institutions, National Public Entities and Trading
      Accounts for 2003-2004 [RP 23-2005].

2.    The Minister of Transport

      Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2005-6 to 2007-8.

                            MONDAY, 4 APRIL 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) National Energy Regulator Bill [B 9D – 2004] – Act No 40 of 2004
           (assented to and signed by President on 30 March 2005); and
        2) Division of Revenue Bill [B 8B – 2005] – Act No 1 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 30 March 2005).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Government Notice No 111 published in Government Gazette No
         27235, dated 11 February 2005: Determination of the daily allowance
         in respect of meals and incidental cost for purposes of section
         8(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).
      (b)   Government Notice No 112 published in Government Gazette No
         27235, dated 11 February 2005: Determination of welfare activities
         for purposes of the definition of “welfare organisation” in section
         1 of the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No 89 of 1991).
      (c)   Proclamation No R.6 published in Government Gazette No 27233,
         dated 31 January 2005: Commencement of the Security Services Act,
         in terms of the Security Services Act, 2004 (Act No 36 of 2004).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee for 2003-2004.



                            TUESDAY, 5 APRIL 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   Forestry Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of
         Water Affairs and Forestry on 28 March 2005. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry and the Select
         Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

      Strategic Plan of the Department of Defence for 2005-6 to 2007-8.

2.    The Minister of Labour

      Preliminary Annual Report of the Department of Labour for 2004-2005
      [RP 37-2005].

3.    The Minister for Safety and Security

      (a)   Strategic Plan of the South African Police Service (SAPS) for
         2005-2010 [RP 36-2005].
      (b)   Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD)
         for 2005-2008 [RP 18-2005].

4.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

      Strategic Plan of Sport and Recreation South Africa for 2005-2009.

5.    The Minister of Communications

      Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for 2005-2008.


                           WEDNESDAY, 6 APRIL 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees

      (1)   The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
         Committees viz:
            Budget
            African National Congress:
            Appointed:
                       Asiya, Mr S N (Alt)
                       Bhamjee, Mr Y S (Alt)
                       Chinkunga, Mrs L S
                       Dambuza, Ms B N
                       Gumede, Mrs M M
                       Joemat, Mrs R R
                       Mashigo, Mrs R J
                       Mkongi, Mr B M
                       Mnguni, Mr B A (Alt)
            Dicharged:
                 Hogan, Ms B A
                 Mabe, Ms L L
                 Mashiane, Ms L M
                 Sikakane, Mr M R

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

      The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
      relevant committees as mentioned below:

      (1)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services for consideration:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
              Transport Agency for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              200-2004].
      (b)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2005-6 to
              2007-8.

      (2)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Social Services:

      (a)   Report of the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) on the
              National and Provincial Elections for April 2004.
      (b)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2005-2008.


      (3)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

      (a)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2005 to
              2010.
      (b)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture for 2005 to
              2010.
      (c)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism for 2005-6 to 2009-10.

      (4)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

            Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate
         E T Khenisa.

      (5)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs:

      (a)   Report of the Auditor-General on the Performance Audit of
              Overall Management Measures at Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
              Agency [RP 11-2005].
      (b)   Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee for 2003-2004.

      (6)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation:

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2003-
              2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.
      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory
              Council on Innovation for 2003-2004.

      (7)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration:

            Consolidated Financial Information of National Treasury for the
         year 2003-2004, including the Reports of the Auditor-General on the
         Consolidated Financial Information of National Departments,
         Constitutional Institutions, National Public Entities and Trading
         Accounts for 2003-2004 [RP 23-2005].

      (8)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:

      (a)   Government Notice No 111 published in Government Gazette No
              27235, dated 11 February 2005: Determination of the daily
              allowance in respect of meals and incidental cost for
              purposes of section 8(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No
              58 of 1962).
      (b)   Government Notice No 112 published in Government Gazette No
              27235, dated 11 February 2005: Determination of welfare
              activities for purposes of the definition of “welfare
              organisation” in section 1 of the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991
              (Act No 89 of 1991).
      (c)   Proclamation No R.6 published in Government Gazette No 27233,
              dated 31 January 2005: Commencement of the Security Services
              Act, in terms of the Security Services Act, 2004 (Act No 36
              of 2004).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs

      Strategic Plan of the Department of Foreign Affairs for 2005 to 2008.

                           THURSDAY, 7 APRIL 2005


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      Strategic Plan of the Department of Trade and Industry for 2005 to
      2008.


2.    The Minister of Correctional Services

      Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for 2005-6
      to 2009-10.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs  on
    Provincial Study Tour to  North  West,  Mpumalanga,  Eastern  Cape  and
    Western Cape Provinces 8 – 12 November 2004:

                                  Contents

|                                                     |Page       |
|Acknowledgements                                     |2          |
|Section A                                            |           |
|                                                     |           |
|Introduction                                         |2          |
|Aquaculture production in South Africa – an overview |2          |
|Overview of provincial initiatives to develop        |3          |
|aquaculture production – North West                  |3          |
|Briefing by the Department of Agriculture,           |           |
|Conservation, Environment and Tourism                |4          |
|Aquaculture in the North West Province               |4          |
|Current status                                       |4          |
|North West Province: Aquaculture considerations      |4          |
|Potential threats and challenges posed by            |           |
|aquaculture to the Environment                       |5          |
|Aquaculture strategic plan                           |5          |
|Conclusions                                          |5          |
|Recommendations from DACE                            |           |
|                                                     |5          |
|Western Cape                                         |           |
|                                                     |6          |
|Eastern Cape                                         |6          |
|Background of the Oliver Tambo District              |6          |
|Site visits to the Aquaculture Project in Umtata     |           |
|                                                     |7          |
|Recommendations (Select Committee)                   |           |
|                                                     |           |
|Section B                                            |           |
|                                                     |8          |
|Water and Sanitation in South Africa – an overview   |           |
|Overview of provincial initiatives to attain water   |           |
|and sanitation rights                                |8          |
|North West                                           |8          |
|Water services Provision – Status Quo                |8          |
|Basic sanitation – backlog                           |           |
|Basic water supply                                   |9          |
|Overview of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) |           |
|programme of                                         |9          |
|the province                                         |10         |
|Monitoring and support towards service delivery      |10         |
|Issues that emerged during the presentations and site|           |
|visits                                               |           |
|Recommendations                                      |11         |
|                                                     |11         |
|Mpumalanga                                           |11         |
|Overview of provincial framework on water and        |           |
|sanitation services                                  |12         |
|Water Supply                                         |12         |
|Sanitation supply – 1994 – 2004 onward               |13         |
|                                                     |13         |
|Visit to water and sanitation projects               |13         |
|Albert Luthuli Local Municipality – provision of     |14         |
|boreholes to rural areas                             |           |
|Albert Luthuli Local Municipality – clinic sanitation|14         |
|Albert Luthuli Local Municipality – upgrading of     |           |
|Eerstehoek water scheme                              |           |
|Issues that emerged during the presentation and site |14         |
|visits                                               |           |
|Recommendations                                      |14         |
|                                                     |           |
|Eastern Cape - Water and Sanitation Projects in the  |           |
|Eastern Cape – Amatole and Chris Hani Districts, 9   |           |
|November 2004                                        |           |
|                                                     |           |
|Western Cape, Eden District                          |           |
|                                                     |           |
|References                                           |           |


Acknowledgements

The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs (hereinafter
referred to as the Select Committee), National Council of Provinces (NCOP)
would like to thank all the officials (North West and Mpumalanga) involved
in facilitating this oversight visit. Their generosity of spirit,
accommodating nature as well as all their planning before, during and after
the visits assisted Members and staff to fulfil their oversight
obligations.


                                  Section A


                                Introduction


This report covers the study tour undertaken by the Select Committee to  the
North West, Mpumalanga, Eastern and Western  Cape  Provinces  from  8  –  12
November 2004. Sample studies of projects were undertaken  as  part  of  the
oversight  visit  to  gauge  the  developments,  progress   and   challenges
encountered  in  the  implementation  of  aquaculture  production  in  South
Africa, as well as the provision of water and sanitation services.




      Aquaculture Production in South Africa – an overview[1]


Aquaculture in South Africa consists mainly of freshwater species of  trout,
crocodiles, ornamental fish, catfish and tilapia and marine species such  as
abalone, prawns, oysters and mussels, whilst candidate species such as  eel,
crayfish, cob, yellow-tail, grunter,  tuna,  turbot  and  seaweed  are  also
receiving priority. The technology and  services  is  well  established  for
species such  as  trout,  crocodiles,  catfish,  abalone,  prawns,  oysters,
mussels whilst still lacking for species such as  eel,  tilapia,  cob,  tuna
and seaweed.

Various factors are currently stimulating  the  development  of  aquaculture
development in South and Southern Africa, including:

   • Availability of resources: water, land, labour, energy, etc.
   • Limited fisheries resources
   • Market factors
   • Marine and agricultural infrastructure
   • Need for diversification and optimisation of resources
   • Access to technologies
   • International partnerships and collaboration
   • Socio-economic factors

Factors that  are  currently  inhibiting  development  within  the  industry
include:

   • The lack of a national policy with regard to aquaculture development
   • Complicated and fragmented statutory procedures
   • The lack of marketing structures and access to global markets
   • Limited access to finance and developmental capital
   • Limited human resource capacity, skills and expertise
   • Some constraints in terms of natural resources are seasonal  variation
     in climate, particularly in the southern and  high-lying  regions,  as
     well as a high-energy coastline, with limited sheltered areas
   • Human resources are poorly development and will need to  be  addressed
     in order to ensure sustainable and equitable development
   • Low cost unskilled labour may provide opportunities in certain  labour
     intensive sectors
   • Expertise on managerial level is, however, limited, particularly  with
     regard to large-scale intensive farming  systems.  Economic  resources
     provide an opportunity in terms of  available  infrastructure,  though
     access to capital and markets are difficult

A joint venture strategy based on complementary partnerships is proposed  to
address weaknesses in terms of human and economic  resources  in  the  short
term. It is important, however,  that  the  initiative  is  taken  by  South
Africans to ensure equitable participation in such ventures.

   1. Overview of provincial initiatives to develop aquaculture production –
      North West

      • Briefing by the Department of Agriculture, Conservation,
           Environment and Tourism, 9 November 2004, Mmabatho[2]

The Select Committee was briefed by officials from the Provincial
Department of Agriculture on aquaculture initiatives and or projects in the
province. A synoptic report and an overview on aquaculture initiatives and
or projects in the province highlighted the following:

Aquaculture was defined as:

                 Managed production of aquatic organisms, through breeding
                 and stocking of fish, amphibians, reptiles, invertebrates
                 and aquarium plants.

Aquaculture and Food Security:

   • Potentially can contribute to food security and rural livelihoods
   • Sustainability needs to  be  ensured  through  funding,  training  and
     support from government
   • Can be  achieved  through  ‘on-farm  diversification  strategies’  for
     emerging farmers and ‘culture-based fisheries’ for subsistence farmers
   • Small-scale commercial aquaculture should be developed

Small-scale commercial aquaculture:

   • Small-scale commercial aquaculture has great potential in South Africa
   • Requires higher levels of sophistication and  organisation  than  food
     security aquaculture projects
   • Technical support required in the initial stages
   • Formal markets essential
   • Community-public-private sector partnerships could be established




2 Aquaculture in the North West Province


      • Current status

North West Province, due to its relatively warm  climate  and  abundance  of
dams, has great  potential  to  develop  its  aquaculture  sector.[3]  Rural
aquaculture  can  play  a  significant  role  in  rural  food  security  and
depending on the circumstances of the location (for example,  local  ambient
temperatures and distance from market) can become commercially orientated.

Although there are currently no rural aquaculture projects in the North
West province, the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Environment
(DACE) has embarked on a process to develop this sector and to make the
necessary commitments to ensure the success of rural aquaculture within the
province.

Currently, there is a national programme (to take place over the next  3  to
5 years) that has been initiated by the Water Research  Commission  and  the
National Department of Agriculture and which is  being  implemented  by  the
Rural Programme of the Department  of  Ichthyology  and  Fisheries  Science,
Rhodes University to develop aquaculture within the rural sector.[4]

      • North West Province: Aquaculture considerations

    • Intensive aquaculture requires  significant  capital  investment,  for
      example, tanks, pumps and piping
    • Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) required
    • Aquaculture licensing and permit issues
    • Requires trained expertise in diverse fields from animal husbandry  to
      entrepreneurial skills
    • Market chain needs to be established.

      • Potential threats  and  challenges  posed  by  aquaculture  to  the
        environment

    • Translocation or introduction of alien and/or  invasive  species  into
      rivers threatens ecosystems
    • Escape of aquaculture species into the wild during floods
    • Introduction of  parasites  and  diseases,  for  example,  carp  louse
      potentially causing harm for indigenous species

      • Aquaculture strategic plan

    • Develop a provincial policy and vision for aquaculture
    • Identify resources available for  rural  aquaculture  (skilled  staff,
      infrastructure and funding)
    • Training for DACET extension officers to provide aquaculture support

      • Conclusions

    • Aquaculture identified as having significant potential in  North  West
      Province
    • Potential economic benefits for the people of the Province
    • Can provide  food  security  for  rural  people,  but  requires  state
      intervention and support to sustain these initiatives
    • Currently under-developed, but can  be  developed  through  the  Water
      Research Commission (WRC) national aquaculture development programme
    • A recent WRC survey found that rural aquaculture in  South  Africa  is
      not constrained by available land, water and infrastructure
    • Ongoing technical support required
    • Training and experience in aquaculture a limiting factor
    • Small scale commercial  aquaculture  to  be  more  viable  than  ‘food
      security’ aquaculture projects


Recommendations from DACE (North West)


      • Develop a strategic plan for the DACE with regard to developing this


   sector.
      •  Identifying  resources  available  to  the  DACE  with  regards  to
        developing
    rural aquaculture (for example, staff with skills,  infrastructure  that
would
    be used for rural aquaculture, funds to start pilot projects, etc.).
      •  Developing policy and a vision (with regard to aquaculture) for the
        DACE.
      • Training of DACE extension service officers in aquaculture.
      • Need for national policy on aquaculture for South Africa – DWAF  and
        NDA
   are developing these.
      •  Need for financial, technical and  capacity  building  support  for
        NWDACET
    staff and potential rural community aquaculture projects.

    1. Site visit by the Select Committee on Land and Environmental  Affairs
       on Aquaculture Projects  in  the  Western  Cape,  Eden  District,  12
       November 2004

The purpose of the visit by the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
Affairs to the Western Cape Province was a fact-finding mission regarding
aquaculture projects in the provinces.

There was no briefing and the site visit  to  aquaculture  projects  in  the
Eden District were cancelled. The main reason for the cancellation  is  that
both the Mayor and Municipal Manager of Eden District Municipality were  out
of town on business matters on that day. They had requested  a  postponement
of the visit  to  a  later  date  that  will  be  suitable.  (Correspondence
available from Committee Section).

    2. Site visit by the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs
       on Aquaculture Project in the Eastern Cape – Amatole and Chris Hani
       Districts, 9 November 2004

The purpose of the visit by the Select Committee on Land  and  Environmental
Affairs to the Eastern Cape Province was a  fact-finding  mission  regarding
aquaculture projects in the provinces.

The  Select  Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs   visited   an
aquaculture project outside Umtata,  which  falls  under  the  Oliver  Tambo
District (instead of visits initially planned for  aquaculture  projects  in
the Amatole and Chris Hani Districts).

      • Background of the Oliver Tambo District

The Oliver Tambo District covers most of the former  Transkei.  With  Umtata
as the main centre, the district includes most of the beautiful  Wild  Coast
and Pondoland. The coastal belt is sub-tropical,  especially  from  Port  St
Johns northwards, and holds a number  of  nature  reserves  with  indigenous
forests. Hills beyond the  coast  gradually  rise  to  1,500  metres  beyond
Umtata. The district is well watered, with many rivers  and  rainfall  above
700mm per annum in most areas.

Oliver Tambo has the second highest population, an estimated 1  504  411  in
1999. It has  a  high  population  density  for  a  mostly  rural  district,
90/square kilometre, reflecting the apartheid inheritance of the  homelands.
Oliver Tambo has a relatively small formal economy compared to the  rest  of
the province, providing 11% of value added. Subsistence agriculture makes  a
major contribution to household food security.  The  main  challenge  facing
the Oliver Tambo District is to grow the economy and create employment.  The
unemployment rate is a very high 77% and the formal  economy  is  small  and
centred on Umtata and public services. The rich  natural  resources  of  the
district in existing forestry and the potential in irrigation and  livestock
farming need to be utilised through  partnerships  between  communities  and
the private sector. Fishing has potential for development, possibly  through
a small fishing harbour at Port  St  Johns  and  community  partnerships  in
aquaculture in a limited number of areas.

    3. Site visit to the Aquaculture project in Umtata

Aquaculture in Umtata was started years ago. It initially  received  support
from the provincial department  of  environmental  affairs  and  skills  and
expertise from the University of Transkei’s Department  of  Marine  Biology.
However, when  the  professor  left,  the  project  went  into  decline  and
financial support also dried up. The aquaculture facilities  in  Umtata  are
currently underutilised and not fully maintained.

Among the challenges that are currently facing the facility include:

    • Lack of funding and proper support from Government
    • Poor state of facilities and lack of maintenance
    • A need to have access to water, particularly the local dam
    • A need for a new and powerful water-pump
    • Lack of skills and  expertise,  such  as  a  biologist  from  a  local
      university
    • Lack of cooperation with sector departments  such  water  affairs  and
      environmental affairs
    • A need of resources

There are a number of positive spin-offs of aquaculture in the  area.  These
include:

    • Generation of income,  serving  as  job  creation,  for  those  people
      working at the facilities
    • Poverty alleviation purpose and improving dietary/nutrition  needs  of
      the communities Potentially it can contribute to food security
    • Need for diversification and optimisation of resources
    • Has potential of harvesting different types of fish and  other  marine
      species such as eels for export purposes to overseas markets
    • Similarly there is potential for local market

   Recommendations (Select Committee)


    • DWAF and NDA are developing a  national  policy  for  aquaculture  for
      South Africa, the Select Committee needs to input on this policy based
      on their first hand experiences of visiting aquaculture sites.
    • A workshop must be planned with the relevant stakeholders  working  on
      this issue in  South  Africa  to  ascertain  a  holistic  overview  of
      provincial initiatives on aquaculture production. The Select Committee
      will host a two-day workshop, bringing all relevant  people  in  South
      Africa to provide insights on ‘best  practices’  utilised  at  various
      levels.
    •  Need  for  provincial  Government,  especially  sector   departments,
      cooperation and support.
    • Develop a strategic plan with regard  to  developing  aquaculture  for
      commercial, recreational and subsistence purposes.




                                  Section B


   1. Water and sanitation services in South Africa – an overview[5]

When South Africa’s first non-racial democratic  Government  took  power  in
April 1994, the country’s population was just over  40  million  people.  Of
these, 15,2 million (12 million  of  whom  lived  in  rural  areas),  lacked
access to basic water supply[6] and 20,5 million  lacked  basic  sanitation.
The newly  elected  Government  strongly  located  basic  services  for  the
citizens of the country within a rights based approach.

South Africa is one  of  the  few  countries  in  the  world  that  formally
recognises water as  a  human  right.  Its  national  water  and  sanitation
programme, which is one of the largest national programmes in  Africa,  aims
to deliver sustainably on that right. Both the recognition  of  water  as  a
human right and  the  development  of  the  national  water  and  sanitation
programme derive from the advent, in  1994,  of  South  Africa’s  democratic
era. At that time, the country faced immense challenges  relating  to  water
supply and sanitation. The Government  and  its  development  partners  have
been determined to tackle these problems and to achieve  major  progress  in
water and sanitation.

   2. Overview of provincial initiatives to  attain  water  and  sanitation
      rights

           1. North West

      • Water Services Provision – Status Quo

There are 11 Water Services Authorities (WSA) and 5 Water Boards[7]  in  the
North West  Province.  These  comprise  2  district  councils  and  9  local
municipalities.

      • Basic sanitation – backlog

    • Household sanitation – 2,850,000 persons (R1568 million)
    • Bucket replacement – 40 268 hh (R250 million)
    •  Clinic  sanitation  (R7  million)  funds  transferred   to   district
      municipalities and implementation is in progress
    • School sanitation – 62 schools (R30 million)

      • Basic water supply

    • Provision of basic water supply – 1,140,000 persons (R1538 million)

      • Overview of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG)
            Programme in the Province

    • The introduction of the MIG posed a number of challenges in terms of:
         o New national management structure
         o New national management systems and procedures
         o New funding criteria
         o Establishment of project management units (PMU’s)
         o Involvement of sector departments
         o Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP)
         o Increased allocation
         o Committed CMIP and DWAF projects

MIG Allocation 2004/05


|Municipality   |2004/05   |Total      |% of      |Initial  |% of initial       |
|               |Allocation|Expenditure|allocation|allocatio|allocation to date |
|               |          |to 5       |to date   |n 04/05  |(R’000)            |
|               |          |October    |(R’000)   |(R’000)  |                   |
|               |          |2004       |          |         |                   |
|               |          |(R’000)    |          |         |                   |
|Madibeng       |49,197    |7,257      |15%       |21,117   |34%                |
|Rustenburg     |55,907    |2,830      |5%        |18,174   |16%                |
|Bojanala DM    |57,815    |11,177     |19%       |22,841   |49%                |
|Total: Bojanala|162,919   |21,263     |13%       |62,132   |34%                |
|District       |          |           |          |         |                   |
|Central DM     |64,755    |14,646     |          |34,991   |                   |
|Total: Central |64,755    |14,646     |23%       |34,991   |42%                |
|District       |          |           |          |         |                   |
|Bophirima DM   |40,490    |8,706      |          |24,649   |                   |
|Total:         |40,490    |8,706      |22%       |24,649   |35%                |
|Bophirima      |          |           |          |         |                   |
|District       |          |           |          |         |                   |
|Potchefstroom  |9,009     |2,990      |33%       |6,080    |49%                |
|Klerksdorp     |30,283    |5,897      |19%       |12,928   |46%                |
|Southern DM    |10,197    |3,421      |34%       |4,748    |72%                |
|Total: Southern|49,489    |12,308     |25%       |23,756   |52%                |
|District       |          |           |          |         |                   |
|Provincial     |317 653   |56,924     |18%       |145 528  |39%                |
|Total          |          |           |          |         |                   |


Source: Department of Developmental  Local  Government  and  Housing,  North
West Province

            • Monitoring and support towards service delivery

    • Ensure completed Water Services Development Plan (WSDP) (11 WSAs)
    • Ensure feasibility studies are done for identified projects
    • Approve technical reports of selected projects
    •  Participate  in  PMUs   9Central,   Bophirima,   Southern   Bojanala,
      Rustenburg, Madibeng,
      Klerksdorp and Potchefstroom) for guidance and support
    •
    • Sustainable service delivery:
         o Monitor the sector performance
         o Pre-assessments of draft WSDPs and assistance to WSAs to prepare
           WSDPs
         o Give support to  municipalities  to  implement  the  free  basic
           services policies


    • Sustainable institutions:
         o Support to WSAs to identify training needs to build capacity
         o Support to implement MIG programme by  providing  toolboxes  and
           guidance to WSAs/PMUs
         o Support WSA’s for the Section 78 process

    • Transfer of assets:
         o Three transfer of assets  agreements  finalised  (Ga  Segonyana,
           Phokwane and Moshaweng)
         o Drafting of transfer of assets agreements for other WSAs
         o  Promoting  WSP/WSA  agreement  with  water  boards   and   WSAs
           (Moretele, Moses Kotane,  CEDM  and  Rustenburg)  depending  the
           outcome of s78 process
         o Refurbishment of schemes (R21.5m)
         o Performing joint inspections
    • Planning (technical) support to WSIs
         o Support IDP and WSDP processes
         o Support MIG processes
         o Liaise with provincial government departments
         o Drought relief activities
    • Information management and monitoring
         o Access information from Macro-plan, WRM and MIG
         o Monitor backlog clearance
         o Monitor free basic water and sanitation provision
         o Provide information to MIG, WSDP, WRM and NIS
         o Monitor water boards
    • Region’s capacity to meet challenges
         o Reorganise the team in line with new functions
         o Support and oversight functions
         o 20 posts are identified
         o 13 posts are occupied
         o Filling critical vacant posts

Issues that emerged during the presentations and site visits

            • Concerns were raised at  the  huge  backlog  of  delivery  of
              sanitation
       services in the North West. These concerns focused on the reason for
       only 25% targets in sanitation being met after 10 years.
            • The issue of the non-establishment of PMU’s was also raised.
            • The figures presented by the officials showed a large  under-
              spending
            of money in the Rustenburg municipality and this revealed the
      discrepancy of the allocated amount to the amount spent by this
      municipality.
      • The issue of expenditure and monies being retained by the
      municipalities was a serious one and Members probed extensively on
      this component of the presentation.
            • The slow transfer of assets to municipalities raised a number
              of
      questions.
            • Limited infrastructure in rural areas hampered the  effective
              delivery of
      provision of water and sanitation services.
            • Limited resources to support the IDPs hamper the work of the
      municipalities.

Recommendations

    • Need to work more extensively with municipalities in the North West to
      educate officials on the   meshing of budgets and IDPs.
    • The limited infrastructure for the provision of water  and  sanitation
      services hampers delivery  and  therefore,  this  issue  needs  to  be
      critically addressed in rural areas.
    • The transfer of assets to municipalities must be fast tracked and  the
      target date set by DWAF of 2006 must be achieved.
   2. Mpumalanga

      • Overview of provincial framework on water and sanitation
           services

Water Supply

1 682 807 people were served by the DWAF CWSS programme since 1994. The
DWAF capital investment on water supply since 1994 is approximately R788
million. The current backlog figures are estimated at approximately 800 000
people. This included people with infrastructure that are receiving a
service below basic level.

Unfortunately, the above figures do  not  include  the  backlogs  served  by
other programmes like CMIP,  etc.  DWAF  is  currently  in  the  process  to
consolidate the information for the sector.

During  the  ten  years  since  1994,  it  was  mainly  the   function   and
responsibility of the Department of Water Affairs and  Forestry  to  address
the water backlog.

As from April  2003,  most  of  the  funding  was  transferred  directly  to
Municipalities in order for them to address the water provision  backlog  in
their areas of jurisdiction. The MIG process was fully introduced  in  April
2004 and  DWAF  will  be  involved  in  this  process  with  policy.  WSDPs,
monitoring of sector conditions, support to WSAs and intervention.

Sanitation Supply


      Phase 1 – 1994 to 2000


The programme began during the 1994/5 financial year, and the period
between 1994 and 2000 saw the first phase of the programme being
established. This first phase was largely focused on pioneering a community
based developmental programme model, which was characterised by its demand
driven approach, and saw roughly 15% of all construction costs being funded
through community contributions.

From  1996  to  2000,  community  members  in  Mpumalanga,  in  relation  to
improving their own sanitary conditions and lives, contributed an  estimated
R260 000 – this was over and above the labour contributions that  were  made
in terms of households that dug their own toilet pits.
Cumulative expenditure during these years was just below R3, 2 million,  and
this saw slightly over 2 700 toilets built.


      Phase 2 – 2000 to 2002


The  years  from  2000  to  2002  saw  the  provinces’  sanitation   project
implementation falling under a programme known as  the  Mpumalanga  Regional
sanitation Programme (MRSP). This programme was managed by the  Mvula  Trust
and funded by the Mpumalanga DWAF regional office.

Cumulative expenditure during these years was just below R30 million.  These
funds were  effectively  utilised  to  build  just  under  6  900  household
toilets, 1 175 school toilets in 105  schools,  and  enabled  a  substantial
cholera  campaign  to  be  conducted  in  partnership  with  the  Provincial
Department of Health.

      Phase 3 – 2003/2004

This financial year was characterised with many of the preliminary
processes leading to the launching of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant
(MIG) programme. Delays in sanitation service delivery were caused in
relation to the finalising of an increased sanitation subsidy amount by
DWAF. On 1 July 2003, 17 local municipalities in Mpumalanga took up their
Water Service Authorities functions.

Cumulative expenditure during 2003/2003 was just below R38 million. Over  13
500 toilets were built – an amount just under one  and  half  times  greater
than the cumulative total of all toilets delivered over the  previous  years
since 1994.

      Phase 4 – 2004 onward

The application of the transition of the Mpumalanga sanitation programme
under the MIG programme of the Mpumalanga Department of Local Government
and Housing is underway. All multi-year sanitation project cash flow
information was successfully handed over to the finance section of DPLGH.
Funds for the 04/05 year are currently being dispersed to the various
Municipal Project Management Units, for use on the ongoing sanitation
projects, as well as for newly approved projects as listed in the
Integrated Development Plans of Municipalities.

The 2004/05 will see a  targeted  17  000  toilets  built  in  the  on-going
MIG/DWAF  contractually  committed  projects.  Further,  several   new   MIG
sanitation projects are going ahead and the 2005 MIG target  for  sanitation
service delivery could be estimated at 20 000 toilets.

      • Visit to water and sanitation projects

Albert Luthuli Local Municipality – provision of boreholes to rural areas
|Funder       |Department of Water Affairs and Forestry                        |
|Amount       |R3 500 000 000                                                  |
|Contractors  |Bloms’ Kitchen, Ncesa & Vusuzi JV and J & M Drilling CC         |
|Consultants  |Simba Civil and Structural Engineers & Tumber Fourie Consulting |
|             |Engineers                                                       |
|Beneficiaries|14 000                                                          |
|Employment   |1250 people employed (temporary).                               |
|created      |                                                                |
|Project      |R3, 5 million was made available by DWAF to address the backlog |
|description  |in rural communities where bulk water supply through pipeline is|
|             |impossible or not cost effective. Since the municipality has a  |
|             |greater population residing in the remote areas where the bulk  |
|             |could not cater for their water demands, the municipality opted |
|             |for the drilling of boreholes as the best available option to   |
|             |address the situation.                                          |
|             |                                                                |
|             |About 57 boreholes were drilled and equipped with hand pumps    |
|             |through this programme and this addressed the need to more than |
|             |14 000 residents in the rural remote area. Another 17 boreholes |
|             |were equipped with play pumps, especially where the yield of the|
|             |borehole is more than 3 litres per second and mostly near at    |
|             |least more clustered communities and rural public amenities like|
|             |primary schools and clinics.                                    |
|             |                                                                |
|             |The programme was successfully completed and a further R1       |
|             |million is made available for this current financial year. A    |
|             |further 18 boreholes would be drilled and equipped with the     |
|             |relevant mechanisms.                                            |
|Project      |April 2004.                                                     |
|Commission   |                                                                |
|(Date)       |                                                                |


 • Albert Luthuli Local Municipality – clinic sanitation

|Project name |Provision of VIP toilets to clinics                             |
|Funder       |DWAF                                                            |
|Amount       |R536 757 44                                                     |
|Contractors  |Masihambisane General Construction CC                           |
|Consultants  |Mvula Trust                                                     |
|Beneficiaries|347 people employed.                                            |
|(Temporary)  |                                                                |
|Project      |R536 747 44 was made available by DWAF to address the sanitation|
|description  |problems that clinics have due to the nature of the areas of    |
|             |services that are without sustainable water supply, and bulk    |
|             |sanitation infrastructure to be provided with sanitation. The   |
|             |best available option for people at this point was the provision|
|             |of VIP toilets since these are dry systems.                     |
|             |                                                                |
|             |The Department of Health was also part of the programme as they |
|             |assisted with the health and hygiene training, which was part of|
|             |the programme. About 15 health and hygiene workers were trained,|
|             |including the cleaning staff of the clinics concerned.          |
|Project      |May 2004.                                                       |
|commission   |                                                                |
|date         |                                                                |

Albert Luthuli Local Municipality – Upgrading of Eerstehoek Water Scheme

|Funder        |Department of Water Affairs and Forestry                       |
|Amount        |R2 500 000.000                                                 |
|Contractors   |Insakavukela Construction CC                                   |
|Consultants   |Tirisano Consulting Engineers                                  |
|Beneficiaries |33 000                                                         |
|Employment    |1520 people employed.                                          |
|created       |                                                               |
|(Temporary)   |                                                               |
|Project       |Eerstehoek water scheme consists of both bulk and reticulation |
|description   |that was previously constructed to supply water to the         |
|              |Elukwatini. A (full pressured water) and Nhlazatshe 1 – 7 (RDP |
|              |standard). Over the years, the townships have overgrown the    |
|              |capacity of the system to supply water resulting in water      |
|              |shortages and sometimes unavailability at all. Some extensions |
|              |to the township were made without upgrading of the system      |
|              |itself. Some investigations were done by professionals, which  |
|              |proved that in order for the scheme to be able to supply water |
|              |equitable to all its beneficiaries, it would require an upgrade|
|              |of another 6 Ml in size from its original 8MI. Some parts of   |
|              |the areas do not have access to potable water at all.          |
|              |                                                               |
|              |Due to the situation above, a need to upgrade the water scheme |
|              |and further extend water reticulation to other parts of the    |
|              |villages was necessary. Hence, funds to the tune of R2.5       |
|              |million were made available to build a reservoir to supply     |
|              |Avontuur community that did not have water, further extend     |
|              |reticulation to Nhlazatshe, and construction of booster pump   |
|              |stations to supply Nhlazatshe 1 – 3 that did not have water due|
|              |to its gradient nature.                                        |
|              |                                                               |
|              |Since the upgrade would require some more funds, commitments to|
|              |fund the project in phases was made by DWAF. Phase 2 is also   |
|              |now underway and is funded to a tune of R4 million, which would|
|              |practically extend the water purification plant.               |
|Project       |June 2004                                                      |
|commission    |                                                               |
|date          |                                                               |

Issues that emerged during the presentations and site visits:

      • MIG PMUs are not fully functional and the rollout of the MIG
        programme is not as smooth as anticipated.
      • Some local municipalities are not reporting  regularly  or  actively
        taking
        part in drought relief programmes and this is cause for concern.
      • The capacity of the sanitation sector is still  problematic  as  the
        sector
        relies heavily on current DWAF support.
      • The internal capacity of local municipalities in handling water and
        sanitation issues is problematic.
      •  The  provincial  integrated  strategy  to   address   backlogs   is
        outstanding

Recommendations

      • More competent sanitation implementing agents required.
      • The skilling of municipalities must be urgently prioritised.
      • Information systems need to be updated so that backlogs tracked and
        addressed.

   3. Site visit by the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs
      on Water and Sanitation Projects in the Eastern  Cape  –  Amatole  and
      Chris Hani Districts, 9 November 2004

The purpose of the visit by the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
Affairs to the Eastern Cape Province was to undertake an oversight visit
focusing on water and sanitation services and projects in the province.

The site visit to the projects was cancelled due to difficulties
experienced with regard to transport logistics, as well as delays resulting
from other factors such as long distances travelled, e.g. from Cofimvaba to
Umtata.

   4. Site visit by the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs
      on Water and Sanitation Projects in the Western Cape,  Eden  District,
      11 November 2004

The purpose of the visit by the Select Committee on Land  and  Environmental
Affairs to the Western Cape Province was a  fact-finding  mission  regarding
water and sanitation projects and services in the provinces.

However, all the activities for the day were cancelled due to logistical
problems. The main reason being that the morning flight from East London
(Eastern Cape) to George (Western Cape) via Johannesburg was delayed as a
result of bad weather conditions. Members of the Select Committee only
arrived in George in the late afternoon of the 11th November 2004.

References


Written and oral input of the officials  from  Departments  of  Agriculture,
Conservation  and  Environment  and  Water  and  Sanitation  –  North   West
Province, 2004
Written and oral input of the officials  from  Departments  of  Agriculture,
Conservation  and  Environment  and  Water  and  Sanitation   –   Mpumalanga
Province, 2004

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation (Arts and
    Culture, Science and Technology, Sport and Recreation) on Oversight
    Visit to Eastern Cape Province 8-12 November 2004:

1. Introduction

The Select Committee on Education and Recreation (Arts and Culture, Science
and Technology, Sport and Recreation) undertook an over sight visit to the
Eastern Cape Province between 8 – 12 November 2004. The visit to was also
in line with the National Council of Provinces’ (NCOP) Vision 2009
document, which seeks to expand the role of the Council to monitoring
service delivery by the Provinces in order to ensure continued progress and
furthering of the visible advances of the first decade of freedom in South
Africa. The Committee reports as follows:

2. Objective of the study tour

The main objective of the study tour to the Eastern  Cape  Province  was  to
ascertain the state of the implementation of  the  following  programmes  of
the Department of Education:

   a) The National School Nutrition Programme
   b) School sanitation and water supply
   c) Early Childhood Development
   d) Adult Basic Education and Training
   e) Further Education and Training
   f) Education for Learners with Special Educational Needs
   g) Functionality of School Governing Bodies
   h) Programmes on HIV and AIDS
   i) School vandalism
   j) School staffing and availability of classes
   k) Teacher and learner abuses


3. Delegation


The following Members of the Committee formed part of the delegation to the
Eastern Cape Province:

1) The Hon. Mr. B. J. Tolo,  Mpumalanga  Province  (as  the  Leader  of  the
   delegation)
2) The Hon. Mr. M. Thetjeng, Limpopo Province
3) The Hon. Mr. J. O. Tlhagale, North West Province
4) The Hon. Ms J. Vilakazi, KwaZulu-Natal Province
5) The Hon. Ms. J. M. Masilo, North West Province
6) The Hon. Ms M. Madlala-Magubane, Gauteng Province
7) The Hon. Ms A. N. D. Qikani, Eastern Cape Province
8) The Hon. Ms H. Lamoela, Western Cape Province
9) The Hon. Mr. M. A. Sulliman, Northern Cape Province

The following Parliamentary support staff accompanied the delegation to  the
study tour:

1) Mr. T. Madima, Control Committee Secretary (He joined  the  Committee  on
   10 November 2004)
2) Mr. Z. A. Mvulane, Parliamentary and Committee Researcher

During the study tour, provincial  and  district  managers  accompanied  the
delegation.

4. Briefing by the MEC for Education

On the first day of the study tour, the MEC for Education in the Eastern
Cape Province, the Hon. Mr. M. Matomela (MPL), briefed the delegation on
the state of various education programmes in the Province and progress of
the Department in ensuring that the programmes are effectively and
efficiently implemented. Mr Matomela briefed the delegation as follows:


4.1 Mud structures in schools


The Eastern Cape Province has among the highest number of schools with mud
structures in the country. Over 500 schools in the Province have mud
structures. The Province does not have any learners who study under trees,
but in mud structures, churches, community halls and people’s houses. In
winter, some of these structures are not conducive for effective learning
and often dangerous for the learners. It is in such situation that the
community will then offer their churches and houses for the learners.


4.2 Over-expenditure


The major challenge that is  facing  the  Department  of  Education  in  the
Eastern Cape Province is over-expenditure. The  Department  is  paying  more
than R3,5 million per month in interests to  service  its  over-expenditure.
By March  2004,  it  had  paid  over  R15  million  in  interest.  The  over
expenditure depletes the budget available to the Department  and  limit  its
ability to address some of the major  challenges  facing  education  in  the
Province.

A major concern about the over-expenditure is that it is  in  personnel.  It
has been established  that  the  main  causes  of  this  is  poor  budgetary
systems. The over-expenditure is also caused by  backlogs  in  salaries  and
retirement funds for retired teachers. Some of  the  retired  teachers  were
not paid for over a long period and the Department is compelled to pay  them
despite the shortage of funds.

Generally,  the  Department  has  a   history   of   poor   management   and
administration systems. It has a shortage of adequately  trained  personnel,
especially  in  management  positions  and  key  strategic  positions   like
financial management and planning. It also has a vacancy  of  rate  of  over
60% posts in critical positions. In some instances this limits  its  ability
to implement and monitor government policies effectively.

However, measures have been put in place to address many of  the  challenges
that are facing the Department and education in the  Province,  particularly
in improving the administration and management structure of the  Department.
In order to ensure that the Department has the necessary personnel,  systems
and structures to  address  some  of  the  weaknesses,  the  Department  has
prioritised the Finance and Corporate Services Section and filling  critical
posts, particularly in management  positions.  The  national  Department  of
Education, through the  Interim  Management  Team,  is  also  assisting  the
Department in finding means to address  the  issues  associated  with  over-
expenditure and poor performance of staff.

4.3 Infrastructure backlogs

The Eastern Cape Province is facing massive backlogs  in  infrastructure  in
schools. This include new classrooms, the renovation of old  classrooms  and
school  structures,  administrative  blocks,  kitchens,  and   laboratories.
However, the  Province  does  not  receive  any  budget  from  the  National
Treasury (Department of Finance) to address this backlogs. As a  result,  it
budgets  backwards  every  year,  which  means  it   has   to   budget   for
infrastructure backlogs of previous years.

However, this issue has been raised with the National Treasury and with  the
national  Department  of  Education  for  urgent  interventions.  There  are
indications that measures will be put in place  to  address  the  Province’s
backlogs in the next financial year.

The Eastern Cape Province is in a  process  of  reorganising  its  schooling
system. The Province  still  has  a  large  supply  of  junior  primary  and
secondary schools that were inherited from the  homeland  education  system.
The Department is also planning to ensure that  all  new  schools  have  the
necessary infrastructures and systems necessary for effective education.

The influx of learners in some areas, particularly learners  who  move  from
poor performing schools to better schools, has exacerbated the  issue  of  a
shortage of classrooms in some schools.  The  Department  is  devising  more
options in order to address the issue of lack of classrooms in the  schools.


The problem of learners studying  under  dangerous  conditions  is  a  major
issue in the Province. Department is devising mechanisms to  cater  for  the
needs of  these,  particularly  those  studying  under  mad  and  collapsing
dangerous structures that were largely built  by  communities.  It  is  also
planning to amalgamate  some  schools  where  the  number  of  learners  has
declined substantially and to create hostels where learners have  to  travel
long distances.

4.4 Departmental leadership

From a leadership perspective, the provincial Department  of  Education  has
been among the unstable departments in the Province. Since 1994 it  has  had
9 Heads of Department (Superintendent-Generals) and six MEC’s.  Some  people
in critical posts in the Department do not know their job  descriptions  and
functions, which affect the ability of the Department  to  deliver  services
effectively.

However, proper systems have been put in place  to  address  most  of  these
challenges. The Interim Management Team  from  the  National  Department  of
Education is assisting the Department to address  some  of  the  challenges,
particularly those associated with personnel matters. Thus  far,  there  are
indications  that  the  situation  is  stabilising  and  improving.  A   new
departmental structure with properly defined roles and responsibilities  has
been  established.  This  will  ensure  that  people  understand  their  job
descriptions and responsibilities in  delivering  quality  services  to  the
people.  Displaced  employees  within  the  structure  will  be  placed   in
positions that match their competencies and  where  they  will  be  able  to
perform optimally.

4.5 The National School Nutrition Programme

The current budget for the School Nutrition Programme in  the  Eastern  Cape
Province is just over R177 million. This amount  has  proven  inadequate  to
cover all the  needy  schools  in  the  Province.  The  Department  has  had
problems with the Programme since taking it  over  from  the  Department  of
Health early in 2004. The tender process is in dispute.

Despite poor infrastructure and the lack  of  personnel  to  administer  the
Programme effectively, the Department was compelled to take  over  from  the
Department of Health. Few months after taking over  the  Programme,  it  was
discovered that the  Proof  of  Delivery  system,  which  was  used  by  the
Department of Health was fraught with corruption  and  mismanagement.  As  a
result the Department initiated the Goods Receive Vouchers system to  ensure
that goods are accounted for during delivery. This system ensures  that  the
school keeps a record of the delivery of food, the  date  it  was  delivered
and the person who received the food on behalf of the school.

However, Goods Receive Vouchers system has resulted in a lot of  paper  work
for the Department, particularly at district level. For each feeding day  at
school, there is large number of invoices for  the  districts  officials  to
process. The paper work tends to cause delays in the payment of the  service
providers. As it stands, the Department has a huge  backlog  of  paper  work
relating to payments and purchases of food in schools.

The suppliers of the food in schools are  also  major  contributors  to  the
challenges  faced  by  the  Department  in   administering   the   Programme
effectively. They frequently do not claim in time and some suppliers do  not
deliver the food to schools as required.

Many  schools  in  the  Province  have  reported  problems  on  the  current
operation and structure of the Programme. As a  result,  the  Department  is
reviewing the Programme to  improve  it.  Several  options  are  considered,
including that of the Northern Cape, as proposed by the Select Committee  on
Education and Recreation in 2004.

There are  indications  that  some  of  the  problems  associated  with  the
Programme  could  be  addressed  if  it  is  decentralised.   However,   the
Department needs to carefully investigate the effectiveness  and  challenges
of decentralising the Programme so that when it is decentralised  there  are
no interruptions.

The Department is planning to implement the new model for the  Programme  in
the coming new financial year. In  all  the  options  that  are  considered,
there is strong indication that there is a  need  for  effective  provincial
monitoring systems for the  Programme.  The  new  model  for  the  Programme
should ensure that the Department focuses more on educational issues  rather
than seeking ways to improve administrative systems,  as  is  currently  the
situation.

4.6 Vacancy rate in schools

The Eastern Cape Province has  a  supply  of  over  600  000  teachers.  The
teacher to administrator ratio in the  Province  is  93:7  rather  than  the
national norm of 80:20. Despite the large supply of teachers,  the  Province
appears not to have enough teachers in certain areas,  particularly  in  the
rural parts of the Province. This is  mainly  because  the  redeployment  of
teachers has been slow. As a result, temporary  educators  have  had  to  be
employed in many schools.

The Department plans to deploy 6 000 teachers  to  schools  where  they  are
needed, specifically to rural schools. It is also  devising  a  strategy  to
address the issue of temporary  teachers  and  acting  principals.  In  some
instances there have been reported fatalities when people are not  appointed
to the posts that they have filled in an acting capacity for some time.

A major challenge in the  redeployment  process  in  the  Province  is  that
teachers do not like to be redeployed to other areas, particularly to  rural
schools. This has resulted in a large supply of teachers in the urban  areas
and a limited supply of teachers in areas where they are  needed  most  like
in rural schools.

4.7 Non-performing schools

The Eastern Cape Province has a large supply of  non-performing  schools  or
schools that achieve a pass rate below 20%. The Province  also  has  a  very
low pass rate in Grade 12, particularly in schools located in  disadvantaged
communities. The problem is mainly attributed to the fact that some  schools
push learners to do Standard Grade subjects.

The Province  also  has  a  very  low  supply  of  Mathematics  and  Science
educators. Thus, teacher-upgrading, particularly in Mathematics and  Science
subjects needs to be followed up in order to ensure that it is in line  with
the curriculum needs of schools.

4.8 Subsidised scholar transport

Generally, scholar transport is a major issue in the Eastern Cape  Province.
This  has  been  exacerbated  by  the  influx  of   learners   from   former
disadvantages areas to urban areas where  most  of  the  performing  schools
with proper infrastructure are located.

The lack of a subsidised scholar system in many schools in the  Province  is
mainly as a result of budgetary control  measures  in  order  to  curb  over
expenditure. The geographic set up of some areas makes it difficult cars  to
reach  schools.  In  some  areas  learners  have  to  walk  long  distances,
particularly in summer where heavy rains damage roads.

The Province also has a system  of  a  large  supply  of  dangerous  scholar
transport like bakkies, which are not permissible to transport people.  Some
of these vehicles are not road worthy and are not  maintained  and  serviced
by their  owners.  There  have  been  several  fatal  accidents  of  bakkies
transporting learners to school. The  Department  of  Education  is  working
with the provincial Department of Transport to  device  a  proper  and  safe
scholar transport system for the Province.

5. Oversight Visit to Schools

The delegation visited the following schools in the Province:

5.1 Langalethu Junior Secondary School

This school was established in 1981. In 1988, a transformation programme
was established to create a proper identity for the school. One of the main
objectives of the transformation process was to change the learning culture
at the school. After the implementation of the process, the culture of
teaching and learning changed completely. The school is now among the top
performing public schools in the Province.

In 2002, the school had an enrolment of 2 144 learners. This number has
decreased to 1 331 in 2003 and 1 393 in 2004. There are indications that
this is a problem facing all schools in the Province.

The school has 29 educators. It has managed to be the first in music and
sport in the Province. The Principal plays a key role in motivating the
learners and educators to do better academically and in all provincial
competitions and events. Educators in the school work up to 10 hours a day
instead of the norm of 7 hours a day.

5.1.1 Challenges

The school is facing the following challenges:

a) Poverty

A major challenge facing the school is the high poverty rate in the area.
Most of the learners at the school are from poor families. This results in
some parents not being able to pay schools fees for their children.

b) The National School Nutrition Programme

There is late delivery of food for the Nutrition Programme at the school.
In some instances, the supplier supplies insufficient food products. The
school has a school garden, but because it is not fenced some members of
the community steal the vegetables.

c) Vandalism

As the school is not fenced, it experiences a high incidence of vandalism
and burglary.

d) Lack of Classrooms

The school has eleven classrooms. This has resulted in the overcrowding of
learners in all grades.

e) Lack of computers

The school does not have computers. The learners are eager to learn about
computers, but the budget of the school does not allow the school to
purchase even one computer.

f) Water and sanitation

Although the school has water, the supply is infrequent. In some instances,
it does not get water for a week. The toilets at the school need
renovation.

g) Impact of the HIV/AIDS pandemic

The school has a high number of learners affected by the HIV and AIDS
pandemic. However, due to lack of resources, there is very little that the
school can do to assist the learners or their parents. The school does
offer HIV and AIDS education and works with the local clinic to offer
health education to the learners. One classroom at the school has been
converted to a clinic. This assists the school in raising awareness about
the disease at the school. Some teachers use the class to teach learners
about first aid. The class is equipped with a first aid box donated by a
local clinic, which also assists in stocking it.

h) Abuse of learners

There are high incidences of learner-to-learner abuse at the school. The
school tries to find means to address it. In some instances parents are not
keen to take matters of learner-to-leaner abuse further. They leave them
solely to the school. For example, a group of learners tried to rape a
learner. The parents of the learner were asked to report the matter to the
police, but they never did. The school informed the police of the incident
and the learners were arrested. However, the parents are still not keen to
take the matter any further.

There are also incidences of bullying by some learners. The school,
however, takes matters of bullying very seriously.

i) Learner Support Materials

The school uses old and outdated Learner Support Materials. There has not
been any delivery of new books to the school. Teachers buy new textbooks
with their own funds and share them with the learners.

j) Substance abuse


The school experiences incidences of substance abuse by some learners.
Although most of them try to hide the fact that they smoke marijuana,
teachers have caught a few smoking on the premises.

5.1.2 Committee recommendations

The Committee recommends the following with regard to Langalethu Junior
Secondary School:

    • The Department should take urgent intervention measures to ensure that
      learners at the school eat every school day.
    • Tenders for the school nutrition programme should be awarded to local
      people.
    • The school should follow up on learners applying for grants.
    • The Department of Education should invite the Department of Home
      Affairs to the school to assist with birth certificates for the
      learners.
    • The Department should ensure that the school is fenced.
    • The school governing body should look at other sources of revenue for
      funds to fence the school and address some of its challenging.
    • Psychologists or councillors should be invited to the school to assist
      learners with social problems.
    • The toilets at the school should be renovated.

5.2 Lindokuhle Junior Secondary School

The community established this school in 1984. It has 442 learners and 11
teachers. It starts from Grade R to Grade 9. All the teachers at the school
are employed permanently, but one teacher is temporary and has not been
paid by the Department since January 2004. Another teacher, who teaches
Grade R, is volunteering and is not paid at all by the Department. Although
she shows serious commitment to teach the learners voluntarily, the school
feels that she should be compensated because she does a very good job and
shows commitment to the education of the learners. However, the school is
unable pay the teacher because of shortage of funds.

The school has three mud class structures. The roof in two classrooms is
falling down. When it rains, the learners attend classes in houses in the
community. This interrupts the teaching programme of the school, especially
in winter.

   1. Challenges

The school is facing the following challenges:

a) Lack of classrooms

The school has one proper functioning classroom. The other classes are
conducted under trees and sometimes in community houses and churches.
Because the classrooms do not have doors, goats sleep in them. The learners
have to clean their classes every day before they resume their lessons.

b) Water and sanitation

The school uses water from a nearby river. There are pit toilets that are
not working. The learners go the bush for toilet.

c) Scholar transport

The school does not have subsidised scholar transport. The learners walk an
average distance of five kilometres a day to and from the school.

d) Poor road infrastructure

The school is located at the top of a hill and has a very poor road
infrastructure. When it rains, it becomes difficult for the educators and
learners to get to the school.

e) Fencing

The school is not fenced. Sometimes mentally disturbed people from the
community walk to the school and disturb learners.

f) The National School Nutrition Programme

The school receives only bread, which is delivered in bulk once or twice a
week. This results in learners eating stale bread and unhealthy foodstuffs.
Sometimes the school does not get bread for weeks.

5.2.2 Committee recommendations

    • There is an urgent need for the Department of Education to intervene
      at the school.
    • The condition of the school is very bad. There is an urgent need for
      mobile classes at the school.
    • The Department needs to ensure that the learners get learners support
      materials.
    • The Department needs to provide scholar transport to the school.
    • The Department should ensure that the teacher, who teaches Grade R, is
      paid at least a stipend salary.

5.3 Ikhwezi Junior Secondary School

This school was established in 1985. It has ten grades with 488 learners
and a total of 12 teachers. Nine of the teachers are permanent and three
are temporary. Among these teachers is an educator who volunteers to teach
the ECD class. Some of the temporary educators have been temporary for
almost a year.

The school has a serious problem of overcrowding. It is unable to
accommodate all the learners in the five classrooms that are currently
available in the school. In order to accommodate the learners, the school
uses multi-grading of classes, with two teachers teaching various grades.
This affects the learning ability of the learners.

5.3.1 Challenges

The school is facing the following challenges:

a) Water and sanitation

The school does not have access to water. Water is fetched from a nearby
dam and sometimes when it rains from tanks. The use of the water from the
dam results in the Principal of the school having to take learners to
hospital every week. The school has ten pit toilets for the learners and
five for the educators.

b) Telephone


The school does not have a telephone. Even cell phones do not work where
the school is located. This makes it difficult for the principal to keep in
touch with the circuit and the Department. Sometimes the Principal misses
crucial meetings because invitations arrive late. If the Principal has to
make a phone call, he has to walk four kilometres for cell phone coverage.

c) Education for Learners with Special Education Needs

The school does not have educators with specialised knowledge of dealing
with learners with special educational needs. The school devices its own
means of catering for learners with special educational needs. Even the
structures of the school are not conducive to learners with special
educational needs.

d) Non-payment of school fees


Because of the high poverty in the area, most parents struggle to pay
school fees. In order for the school to survive, it needs to increase the
fees for the learners who are able to pay.

e) The National School Nutrition Programme

The nutrition programme at the school is infrequent. This affects the
general attendance of the learners. Some learners only attend school on
feeding days. The principal has sought help from the Circuit and District
offices, but nothing is being done to improve the situation.

It is very difficult for the school not to feed other grades as learners at
the school are from poor families. Even the ones in senior classes deserve
to eat because the young ones keep some of their food from them or their
siblings at home.

5.3.2 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should ensure that learners eat every school day.
    • The educators at the school should be trained to deal with learners
      with special educational needs.
    • The Department should ensure that the school is supplied with water.
    • The Department should ensure that the learners are transported to
      school.
    • Rather than the Department contracting people from Mtata and other
      distanced areas, local contractors should be contracted to supply food
      to the school.

5.4 Vukuzenzele Junior Secondary School

Vukuzenzele Junior Secondary School caters for learners with special
educational needs. It is located in the Bizana District area. The 150
learners at the school reside in hostels at the school. Most of the
facilities at the school are functioning.

However, the supply of water is infrequent. This results in school toilets
being in a bad condition. Some learners, as result of their disability, are
not able to use toilets properly, which creates more work when there is no
water. Some educators at the school have not received their special school
allowances for three years.

5.4.1 Challenges

The school is facing the following challenges:

a) Lack of critical staff


The school lacks critical staff like psychologists, nurses and therapists.

b) Lack of a proper sanitation system


The sanitation system at the school has been blocked for two years. Funds
for it to be renovated were approved in 2003 but nothing has been done to
address the situation.

c) Scholar transport

The school does not get any provision for scholar transport, particularly
when closing for vacations. It struggles to transport the learners to their
families, who are unable to pay for their transport.

d) Lack of support from the district

The school does not get support from the district office, as there is no
support staff member responsible for learners with special educational
needs.

e) Insufficient budget

The budget give to the school is insufficient. The school is not given a
special budget to meet the special needs of the learners.

5.4.2 Committee recommendations

     • The Department should take urgent measures to ensure that there is
       water in the school.
     • The Department should assist the school to hire at least two people
       who will assist with cleaning and to take care of the disabled
       learners in the school.
     • The school should be provided with a mobile clinic.
     • The Department should assist the school to transport the learners to
       the school.
     • The Department should make provisions for the school to meet the
       special needs of the learners.
     • The Department should review its funding to special schools. Because
       of the nature of their learners, special schools tend to have more
       needs that are associated with the nature of the learners.

5.5 Nompumalanga Special School

This school was established in 1988. It is  located  in  the  same  premises
with Vukuzenzele Junior Secondary School. It trains  learners  with  special
educational needs with basic skills. Some of the learners at the school  are
slightly educable and, thus, the school teaches them the normal  curriculum.
Some of the learners have learnt to read and write  since  arriving  at  the
school.

Those learners who rely on their creative skills, make very creative works
like leather clothes and other crafts. Some of the learners run a cooking
company and cook for events and functions. Some of the learners do
gardening. They sell their products to the community. The school has
started a major project to give employment to 40 of them. Fifty percent of
the learners at the school get disability grants.

5.5.1 Challenges

The school is facing the following challenges:

a) Lack of critical staff


The school lacks critical staff like psychologists, nurses and therapists.
The only psychologist, who comes to the school when needed, is located 150
kilometres away from the school.

b) Lack of a proper sanitation system


The sanitation system at the school has been blocked for two years. Funds
for it to be renovated were approved in 2003 but nothing has been done to
address the situation.

c) Scholar transport

The school does not get any provision for scholar transport, particularly
when closing for vacations. It struggles to transport the learners to their
families, who are unable to pay for their transport.

d) Lack of support from the District Office

The school does not get support from the district office, as there is no
support staff member responsible for learners with special educational
needs.

e) Insufficient budget

    • The budget give to the school is insufficient. The school is not given
      a special budget to meet the special needs of the learners.

5.5.2 Committee recommendations

    • The needs of the school should be prioritised, particularly the
      renovation of toilets.
     • The Department should assist the school to transport the learners to
       the school.
     • The Department should make provisions for the school to meet the
       special needs of the learners.
     • A mobile clinic should visit the school at every week.
     • The Department of Social Development should be invited to ensure that
       all the learners get disability grants.
     • The Department should take urgent measures to ensure that there is
       water in the school.
     • The Department should assist the school to hire at least two people
       who will assist with cleaning and care of the learners in the school.



5.6 Xuraview Junior Secondary School

The community established the school in 1976. The reason for establishing
the school was because the learners were studying in schools across the
river. When it rained, learners were unable to go to school. In some
instances there were reported fatalities in the river. The community
decided that there was a need to establish the school.

The school has 590 learners and 15 educators. The school has a functioning
School Governing Body. The school has insufficient classrooms. Pre Grade R
and Grade R are combined into one classroom.

5.6.1 Challenges

The school is facing the following challenges:

a) Lack of classrooms and overcrowding

The school has eight proper classrooms and needs another eight to
accommodate all its learners. The classrooms are not conducive to learning.


b) Water and Sanitation

Water supply at the school is infrequent. The toilets for learners at the
school are in a very bad state. Some of them have been closed because they
are irreparable and hazardous to the learners.

c) Electricity


Although the school has electricity, it needs to be upgraded.

d) Telephone

The school does not have a telephone. This makes communicating with other
schools very difficult.

5.6.2 Committee Recommendations

    • The Department needs to assist the school in renovating the classes
      and make them conducive to teaching and learning.
    • The Department needs to work with the Municipality to ensure that the
      school gets water.
    • The school needs to be renovated.
    • Public works needs to be invited to inspect the school.

5.7 Hillbrow Senior Secondary

The school has 1 258 learners and 36 educators. There are 15 vacancies for
educators. The School Governing Body at the school is effective and assists
in many matters concerning school management and administration. Senior
certificate or matric examination results at the school have moved from
below the average in 1997 (28,6%) to 66% in 2003. This is attributed to the
commitment of both the learners and teachers at the school. The school has
a well-resourced computer centre with 43 computers. However, only 23 of the
computers are working. The rest need to be upgraded and fixed. The school
has a laboratory wit basic infrastructure.

The facilitators in Grade R were paid R1 000 and have not been paid since
2003. One structure of the school was built in 1936. It is now dangerous to
keep learners under such a structure.

5.7.1 Challenges

The school is facing the following challenges:

a) Water and Sanitation

Although the school has water, it is irregular. There water tanks but
because the school is not properly fenced, the community uses the water.

b) Education for Learners with Special Education Needs

Although the school has education with special educational needs, there is
very poor support that is given to the learners.

c) Teenage Pregnancies

The school has a very high number of teenage pregnancies.

d) Scholar transport

The school does not have a scholar transport. The reason from the
Department has been that learners from the township are excluded from
getting scholar transport. However, some of the learners are coming from
far away communities. They struggle to get to the school and are often late
or miss classes.

e) Sporting facilities

The school does not have sporting facilities. Although some of the learners
are keen to play sport, they are prevented by the lack of infrastructure at
the school.

f) The National School Nutrition Programme

Although the school does have a nutrition programme, the menu needs to be
revised. The school is also prevented from having a say in the menu and
type of food given to learners.

5.7.2 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should work with the school to organise councillors to
      council the learners on teenage pregnancies and safe sex.
    • The Department should involve the school in determining the menu for
      the learners.
    • The Department should assist the learners who are from more than five
      kilometres away from the school with subsidised transport.
    • The Department should engage with the Department of Sport and
      Recreation and the local municipality to ensure that the school has
      sporting facilities.
    • The Department should assist the school in identifying learners with
      special educational needs and assisting them with their special
      educational needs.
    • The Department should ensure that some of the teachers in the school
      are trained in assessing and addressing the needs of learners with
      special educational needs.

5.8 D. D. Siwisa Primary School

The school has a total enrolment of 658 learners. There is overcrowding in
the foundation phase, as the ratio of teacher to learner is 1:60. The
situation is better in the intermediate phases where the ratio is 1:38.

5.8.1 Challenges

The school is facing the following challenges:

a) Shortage of classrooms

There is a shortage of classrooms in the school, particularly for the
foundation phase.

b) Inadequacy of the School Nutrition Programme

Although the school has a nutrition programme, the learners are fed only
three times a week. The school only feeds learners up to Grade 4, while
learners in Grades 5 to 7 are not fed. This is a major challenge for the
school since some of the learners come from the same poor families, but
because of the inadequacy of the Programme, the school is compelled to only
feed learners up to Grade 4 and only for three days.

The inadequacy of the Programme also affects the attendance of learners to
school. There is a much higher attendance of learners on the days when
there is feeding than when there is no feeding.

c) Poor attendance of Parents to School Governing Body’s meeting

There is very poor attendance of parents to School Governing Body’s
meeting. This affects the functionality of the School Governing Body and
the ability of the school to devise proper and affective mechanisms to
address some of the challenges that are facing the school.

5.8.2 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should take urgent measures to ensure that the learners
      in the school are fed every school day.
    • The Department should assist the school in devising mechanisms that
      will ensure that parents take part in the education of their children.


    • The Department should devise alternative measures like mobile
      classrooms to accommodate the learners.

5.9 Roodeblom Farm School

This is a small farm school with about 40 learners and has two teachers.
Although, the learners stay far more than five kilometres away from the
school, there is no subsidised scholar transport. The principal wakes up
early in the morning and collect those staying more further from the
school.

Most of the learners in the school are from very poor families, who earn
very low salaries. As a result their parents cannot afford to buy them
school uniforms. Some of them wear their normal clothes and some wear old
uniforms.

The school has a Nutrition Programme, however, the learners are fed
biscuits and scheme milk everyday. The school does not have electricity.
This affects learning and teaching, particularly in winter when there is
poor visibility.

5.9.1 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should device urgent mechanisms to ensure that the
      learners who stay far more than five kilometres away from the school
      get subsidised scholar transport.
    • The Department should exempt all the learners from paying school fees
      because school fees have become a major barrier to the learners in the
      farm.
    • The Department should assist the school in establishing a healthy menu
      rather than just feeding the learners biscuits and milk.
    • The Department should ensure that the school is electrified.

5.10 Thembalesizwe Primary School

The school is located in a very poor area. Only about 40% of the parents
are able to pay school fees. The school has a Nutrition Programme and feeds
learner every school day. This has proven really helpful in attracting more
learners to the school. The surplus food from the Programme is given to the
more needy learners to take with them to home everyday. There are two
volunteers who cook and prepare the food for the learners. Although they
come from very poor households, the school is unable to pay them the
stipulated stipend for assisting with the preparation of the food.

5.10.1 Challenges

The school is facing some of the following key challenges:

a) Lack of sporting facilities

The school does not have any facilities for school sport. As a result the
learners are not able to participate in any school sport competitions.
There is an open space near the school which could be used as a play field.
The Principal of the school has made numerous requests to the Department to
prepare the open space to be used as a play field for the learners. To date
there has not been any response from the Department.

b) Toilets not conducive for use by Grade R learners

Although the school has pit toilets, they are not conducive for use by the
Grade R learners. The toilets are normally not a good state and too big for
the Grade R learners.

5.10.2 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should engage with the Department of Sport and
      Recreation and the farmer to ensure that the available space is
      upgraded and prepared for sporting activities.
    • The Department should take urgent measures to ensure the school has
      proper toilets, particularly for the Grade R learners.
    • The Department should ensure that the volunteers who prepare the food
      for the learners are paid the stipulated stipend.

5.11 Masiphathisane High school

This is one of the Dinaledi schools in the Province. It has an enrolment of
1 347 learners with 40 teachers. The learners pay a school fee of R200 and
there have been no incidences of non-payment of school fee. Most parents
bring their children to the school because of the quality of learning that
takes place in the school.

In 2004 the school had 251 matric students and 151 of them were doing Maths
and Science subjects on Higher Grade.

Success of the school is also as a result of the committed and hard working
teachers and learners. The co-operation of parents in the education of the
learners is also vital in ensuring that the learners are performing very
well and always do their homework. The school also puts more emphasis on
social behaviour and social guidance.

5.11.1 Committee recommendations

    • This school should be used as model for assisting other schools in the
      Province.
    • All the learners in the school should be encouraged to do Maths and
      Sciences subjects because of the potential and attitude of the school
      and the learners towards these subjects.

5.12 West-end Primary School

The school has 940 learners and 25 educators. There is a decline in the
number of learners at school. This is largely due to the high rate of
poverty in the area.

5.12. 1 Challenges

The school is also facing the following challenges:

a) Centralisation of education administration in the District

The school is facing major challenges that are resulting from the
centralisation of administration in the district that constantly interrupt
the effectiveness of the school. For example, when a teacher gets sick, the
school is unable to replace him or her or hire a replacement because the
approval has to be obtained from Bisho. Sometimes it takes over a month for
Bisho to approve the appointment of temporary teachers. This means that the
learners will come to school but do not get any lessons because there is no
teacher. Often learners without teachers are combined with other same
grades but this result in the overcrowding of classes.

The maintenance of the school is also contracted from Bisho. It takes a
long time for Bisho to respond to issues of maintenance. In some cases an
incident can go for month without any response.

b) Delivery of Learner Support Material

The delivery of Learner Support Material to the school is always late. In
some instances support material is delivered weeks after lessons have
started.

c) School Governing Body

The School Governing Body is not well versed in issues pertaining to school
management. It needs to be trained.

d) Insufficiency of the School Nutrition Programme

Although the school has a Nutrition Programme, it is insufficient and is
therefore only given to the most needy students, despite the fact that
government policy indicates that it has to be given up to Grade 4.

e) Lack of subsidised scholar transport

Some learners from the school come from as far as more than five kilometres
away from the school. However, they do not get subsidised scholar
transport. When some their parents cannot afford to pay for scholar
transport, the learners miss school or are often late because they are
forced to walk long distances.

f) Lack of training for teachers to deal with Learners with Special
Educational Needs.

Although some of the learners at the school have Special Educational Needs,
teachers cannot cater for their needs because they are not properly trained
to understand their needs.

5.12.2 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should take urgent measures to ensure that at least all
      the learners up to Grade 4 are fed.
    • The Department should ensure that Learner Support Material is
      delivered and given to the learners at least before the start of the
      school calendar.
    • The Department should ensure that teachers at the school are trained
      to assess and understand the educational needs of learners with
      special educational needs.
    • The Department should ensure that learners who come as far as more
      than five kilometres away from the school are assisted with subsidised
      scholar transport.
    • The Department should ensure that the School Governing Body is
      properly trained to effectively manage the school and play a key role
      in the administration of the school.


5. 13 Fanti Gaqa Primary School

This is a good example of a well-managed and functioning school. The
success of the school is attributed to the cooperation between all
stakeholders including teachers, parents, learners and the community. Due
to parents involvement the school managed to buy computers and establish a
computer laboratory. Generally, the environment of the school shows
discipline and commitment from both teachers and the learners. The school
has 834 learners with 19 educators.

5.13.1 Challenges

The school is facing the following challenges:

a) Lack of classrooms

The school has a problem of overcrowding of classrooms because of lack of
classrooms.

b) No Nutrition Programme

Although some of the learners in the school are from poor families, they do
not get any food because the school is classified as not needy.

5.13.2 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should take urgent measures to ensure that all the
      needy learners at the school are fed.
    • The Department should devise temporary measures like mobile classrooms
      to ensure that the learners are accommodated.

5.14 Kuswus Laerskool

This is a former model C Afrikaans school. In 1994 it had 135 learners and
all white learners were Afrikaans speaking. At present the school has 525
learners and about 157 are from Afrikaans speaking families and think in
Afrikaans. The rest are from nearby areas and former disadvantaged
communities and think in English. The school has 19 educators.

The school fee is R260 and 53 learners are exempted from paying school
fees, while 100 have partial exemption.

Only 47 of the learners are fed every school day. If there is surplus, it
is given to the most needy learners to take home.

6. Oversight Visit to FET Colleges

The Committee visited the following FET colleges throughout the Eastern
Cape province:

6.1 King Hintsa Public FET College

The King Hintsa Public FET College is located within the boundaries of two
Mbhashe and Mnquma municipalities. The College was formed after the merger
of three Technical Colleges: Teko in Butterworth, HB in Tsengwa at
Willowvale and Centane Technical at Centane, which has resulted in three
campuses. There are also plans to build two more campuses in the areas
where there is a need for the College. The main campus of the College is at
Teko. The enrolment at the College depends on the quarters from 500 to 1500
learners per year.

A Student Governance Council (SGC) was set up to assist the College with
all institutional challenges. The Council has been effective in guiding the
administration and management of the College. It has been trained on school
governance and management. The Council has also played a key role in
securing land for an administration block for the College.


6.1.1 Challenges


King Hintsa Public FET College is facing the following challenges:


a) Lack of administration block





The College does not have an administration block. It occupies a building
that is owned by the Department of Agriculture. This has major shortcomings
in terms of expanding the College and managing its student and
administrative affairs. The Department of Education has promised to assist
the College in building a R6 million administration centre.


b) Lack of fulltime staff


Although the College is supposed to have 99 full-time staff members, the
Principal is the only full-time member of the College. The Heads of
Departments from the previous colleges were seconded to assist in the
management of the College, but none of them is employed in a permanent
position. The College does not have Registrars, which makes dealing with
the administrative and academic affairs of the College a major challenge.



c) Curriculum


The curriculum needs to be reviewed and aligned with the needs of the
learners in the areas it serves. Currently it is located next to a
technikon, which has an advanced curriculum and academic programmes. This
has resulted in lower enrolments in the College. Students are moving to
technikons where they feel they will acquire skills that will enable them
to get jobs. The College does not have the infrastructure to offer
engineering yet there are learners in the area who would like to do
engineering work because it is the only major source of employment in the
Province.


d) Lack of other sources of funding


The College depends solely on  the  Department  of  Education  for  funding.
Parents in the area are too poor to pay for their children’s academic  fees.
There is a substantial number of learners who are unable  to  buy  even  the
basic materials required in their courses.


e) Lack of a resource centre


The College does not have a resource centre. This has resulted  in  the  use
of an office in the administration block  to  keep  some  of  the  College’s
learner support materials.


f) Lack of communications facilities


The communication facilities in the College  are  not  reliable.  An  e-mail
system, which was installed in September 2004,  is  no  longer  functioning.
This prevents the College from looking for other  sources  of  funding  (for
example international donors). Some campuses do not have  telephones,  which
makes communication a challenge.


g) Poor living infrastructure


Some of the hostels in the College are in a very bad state. They need to be
renovated and are a serious health danger to the learners. However, the
College is not able to close them down because it would mean that the
learners from distant areas would not have accommodation.


h) Water and sanitation


Although the College does have water, it is not reliable. Construction
companies continuously interrupt the water. If the matter is reported to
the municipality, it takes more than a month to attend to such
interruptions. The sanitation system at the College is very old and needs
to be changed. The College experiences blockages every now and then.


i) Electricity


Although  the  College  does  have   electricity,   there   are   continuous
electricity  failures.  It  takes  a  while  for  Eskom  to   address   such
interruptions because they have to be reported to the  East  London  office.
The plumbing of the College is very old and needs to be upgraded.


j) Health inspectors


The College does not have health inspectors. The Principal  has  taken  over
the duty of inspecting the health conditions of the College.


k) Laboratories


The College does not have a laboratory. It uses workshops for all its  work.
Some of these workshops are in  a  very  bad  state  and  dangerous  to  the
learners.




l) Library


The College does not have a library. However, there are plans to set up a
main library for all the campuses.

m) Administrative staff

The College does not have a permanent administration. It does not have even
a secretary. It relies of the services of students and other former
students who are currently unemployed.

6.1.2 Committee recommendations

    • There is a need for urgent intervention by the Department to assist
      the College in improving the health conditions of the hostels.
    • The Council needs to approach other corporations for funding in order
      to address some of its challenges.
    • The alignment of the curriculum of the College with the needs of the
      learners should be prioritised.
    • The Council should approach some of the car manufacturing companies in
      the Province to assist with training some of its learners.
    • The Department should approach the Department of Health for health
      inspectors to visit the College at least once a month.

6.2 Buffalo City Public FET College

The Buffalo City Public FET College has three campuses situated in East
London and Mdantsane areas (the East London, John Knox Bokwe and St Marks
Campuses). The College offers a wide range of part-time and full time
programmes as well as short courses at its Business Skills Centre. The
College has well-established infrastructure and systems. This is a result
of its long history as a well-managed College in the entire Eastern Cape
Province. It has networks and links with international cities, donors and
other colleges.

6.2.1 Challenges

However, the main challenges confronting the College are a high vacancy
rate and acting staff. The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is the only full-
time staff member of the College. All the Programme Directors are employed
part-time and on acting capacities. This creates a problem of instability
within the administration of the College.

6.2.2 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should ensure that the vacancies in the College are
      filled.
    • The Department should ensure that learners from poor families in the
      College receive financial assistance like bursaries or study loans.
    • The Department should ensure that the College also admits learners
      from the rural parts of the Province.

6.3. Grahamstown FET College

The process of amalgamation with other two FET’s in the Grahamstown FET
College is in progress. The CEO of the three merging FET’s consults with
the leaders of the other two campuses.

6.3.1 Challenges

The College is facing the following challenges:

a) Lack of institutional policies

There is a lack of institutional policies to guide the merging of the
College, while the amalgamation is moving at a very fast paste. The current
policies in the new institution are fragmented. The various campuses are
still implementing their own old policies.

b) Staff vacancies

The College has about 28 staff vacancies. Most of the staff in the college
work on a part-time basis.

c) Lack of updated computer facilities

The College uses outdated computers with old computer programmes. Most of
the computers need to be replaced.

d) Dilapidated buildings

The R40 000 yearly maintenance budget for the College has proven to be very
insufficient. As a result many of the campus buildings are dilapidating.
The building of the College belongs to the Department of Public Works.
However, it is not maintained. The College does not even have boarding
facilities, which is a major challenge for attracting learners from far way
areas, particularly those from rural areas.

e) Lack of bursaries for poor learners

Although the College has a very high turnover rate of poor learners, it has
very limited bursaries. Some of the learners drop out before completing
their courses because of financial problems.

6.3.2 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should put a task team to assist the College to
      establish institutional policies to guide the merger process.
    • The Department should assist the College in getting sponsorships for
      new computers.
    • The Department should ensure that the College building are renovated
      and maintained.
    • The Department should ensure that the staff vacancies in the College
      are filled.

6.4 Highland Campus Public FET

The Highland Campus Public FET is in a process of reorganising its
curriculum and institutional structure. The College intends to restructure
its three campuses to specialise in different fields, i.e. Grahamstown
campus to deal with business courses, tourism and hospitality; Uitenhage
campus to specialise in engineering and the Graff-Reinette campus to
specialise in agriculture and game farming.

The aim of restructuring the curriculum structure of the College is to
produce students with more entrepreneurial skills to create more work for
other unemployed people. The College has also started offering
learnerships.

6.4.1 Challenges

The College is facing the following challenges:

a) Structure of the learnerships

The structure of the learnerships is a major problem for most Colleges in
the Province. Since the learnerships are under the Department of Labour and
the colleges are under the Department of Education, the colleges are unable
to use their staff because this is seen as double-deeping or some form of
moonlighting.

b) Insufficient budget

About 82% of the budget of the College is spent on salaries. As a result on
only about 18% of the budget is used for other functions. This has often
resulted in the College running over-expenditure.

c) Inflexibility of the college structure

In general, there is inflexibility with the College structure. Because of
the condition of service of colleges, they are unable to offer courses on
Saturdays, despite the fact that there is clearly a need for the College to
offer some of its colleges on Saturdays.

d) No building maintenance of the College

There is no building maintenance taking place in the College. This has been
attributed to the fact that the Education Department is not paying the
Department of Public Works for maintenance of the colleges.

e) Lack of administrative block at Uitenhage campus

The Uitenhage campus urgently needs R2 million to complete its
administration block.

f) Graaff-Reinet campus not conducive for teaching and learning

The Graaff-Reinet campus was originally an army base and is not conducive
for teaching and learning.

6.4.2 Committee recommendations

    • The Department should assist the College to complete its
      administration block since this impact negatively to the
      administration of the College.
    • The Department should ensure that the College is maintained.
    • The current structure of the learnerships needs to be review to enable
      Colleges the flexibility to expand and rich more learners,
      particularly those who can only be able attend classes on weekends.

7. Meetings with District Offices

The delegation met with the following District Offices:

7.1 Mdantsane District Office

At Mdantsane there are a variety of schools. There are those that are
performing very well and managed effectively and those that are not
performing well at all. The major challenge facing the district is the high
rate of poverty. In some schools teachers and learners are robbed of their
properties.

The main of the District is to ensure that all the deserving schools have
access to the Nutrition Programme. However, because of the large number of
learners from poor families and the insufficiency of the budget, the
District targets learners from Grade 0 – 4 and in some schools it the
learners who are considered most needy that are given food.

The District has a poor scholar transport system. There have been several
fatal accidents of learners who are transported in bakkies that are not
road worthy and sometimes overloaded in bakkies. The District is working
with the provincial Department of Education to devise a more proper and
safe transport system.

The filling of posts in some schools, particularly those of acting
principals are temporary teachers has not been done for over two years.
This is mainly because the provincial Department has not issued a circular
for these posts. In some instances the large supply of acting principals
creates uncertainties in the education system in the District because
acting principals and teachers are note sure whether they will be employed
for the posts.

7.2 East London District Office

The District Office briefed the delegation on the following issues

7.2.1 ABET Centres

There are 31 ABET Centres in the East London District Offices. The Centres
are not properly monitored due to lack of transport. Most of the Centres in
the District do not function optimally because of lack of infrastructure
and insufficient financial resources. Teachers in ABET Centres in the
District are not motivated because of the poor conditions of service. In
some instances they get their salaries way after month end. The salaries of
ABET teachers is very poor since they are employed as part-time teachers.

7.2.2 School Nutrition Programme

The School Nutrition Programme in the District is not functioning properly.
There are 206 schools that qualify for the Programme, but 197 of them get
the Programme. In most of these schools the learners are fed for three days
and sometimes the Programme will disappear for a while and then restart
again. There are two schools, which were never allocated suppliers although
the provincial Department was informed of the schools.

There are several reported problems with the suppliers of the food to
schools. Some would supply jam and margarine without bread to a school. In
some instances the suppliers delivered the food in people’s houses early in
the morning before the opening of the schools. This has been raised with
the provincial Department for interventions but there has not been any
solution.

The serious challenge is that the administration of the Programme is
centralised to the provincial Department. This leads to delays in the
payment of service providers.

There is no manager responsible for School Nutrition in the District. The
Programme is done on an ad hoc basis. The Programme has two staff that are
also responsible for other issues besides school nutrition. There are two
unplaced lecturers and one displaced principal working for the Programme.
However,  because of lack of familiarity and working on ad hoc basis, they
do not seem to effectively address the challenges that are facing school
nutrition in the District.

7.3 Bizana District Office

The delegation visited the Bizana District Office, where a District Manager
was short few days before the visit by a disgruntled principal who was not
appointed after acting in a post for almost a year. The delegation also met
wit the staff of the District to brief them about their findings during the
study tour the processes that will be undertaken to ensure that the
Province put in place effective administrative measures and address the
issue of acting principals and temporary teachers.

8. Overall committee recommendations

    • The Department should look at transferring the budget of the School
      Nutrition Programme to schools.
    • Special schools should be prioritised. The Department needs to ensure
      that they have the entire necessary infrastructure.
    • The Department should  ensure  that  teachers  who  are  volunteering,
      particularly those teaching Grade R in the Province, are paid at least
      a stipend salary.
    • A proper employee training and development programme should  accompany
      the new financial control systems in the Department.
    • The Department should work with teacher unions in order to  device  an
      effective Teacher Deployment Plan.
    • Schools with dangerous mud  structures,  for  an  example  Lindokuhle,
      should be prioritised in the next financial year.
    • As a matter  of  urgency,  the  Department  should  distribute  mobile
      classes to schools with dangerous mud structures, and in schools where
      learners are located in people’s houses.
    •  The  Department  should  ensure  that  tenders  for  learner  support
      materials are, at least, finalised by October so that the distribution
      of the materials to  school  can  start  as  early  as  November.  The
      material should be delivered to schools and given to the  learners  at
      least before the start of the school calendar.
    • The Department should establish Norms  for  the  purchase  of  Learner
      Support Materials. The Norms should outline the  exact  date  for  the
      finalisation of orders and the dates for the delivery of the  material
      to schools.
    • The Department  should  finalise  the  appointment  of  staff  in  FET
      Colleges in the Province.
    • The Department should review its funding to special  schools.  Because
      of the nature of their learners, special schools  tend  to  have  more
      needs that are associated with the nature of the learners.
    •  The  Department  should  assist  schools  where  there   is   a   low
      participation of parents in school activities in  devising  mechanisms
      that will ensure that parents take part  in  the  education  of  their
      children.
    • In schools where there is overcrowding, the Department  should  devise
      alternative  measures  like  mobile  classrooms  to  accommodate   the
      learners.
    • The Department should ensure that teachers at the school  are  trained
      to assess and  understand  the  educational  needs  of  learners  with
      special educational needs.
    • The Department should work the Department  of  Social  Development  to
      ensure that  children  with  disabilities  who  are  not  getting  the
      disability grant are assisted and proper follow-up measures should  be
      implemented to check whether the children get the grants.
    • As a follow-up mechanism the Committee recommends that the  Department
      submit  a  written  progress  report  on  the  issues  identified  and
      recommendations made within thirty days  after  the  adoption  of  the
      report.


9. Conclusion


In the five days in the Province, the Committee visited thirteen schools,
three Further Education and Training (FET) Colleges and three district
offices in the three regions of the Province. The Committee also had a
briefing by Honourable Mr. M. Matomela on the first day of the study tour
and a debriefing on the last day of the study tour.

The Committee is of the opinion that, although schools visited may not be
necessary a representative sample of all the schools and colleges in the
Eastern Cape Province, they do, however, provide a framework for the
Committee to better comprehend the state of education in the Province. Most
of the issues that were identified by the schools were also highlighted by
the MEC for Education as key challenges that are facing the Province during
the briefing and debriefing sessions. This reaffirms the findings that were
made by the Committee. It gives the Committee assurance that most of the
challenges will be addressed in order to ensure that schools in the
Province offer better and quality education and have the optimal support of
the administration at district, regional and provincial levels.

Despite the challenges facing the Province, the Committee would like to
express its appreciation to the enthusiasm, commitment and zeal that was
displayed by both the learners and teachers in the schools that were
visited. In most of the schools the delegation was met with jubilation. The
Committee did witness a strong sense of commitment from both the educators
and learners. Some schools have devised creative measures to ensure that
they get education everyday, despite their challenging conditions. The
strong sense of humanity displayed by the educators and the principals
reassured us that the situation could only get better with better resources
and administrative support.

It is apparent that tightening the  belt  at  Head  Office  level  does  not
address the challenges facing schools in the  Province.  It  only  transfers
the challenges to  the  learners  and  teachers  at  school  level.  If  the
Department does not fill vacant posts,  appoint  educators,  principals  and
administrators, and seek better solutions to ensure effective and  efficient
administration at Head Office, it is the learners  and  educators  who  will
suffer.

Report to be considered.


                            MONDAY, 11 APRIL 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

      The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
      relevant committees as mentioned below:

      (1)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:

            Preliminary Annual Report of the Department of Labour for 2004-
         2005 [RP 37-2005].

      (2)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration:

            Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for 2005-
         2008.

      (3)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

      (a)   Strategic Plan of the South African Police Service (SAPS) for
              2005-2010 [RP 36-2005].
      (b)   Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD)
              for 2005-2008 [RP 18-2005].
      (c)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Defence for 2005-6 to 2007-
              8.

      (4)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation for consideration:

            Strategic Plan of Sport and Recreation South Africa for 2005-
         2009.

      (5)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration:

            Strategic Plan of the Department of Foreign Affairs for 2005 to
         2008.

      (6)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services for consideration:

            Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2005 to
         2008.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Agreement on the Financing of Innovative Local Economic
         Development Initiatives by South African Department of Provincial
         and Local Government between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Italy, in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement on the Financing of
         Innovative Local Economic Development Initiatives by South African
         Department of Provincial and Local Government between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Republic of Italy.
      (c)   Government Notice No R.165 published in Government Gazette No
         27320, dated 24 February 2005: Fees payable in terms of the
         Securities Services Act, 2004 (Act No 36 of 2004).
      (d)   Government Notice No 170 published in Government Gazette No
     27332, dated 25 February 2005: Fixing of rate per kilometre in respect
     of motor vehicles for the purposes of section 8(b)(ii) and (iii) in
     terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

                           TUESDAY, 12 APRIL 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces
1.    The Chairperson

      Letter received from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
    Development requesting Parliament's concurrence for the President, in
    terms of section 53(2) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, to extend the
    period of operation of sections 51 and 52 of the said Act for two years
    with effect from 1 May 2005.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Strategic Plan of the National Treasury for 2005-2008 [RP 27-
         2005].
      (b)   Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Service for 2005-
         2008.

2.    The Minister of Public Works

      (a)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2005-2009.
      (b)   Memorandum by the Minister of Public Works setting out
         particulars of the Building Programme for 2005-2006 [RP 24-2005].

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2003-2004
         [RP 183-2004].
      (b)   Proclamation No R.5 published in Government Gazette No 27221,
         dated 31 January 2005: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals, in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on  Economic  and  Foreign  Affairs  on
    Budget Vote 32: Trade and Industry, dated 6 April 2005:

       The  Select  Committee  on  Economic  and  Foreign  Affairs,   having
        considered the Medium – Term Strategic Plan 2005 – 2008 and  Budget
        Vote 32: Trade and Industry, reports  that  it  has  concluded  its
        deliberations thereon and accepts Budget Vote 32.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
    on the Draft Notice for Declaration of Amnesty in terms of the Firearms
    Control Act 2000, dated 11 April 2005:

      The Select Committee on Security and  Constitutional  Affairs,  having
        considered the request for approval  by  Parliament  of  the  Draft
        Notice for Declaration of Amnesty in terms of the Firearms  Control
        Act 2000, referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms  of
        section 139(2)(a) of the Act, approve the said Draft Notice.
      Request to be considered.


3.    Report of the Select  Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs
    during  Participation  in  the  World  Conservation  Congress  held  in
    Bangkok, Thailand, 17 – 25 November 2004 under the  Theme  “People  and
    Nature – Only One World”

1.    BACKGROUND

Members of the Select  Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs  was
invited by the President, Yolanda Kakabadse and Director General,  Mr  Achim
Steiner of the World  Conservation  Union  to  attend  the  3rd  IUCN  World
Conservation Congress to be hosted by the Kingdom  of  Thailand  in  Bangkok
from the 17th to the 25th November 2004. In response to  the  invitation,  a
delegation  of  five  members,  three  from  the  Portfolio   Committee   on
Environmental Affairs and Tourism and, two  from  the  Select  Committee  on
Land  and  Environmental  Affairs  were  granted   permission   attend   the
proceedings of the Congress.

Having participated in the lobbying of Hon Valli Moosa  for  the  Presidency
of the International World Conservation Union and in the six commissions  of
the  World  Conservation  Congress  dealing   with   ecosystem   management,
education and communication,  environmental,  economic  and  social  policy,
environmental law, species survival and protected areas, the  delegation  of
the  portfolio  committee  and  select  committee  report  to  the  National
Assembly and National Council of Provinces as follows:

1.1   CONGRESS OBJECTIVES

   1. Explore the relationships between people, development and conservation
      through its four themes: Ecosystem management, Bridging sustainability
      and productivity; health, Poverty and Conservation - Responding to the
      challenge  of  human  well-being;  Biodiversity   Loss   and   Species
      Extinction - Managing risk in a changing world; and Markets,  Business
      and the Environment - Strengthening corporate  social  responsibility,
      law and policy
   2. Approve the 2005/2008 IUCN Programme and Financial Plan
   3. Elect the President of the world conservation union and other officers
   4. Table 2003/2004 commissions reports on ecosystem management, education
      and  communication,  environmental,  economic   and   social   policy,
      environmental law, species survival and world commission on  protected
      areas
   5. Consider motions and adopt resolutions at plenary level.
1.2   DELEGATION OF THE COMMITTEES

A joint delegation of the  Select  Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental
Affairs and the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism
constituted of the Ms E Thabethe, (ANC-NA)  Ms  M  Ntuli  (ANC-NA),  Mr  G
Morgan (DA-NA), Rev  P  Moatshe  (ANC-NCOP)  Mr  F  Adams  (NNP-NCOP)  and
Committee Secretary, Mr M Manele.


2.    ELECTION OF MR VALLI MOOSA AS PRESIDENT OF WORLD CONSERVATION UNION

As one of the objectives of the ICUN Congress was  to  elect  the  President
and other office  bearers,  the  delegation  in  collaboration  with  senior
officials from the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism played  a
very active lobbying role which culminated to the  nomination  and  election
of Mr Valli Moosa as the President of the World Conservation Union.

3.    OVERVIEW OF CONGRESS PROCEEDINGS

The world conservation congress of which the  delegation  of  the  portfolio
committee on environmental affairs and tourism and the select  committee  on
land and environmental affairs attended was  officially  opened  on  the  17
November and closed  on  the  25  November  2004.  The  proceedings  of  the
congress  had  parallel  commissions  meetings  on   ecosystem   management,
education and communication,  environmental,  economic  and  social  policy,
environmental law, species survival and  protected  areas,  and  tabling  of
reports of the director-general on the work of  union  since  the  2nd  IUCN
World conservation congress, membership  development  since  2001  to  march
2004, draft report by director general on follow-up to the  resolutions  and
recommendations of the 2nd  session  of  the  world  conservation  congress,
proposed amendments to the rules of  procedure  of  the  world  conservation
congress  regarding  the  credentials  committee  and   electronic   voting,
election  of  the  IUCN  President,  Treasurer,  and  Regional   Councilors,
election of chair of the chair of commissions, evolution  of  the  financial
situation over the period of 1999-2003, financial plan for the period  2005-
2008. Discussion and adoption of draft resolutions, adoption of  programmme,
commission mandates and financial plan, announcement  of  election  results,
massage from the President elect, Mohammed Valli Moosa and  closure  of  the
World Congress by the outgoing President, Yolanda Kakabadse.

4.    OVERVIEW OF CONGRESS RESOLUTIONS

The  world  conservation  congress  passed  118  resolutions   relating   to
governance, policy, programme, website and  species.  Under  governance  the
congress  passed  resolution  relating  to  relate  to   precedence   clause
establishing precedence in regard to  IUCN  general  policy,  improving  the
transparency  of  IUCN  Council,  broadening  the  criteria  for  membership
admission in the  NGO  category,  the  involvement  of  local  and  regional
government authorities within IUCN, including  local  IUCN  members  in  the
Union delegation at multilateral agreement meeting,  fulfilling  the  rights
to optional use of the official  languages  in  the  internal  and  external
communication documents of IUCN and its members  and  implementation  of  an
IUCN programme for the Insular Caribbean.

4.1.  POLICY RELATED RESOLUTION

Under  the  policy,  the  congress  passed  resolutions  relating   to   the
Mediterranean mountain convention, ratification and  implementation  of  the
revised African convention, protecting the  earth’s  water  for  public  and
ecological benefit, a moratorium  on  the  further  release  of  genetically
modified organism, policy on control of animal population  for  the  purpose
of biodiversity conservation, HIV/AIDS pandemic and  conservation  and,  the
Harold Jefferson Coolidge medal, recognizing earth charter,  human  trapping
standards,  education  for  sustainable   development,   the   precautionary
principles in environmental  governance  and,  coordination  of  sustainable
development programme for energy.

4.2.  PROGRAMME RELATED RECOMMENDATIONS

Under programme, some of the resolution passed relate to  the  provision  of
an office for IUCN’s observer  mission  to  the  united  nations,  audit  of
international conventions, treaties and agreements on environment,  drafting
a charter of ethics for biodiversity  conservation,  international  covenant
on  environment  and  development,  education  and  communication  in   IUCN
programme, policy on capacity building  and  technology  transfer,  capacity
building for young professionals.

4.3.  SPECIES RELATED RESOLUTIONS

Under species the resolution passed relate  to  conservation  needs  of  the
tiger, conservation of saiga antelope, conservation of dugon, protection  of
the great Indian bustard, shark finning, conservation of  the  bandula  barb
and continued prohibition of shahtoosh production and trade.

5.    CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS


Having  participated  in  the  six  commissions  IUCN   during   the   World
Conservation  Congress,  the  delegation  of  the  Portfolio  Committee   on
Environmental Affairs and Tourism and, the  Select  Committee  on  Land  and
Tourism concludes and recommends that:

5.1.  The South African Government’s  approach  has  shifted  from  that  of
    traditional conservation to a more holistic approach where conservation
    is linked with the development agenda of the  country  including  local
    communities, poverty alleviation, capacity building,  natural  resource
    management.

5.2.  The advancement that can be seen in south  African  conservation  over
    the last ten years have largely been due to the vision and work  of  Mr
    Valli Moosa, the former Minister of Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism
    who  introduced  new  initiatives  and  changed  the   way   in   which
    conservation was being addressed.

In this regard, it is recommended that:

5.3.  The Portfolio Committee and the Select Committee must during the  2005
    Parliamentary  Committee   period   call   both   the   Department   of
    Environmental Affairs and Tourism and IUCN  to  brief  members  of  the
    purpose and functions of commissions such as with ecosystem management,
    education and communication, environmental, economic and social policy,
    environmental law, species survival and protected areas.

5.4.  Both the Department of Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  and  ICUN
    Regional office must appear before  the  Portfolio  Committee  and  the
    Select Committee to brief members on the 2005 –2008 IUCN Programme.

5.5.  Based on  the  recommendations  made  during  the  world  Conservation
    Congress in November 2004, the Department of Environmental Affairs  and
    Tourism must come and brief both the  Portfolio  Committee  and  Select
    Committee  on  strategies  and  plans  put  in  place  to  ensure   the
    implementation of the World Conservation Congress Resolutions.


Report to be considered.

-----------------------
[1] The sections that follow were  sourced  from  an  article  by,  Brink  D
(2003), Overview of Aquaculture in South Africa:  Division  of  Aquaculture,
University of Stellenbosch.

[2] The information highlighted in the sections below  was  largely  sourced
from the written  and  oral  input  of  the  officials  from  Department  of
Agriculture, Conservation and Environment – North West, 2004.
[3] This was documented in a recent report  by  Rhodes  University  for  the
Water Research Commission, entitled, Contributions of Aquaculture  to  Rural
Livelihoods in South Africa: A Baseline Survey, (Rouhani and Britz, 2004).
[4] On 8 September 2004, the DACE, represented by Chief  Director  Mogomotsi
Kgantsi and other senior officials of the  Department,  met  with  Mr  Urban
Rouhani of Rhodes  University  (representing  the  national  initiative)  to
discuss the  Department’s  willingness  to  collaborate  with  the  national
programme so as to develop aquaculture within the rural sector of the  North
West Province.
[5] The  overview  provided  below  was  largely  sourced  from  an  article
entitled The National  Water  and  Sanitation  Programme  in  South  Africa:
Turning the Right to Water into  Reality  (August  2002),  written  by  Mike
Muller for the Water and Sanitation Programme, an international  partnership
to help the  poor  gain  sustained  access  to  improved  water  supply  and
sanitation    services.    The    article    can    be    obtained     from:
http://www.wsp.org/publications/af-bg-sa.pdf
[6] In South Africa, basic water supply is defined as 25 litres  per  person
per day within 200 metres of the home,  and  of  acceptable  quality.  Basic
sanitation is defined as a ventilated improved pit latrine or equivalent.
[7][pic]Oà  -    0     †     Ê
‹h‹-ñ5?\?mH sH
h‹-ñ^J The five Water Boards comprise Rand water, Botshelo Water,  Magalies,
Sedibeng and Midvaal water company.


