---
title: 'National Assembly - 30 August 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-08-30
---

TUESDAY, 30 AUGUST 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                 NEW MEMBER


                               (Announcement)

The Deputy Speaker announced that the vacancy caused by the resignation
from the NA of Mr C B Herandien had been filled by the nomination, with
effect from 26 August 2005, of Mr J Schippers.


                                    OATH


Mr J Schippers, accompanied by Ms C B Johnson, made and subscribed the oath
and took his seat.


                        FLOOR-CROSSING WINDOW PERIOD


                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with today’s business, I
wish to make the following announcement:

The window period for members to change party membership or parties to
change their status in terms of the Constitution commences on 1 September
and ends at midnight on 15 September 2005.

Members or parties who wish to use this window period to change their
status should only do so within the window period, and may do so only once.


A member or members may only change membership of a party without losing
their seats in the NA if he, she or they constitute at least 10% of the
total number of seats held by the party that nominated them to the NA.

Any member or party wishing to make any change during this period should
complete a special form, which has been prepared for this purpose. These
forms are the only valid forms and will be available from the offices of
the Secretary to the NA.

Members should note that for purposes of informing the Speaker of any
intended changes, they should personally submit the completed form to
either Mr Hahndiek in room EG33, New Wing or Mr Xaso in room EG35, New
Wing, whom the Speaker has authorised as the only officials to receive such
forms. The form includes covering notes containing details, which members
and parties will need to comply with in order for the change to be valid. I
thank you.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the DA:


       That the House debates the ongoing problems relating to the
       implementation of the Firearms Control Act.


       I thank you.

Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move
on the next sitting day:

   That the House –

        1) notes the dramatic escalation of South African fuel prices, with
           negative implications for inflation and detrimental consequences
           for household incomes, especially poor households;


        2) notes also that this escalation is mainly due to soaring
           international oil prices with crude now challenging the US$70
           per barrel mark, and that further dramatic increases are likely
           before the year’s end;


        3) recalls that during the presidential budget debate in July 2004
           in this House, the UDM made a specific proposal in this regard,
           namely that the government should seriously and urgently
           investigate the viability of entering into one or more crude oil
           swap arrangements with friendly supplier countries, and that
           such arrangements serve to fix the price of oil to both
           suppliers and purchasers of oil for an agreed period - the UDM
           believes there are a number of crude oil-producing countries
           that we have a friendly diplomatic relationship with, so
           negotiating a favourable swap arrangement should be possible;

        4) further recalls that the hon President’s reply to this
           suggestion intimated that certain unspecified actions were then
           being taken, and that favourable developments regarding the
           stabilisation of the fuel price were imminent;

        5) acknowledges that a year has elapsed during which no action has
           been taken, nor has the UDM suggestion been pursued or any other
           significant alternative implemented, resulting in continuously
           rising domestic fuel prices, and causing massive economic damage
           and social hardship; and

        6) debates South Africa’s fuel procurement policy at the earliest
           opportunity.

I thank you.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, just for
the record, I think there is an agreement between Whips as to how we treat
notices of motion and members’ statements. I think what the member has done
now is that he has clearly read a statement and has not given a notice of
motion. We would just like to appeal to all members to desist from doing
that.

                  BUS ACCIDENT IN KLOOFNEK ROAD, CAPE TOWN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr T D LEE: Adjunkspeaker, ek stel hiermee sonder kennisgewing voor:


   Dat die Huis —
       1) sy skok en verbystering uitspreek oor die tragiese busongeluk in
          Kloofnekweg verlede Donderdag, 25 Augustus 2005, waarin vier
          mense, onder wie drie kinders, gesterf het; en

    (2) sy diepste leedwese en simpatie betuig met die families wat
         geliefdes verloor het en ook die leerders, onderwysers en ouers van
         Dennegeur Primêre Skool, wat direk met die tragedie verbind is,
         sterkte toewens.
Ek dank u


    Goedgekeur.(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)
[Mr T D LEE: I move without notice:

   That the House –

     (1)    expresses its shock and bewilderment at the tragic bus accident
         in Kloofnek Road last Thursday, 25 August 2005, in which four
         people, including three children, died; and


     (2)    conveys its deepest condolences and sympathy to the families who
         lost loved ones and also wishes the learners, teachers and parents
         of Dennegeur Primary School who are directly connected to the
         tragedy everything of the best.

Agreed to.]
    MEMBER’S STATEMENTS



               TRIBUTE TO WOMEN OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE WORLD


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M M MADUMISE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, this is a tribute to the women of
South Africa and the world. We salute the initiative taken by presiding
officers to convene a Women’s Parliament, which commences today. For next
two days, the focus of South Africans will be on the achievements of and
challenges facing women. This auspicious gathering is a fitting tribute to
bring to a close Women’s Month.

Since the historic march by thousands of South African women against
Strydom’s government in 1956, impressive achievements have been recorded by
women of South Africa and the world. Amongst the achievements are the
following: ascendancy of women as leaders in the legislatures, as
Ministers, and as leaders in business and civil society.

We wish to highlight some of the leading role models such as Frene Ginwala,
the first Speaker of the democratic Parliament of South Africa; Getrude
Mongella, the first President of the Pan-African Parliament; Minister
Sigcau, who was honoured by African women of an accountancy association;
Minister Fraser-Moleketi for transformation of the Public Service; and
Minister N Dlamini-Zuma for her sterling efforts in advancing the course of
developing countries in the transformation of the UN. Similarly, we salute
Deputy President Mlambo-Ngcuka for her inspirational leadership.

The struggle for women’s emancipation confronts men and women alike. In
this regard, we salute President Thabo Mbeki for his tireless efforts in
championing women’s emancipation in South Africa and the African Union. I
thank you. [Applause.]





                       RELENTLESS RISE IN FUEL PRICES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv H C SCHMIDT (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, it is outrageous that the
government has sat idly by and watched the relentless rise in fuel prices
without taking a single concrete step to ease the burden on consumers.
About 30% of the price of a litre of petrol consists of taxes imposed by
our government.

The high price of fuel will cause the inflation rate to rise, resulting in
the increase in prices of basic commodities such as bread and milk. Sasol
currently produces between 40% and 47% of South Africa’s liquid fuel
requirements at the estimated cost of approximately US$25 per barrel, yet
ordinary South Africans do not benefit from this.

We call on the government to take the following three steps to address the
issue. Firstly, it must reduce the petrol price by revising a tax formula
on liquid fuels. When the price of Brent crude is above a certain amount,
for example US$50 per barrel, Sasol should have to pay a super tax on its
profits to finance a reduction in the direct fuel tax on consumers.

Secondly, the government must subsidise biofuels production such as ethanol
from mealies. Farmers who wish to produce biofuels should get a 150% tax
write-off on equipment purchased. Thirdly, government should subsidise
people who purchase next generation fuel-efficient cars. I thank you.

              EXCLUSIVE BILATERAL TALKS BETWEEN ZANU-PF AND MDC


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Deputy Speaker, at the Rhodesian HMS Tiger talks
presided over by President Kaunda and Lord Soames, and, later, at the
Lancaster House negotiations presided over by Prime Minister Thatcher and
Lord Carrington, there were more than two negotiators around the table. It
is a misplaced diplomatic intervention for the international community,
including concerned South African civil societies and institutions, to
insist on exclusive bilateral talks between Zanu-PF and the MDC as a
prerequisite to peace, political stability and good governance in Zimbabwe.

It is not in the tradition of former liberation movement governments in
Africa and elsewhere to willingly want to deliberate on the future of their
country with their indigenous counterparts on an equal footing, except in
instances where they have to conference with their former oppressors or
colonial masters, hence President Mugabe’s indirect and ingenious
expression conveying his openness to discuss the problems of Zimbabwe with
the British Prime Minister and government.

The Zanu-PF-MDC talks are not an immediate viable political option and for
this reason the South African government should insist on an urgent inter-
Zimbabwean dialogue, multilateralism, and a generalised principle of
conduct that would attract the support of other African states and
international institutions to this process.

As long as a strong ruling faction of the people of Zimbabwe continues to
associate the MDC and its leadership with the white colonial interests, the
inclusion of other political, social and economic role-players inside and
outside Zimbabwe will more than ever before become a cardinal imperative. I
thank you. [Applause.]


       PRINCIPLES THAT CONSTITUTE OUR COUNTRY’S DEMOCRATIC FOUNDATION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N P KHUNOU (ANC): Deputy Speaker, amongst the fundamental principles of
democracy is the freedom to choose which organisation to belong to, to be
able to express one’s opinion without fear and with respect for the rule of
law. These are amongst the principles that constitute our country’s
democratic foundation.

In the past few months, we observed certain political parties represented
in this House seeking to dictate to their members what to think or which
party or organisation to belong to. In an attempt to avoid the inevitable,
some parties forced their members to take an oath saying that they will not
defect to other parties.

Other members are forced to wear a badge, which reads as follows: “I am not
a crosstitute”. Others have gentlemen’s agreements that “you will not take
from me and I will not take from you”. There are those who asked their
members to resign and to be reinstated after the window period. [Laughter.]
These parties’ behaviour is a shame on our democracy and to those patriots
who laid down their lives for our freedom and democracy.

The ANC calls upon all South Africans to use this window period to cross to
parties of their choice. This is their constitutionally guaranteed right. I
thank you. [Applause.]




                  DISCIPLINARY MISCONDUCT AMONGST TEACHERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Madam Deputy Speaker, the UDM is shocked by the
reported number of disciplinary cases that have been finalised against
South African teachers in the past 16 months or so.

A staggering 620 charges of misconduct were successfully brought against
several hundred teachers. Even more disturbing is that many more cases are
close to finalisation. This shocking misconduct included 62 cases of
assault with a further 34 cases of assault against learners under
investigation, as well as 109 cases of fraud and financial misconduct. But,
by far, the most disturbing aspect of these revelations is that 49 teachers
were found guilty of rape, sexual relationships with pupils and sexual
harassment. Such revelations confirm the national statistics for these
types of crimes.

However, it is particularly disturbing that whilst we, as a society,
struggle to eradicate these crimes, they are being perpetuated through our
education system.

We cannot realistically fight these crimes today when they are ingrained in
our children, and thus already perpetuated into the following generation.
Teachers must understand that they are in the vanguard of our efforts to
build a better society. This places on them the highest of responsibilities
and moral obligations.

We call on the Department of Education and the teachers’ unions to pursue
stricter disciplinary measures. Not only should we have harsher penalties,
but investigations of misconduct must also occur much more speedily. In the
end there is no greater deterrent than justice being seen to be done, and
being done swiftly. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.


                   INEQUALITIES IN THE DEVELOPMENTAL STATE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The ID
wholeheartedly supports the concept of a developmental state. It is clear
that the challenges facing our society requires a strong state acting in
unison with other sectors of our society to address poverty and inequality.

The term developmental state has, however, been bandied about without ever
having been adequately defined and we want a national debate to take place
in order to reach consensus on this issue, and for all actors to be aware
of the responsibilities and actions in this regard.

The ID is also extremely concerned at the persistently high levels of
inequality found in South Africa. Whilst some progress has been made in
reducing racial inequality, income inequality in our country has not been
addressed, and by some accounts has even become worse over the last 11
years.

The ID would urge the government to put in place policies and programmes
that are able to seriously combat the situation and provide some form of
relief to the millions of South Africans who live in abject poverty without
any assistance from the state.

Greater equality is not only an admirable principle to be strived for,
though, but as numerous economic studies have currently indicated, it can
also be growth enhancing.

The experience of other developing countries has shown that the more equal
the society the more economic growth it experiences. In fact, one study has
shown that if we had to reduce our inequality rate by 10% it could lead to
an increase in GDP by 1,3%.

The ID would therefore urge government to put more emphasis on helping the
poorest of the poor communities in South Africa through increased social
assistance and reducing the wide educational divide. The ID would also
lobby for a comprehensive rural development strategy that can effectively
address the huge levels of poverty found in rural areas.

Currently, about 65% of the poor and 78% of those chronically poor live in
rural areas. Migration from rural areas is caused by food and health
insecurities, a lack of access to sanitation and other basic facilities.

As a party that is committed to bridging the divides in South Africa we
will continue to lobby for measures that can lead to a more equal and
prosperous South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]


                         QUESTIONS REGARDING PETROSA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr C P MULDER (VF Plus): Agb Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, op 24 Augustus 2005
het die bestuur van PetroSA en die Sentrale Energiefonds voor Skoor en die
minerale- en energiekomitee verskyn.

Normaalweg is daar ‘n bestaande reëling dat alle lede van die NV sodanige
vergaderings kan bywoon, en ook kan vrae stel aan die betrokkenes. By dié
vergadering is dit nie toegelaat nie, en is vrae beperk tot slegs lede van
Skoor. Wesentlike vrae is nie gevra nie, en daarom sal ek vandag drie van
hulle hier in dié Raad vra. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER (FF Plus): Hon Madam Speaker, on 24 August 2005 the
management of PetroSA and the Central Energy Fund appeared before Scopa and
the committee on minerals and energy.

Normally there is an existing arrangement that all members of the NA can
attend such meetings, and also put questions to the persons concerned. At
this meeting it was not allowed, and questions were limited only to the
members of Scopa. Essential questions were not asked, and for that reason I
will ask three of them here in this House today.]

Despite the drastic underperformance of PetroSA in 2003-04 in which profits
plunged from R3,3 billion to a mere R240 million, the company paid R3,8
million in bonuses and performance payments to its executive directors and
managers. How were these payments justified?
Secondly, was the payment of R15 million to Imvume Management Limited in
December 2003 intended as an advanced payment, or a loan advance?

Thirdly, why was due diligence not conducted before an unsecured payment of
R15 million was made to Imvume Management Limited, of which R11 million
ended up in the ANC’s election fund? [Interjections.] What explanation was
given to the Auditor-General in this regard? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr P A GERBER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the member is misleading the House,
because he went to the meeting and after 10 minutes he left, so he doesn’t
know what happened at the meeting. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I address you on that point of
order?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Will you please continue?

Dr C P MULDER: But could someone please workshop that member with regard to
his ignorance? [Laughter.]

Die feit van die saak is, hier het ons nou pas ‘n voorbeeld daarvan gesien
oor hoe die ANC probeer om hierdie saak te laat weggaan. Hierdie saak sal
nie weggaan nie; daardie lid kan probeer soveel as hy wil, die feit van die
saak is, ander lede is nie toestemming gegee of die geleentheid gegun om
daar vrae te vra nie.

So, ek sê dat dié saak verder gevoer sal word. Ek wil vra dat die verslag
van die Openbare Beskermer oor hierdie onderwerp so gou in die Huis as
moontlik bespreek sal word. En in tussentyd, kan iemand asseblief daardie
lid ``workshop’’ sodat hy kan bykom? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The fact of the matter is, that here we have just now witnessed an example
of how the ANC is trying to make this case go away. This case will not go
away; that member can try as hard as he wants to, the fact of the matter is
that other members were not given permission or the opportunity to put
questions there.

Thus, I am saying that this case will be taken further. I want to request
that the report of the Public Protector, on this topic, be discussed in
this House as soon as possible. And in the meantime, can somebody please
workshop that member in order for him to catch up?]


                     MEETING OF TAX FORUM IN ADDIS ABABA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K A MOLOTO (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC applauds the meeting of tax
officials that took place in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. The purpose of the
meeting was to fine-tune, harmonise and indigenise the strategy of tax
collection on the continent.

There were a hundred participants from 12 countries on the continent. The
forum recognises the fact that most of our tax collection practices
originated in Europe, and in most cases, if not all, are not adapted to
African, social, cultural and economic norms of our societies.

Our improved ability to collect taxes will go a long way in making the
lives of our people better. It will eliminate the dependency syndrome
created by donor funding.

The tax forum must developed strategies that will make tax systems fair,
and make our citizens discharge their tax obligation on a voluntary
compliance basis. I thank you. [Applause.]


                      BANKING COSTS AND COST STRUCTURES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Adjunkspeaker, Suid-Afrika se bankkoste is van die
hoogste ter wêreld. Banke in Suid-Afrika is besig om die verbruiker ‘n
ondiens te bewys met die geweldige hoë bankkoste.

Die professionele dienstefirma Deloitte het so pas navorsing gepubliseer
wat toon dat Suid-Afrika se bankkoste van die hoogste ter wêreld is. Dit is
veral die vier groot banke wat monopolisties die toneel oorheers. Van die
banke erken reeds dat bankkoste te hoog is, en dat dit tyd is vir ‘n
omvattende ondersoek na tariewe wat die kostestruktuur bepaal.

Die DA betreur dat die regering reeds so lank gewag het om die algemene
publiek te beskerm teen monopolistiese praktyke. Die DA verwelkom dit egter
dat die regering ‘n paar dae gelede uiteindelik ‘n taakspan aangestel het
om die bankbedryf te ondersoek vir aanbevelings om verdere ondersoek deur
die Mededingingskommissie en die Mededingingstribunaal.

Die DA doen nou ‘n dringende beroep op die regering om die ondersoek na die
kostestruktuur van banke ernstig deur te voer sodat die uitbuiting van die
publiek kan end kry. Die DA sien uit na die bevinding van dié taakspan.
Dankie, Adjunkspeaker. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Hon Deputy Speaker, South Africa’s bank charges are amongst the highest in
the world. Banks in South Africa are doing the consumer a disservice with
the tremendously high bank charges.

The professional auditors’ firm Deloitte recently published research
findings that show that South Africa’s bank charges are amongst the highest
in the world. It is particularly the four large banks that monopolistically
dominate the scene. Some of the banks already admit that bank charges are
too high, and that the time has come for a comprehensive investigation into
tariffs that determine the structuring of charges.

The DA laments the fact that the government has waited so long to protect
the general public against these monopolistic practices. The DA, however,
welcomes the government’s eventual appointment of a task team a few days
ago to investigate the banking industry for recommendations for further
investigation by the Competition Commission and the Competition Tribunal.

The DA urgently calls on the government to seriously follow through with
the investigation of the structuring of charges by the banks in order to
put an end to the exploitation of the public. The DA looks forward to the
findings of this task team. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.]


                   DISMAL STATE OF BAY VIEW POLICE STATION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, I am making this
statement on behalf of the MF who is extremely disturbed and concerned at
the state of the SAPS police station in the Bay View area in Chatsworth,
KwaZulu-Natal.

It is an eyesore to see how the SAPS personnel have to function in a
structure that quite honestly resembles an informal settlement. The
building is ill-equipped with no proper facilities, and a shortage of
staff, resources and vehicles are among the problems that hinder the SAPS
in Bay View to fulfil their duties adequately and attend to the emergencies
of the community.

Sadly, many appeals have been made to attend to this issue, but to no
avail. Today I stand here appealing to both our national and provincial
Ministers of Safety and Security to visit the Bay View SAPS and see the
horrible conditions under which they are being forced to work, and by which
the Bay View community is being compromised.

They need a proper, solid building facility, among other resources, and we
seek this to be attended to as soon as possible.

Madam Deputy Speaker, on my visit I saw a picture of our hon national
Minister of Safety and Security. I feel it is too handsome and smart to be
placed in such an environment. Thank you. [Laughter.]


                TEAM SHOSHOLOZA’S WIN IN AMERICA’S CUP EVENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L R R REID (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, South Africa’s Team Shosholoza
has won their first race in an America’s Cup event. The team is making a
maiden bid for the world’s oldest and most prestigious sporting trophy, and
made history by becoming the first African entry to win a race in an
America’s Cup qualifying event.

The Africans who are racing in the week-long match event sailed brilliantly
last Sunday to defeat Sweden’s victory challenge, a veteran America’s Cup
challenger, in home waters.

It was Team Shosholoza’a first win of the 2005 season in their new yacht,
Shosholoza RSA83, which was designed and built in South Africa. The
surprise victory came as a result of incredible teamwork and racing
manoeuvres by the team.

The Swedish event counts points towards the Louis Vuitton Cup in 2007,
which decides who will compete against Cup defenders Switzerland in the
ultimate America’s Cup match in 2007.

The ANC congratulates Captain Salvatore and his team coming from, amongst
others, townships in the Western Cape and Gauteng, on their sterling
performance. This clearly illustrates the ANC’s resolve to provide equal
opportunities and equity to all South Africans. I thank you. [Applause.]


                           COMMISSIONS OF ENQUIRY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, President Mbeki’s suggestion of
yet another commission of enquiry, the third arising from the prosecution
of ex-Deputy President Jacob Zuma, is a politically desperate move and a
measure of the crisis for the ANC arising from the fact that one of its
most powerful and popular figures is now, himself, facing corruption
charges. The other two commissions were the Hefer and Khampepe commissions
that were appointed at huge cost to the taxpayer.

But while the President is quick to call for a commission of enquiry into
Cosatu’s conspiracy theories, albeit internal, he appears loath to launch a
similar enquiry into the ANC’s role in the Oilgate scandal.
[Interjections.]

South African taxpayers are not too fussed about whether or not President
Mbeki is driving a campaign against Zuma, but they want to know how their
money found its way into ANC coffers via a front company. [Interjections.]
And there are still outstanding questions on the arms deal, which we
believe should be investigated by a judicial commission of enquiry.

Will this latest commission of enquiry hold any benefit for South Africa?
If it renders the possibility of a Zuma presidency less likely, then
perhaps it will be worthwhile. The Zuma camp has shown a cynical disrespect
for the rule of law and our legal institutions. If Zuma should ever become
President, it would mean the end of constitutionalism, good governance and
the rule of law. Thank you. [Applause.]


                         THE CENSORING OF SABC NEWS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the SABC, as a national public
service broadcaster, is supposed to be committed to fulfilling its mandate
to bring South Africa world-class entertainment, education and information.

It is therefore very unfortunate that the politically appointed officers of
the SABC has now decided to censor the SABC news, and only show those items
that suits the government and portrays it in a favourable light.

One of the values of the SABC as listed in its vision and role is
integrity. The SABC has, however, certainly not been showing any great deal
of integrity in the way they have dealt with the recent incident of KwaZulu-
Natal involving the hon Deputy President, which was not her fault.

As the national broadcaster the SABC has an obligation to be honest with
the public and provide bias-free news. We therefore urge them to act in
accordance with their values in fulfilling their mandate, and to stop being
a government propagandist. Thank you.


               SPECIALISED TRAINING TO AUGMENT LAW ENFORCEMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B NTULI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the realisation of the objective
of a better life for all our people includes the safety and security of our
citizens in the areas where they work, live and study.

The ANC applauds the initiative taken by the MEC for safety and security,
Comrade Leonard Ramatlakane, of the Western Cape to set aside R1 million
for specialised training. The training will be provided to 60 people
recruited from a range of law-enforcement agencies, such as the SA Police
Service, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, the intelligence community
and the SA Revenue Service.

The focus of the training will be on the importance and strengthening of
integrated investigations across the various arms of the law. The ANC calls
on our people to continue their good work of assisting the police in
fighting crime. I thank you. [Applause.]


                             MINISTERS’RESPONSES



  ALLEGED SABC BIAS; POVERTY; CONCERN ABOUT THE PETROL PRICE AND BIOFUELS;
          AND MATTERS CONCERNING THE HEFER AND KHAMPEPE COMMISSIONS


                            (Minister’s Response)

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOLIMO NEZOMHLABA: Sekela Somlomo, ngiyalibonga leli thuba
lokuthi sikwazi ukuphendula izincomo nemibuzo esinokukwazi ukuyiphendula
ebuzwe amalungu.

Ngingathanda mhlawumbe ukuthi ngithi impela siyavumelana nalokhu okushiwo
umhlonishwa uNdlovu weqembu le-IFP ukuthi ukukhishwa kwezindaba nezinhlelo
ngabezindaba ezazisa umphakathi kufanele kwenziwe ngendlela okuyiyo.

Ngingasho nje ukuthi uma mhlawumbe ulibonile iphephandaba lanamhlanje,
umphathi we-SABC, uMnu Dali Mpofu, useqale uphenyo ukuthi kuzwakale kahle
ukuthi ngabe kwenzekani ngalesi simo esenzeka e-Utrecht, KwaZulu-Natali,
njengoba usushilo. Sethembe-ke ukuthi lokho kukhombisa ukungachemi kwalabo
abaphetheyo kwa-SABC ngokuthi babheke umnyombo wezikhalazo ezenziwe
ngabantu baseNingizimu Afrika ngendlela ababona ngayo ukuhamba kwezinto.
Sethemba-ke lokho ukuthi kuyosiza ukucacisa kabanzi udaba lolu osulubekile.

Ngiphinde ngibonge elungeni le-ID eliphakamise kakhulu ukubaluleka kokuthi
masibhekane nesimo sendlala nobuphofu, ngokuthi izinhlelo esizibekayo
zizame ukufukula kumbe zithuthukise labo bakithi abasahluphekayo. Ngibonge-
ke mhlawumbe nesincomo asenzile sokuthi kuzofanele kesixoxisane sifakane
imilomo njengezakhamuzi zaseNingizimu Afrika ukuthi ngabe sikubona
ukuthuthuka kwalo hulumeni kufanele kume kanjani, njengoba esho nje ukuthi
mhlawumbe kungaba yinkinga kwabanye ukuthi uma sikhuluma ngohulumeni
osathuthukayo okuthiwa phecelezi ngesilungu “developmental state” ngabe
sisho ukuthini. Ngiyethemba-ke ukuthi kuyoba nelungelo lokuthi amalungu
ahloniphekile okuyiwona akha izingxoxo okufanele zibe khona lapha
ePhalamende ayolubeka mhlawumbe usuku lokuthi kuxoxiswane ngalokhu.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, I thank you
for this opportunity which allows us to interrogate and give answers to
questions asked by members.

I fully agree with what the hon Ndlovu of the IFP says, namely that the
broadcasting of news and other informative programmes by the media should
be done responsibly.

If you have had sight of today’s newspaper, you would have read that the
CEO of SABC, Mr Dali Mpofu, has set up an investigation around the events
that took place in Utrecht, in KwaZulu-Natal, as you mentioned. We hope
that that move of investigating the cause of complaints and suggestions
from the people of South Africa is an indication of objectivity on the part
of SABC management. We hope that such a move will broadly clarify the issue
you have raised.

I also want to thank the member of the ID who highlighted the imperative of
fighting poverty by making the programmes that we put in place seek to
empower and develop the poor. I also appreciate the recommendation she made
to the effect that we should hold discussions and share ideas as South
Africans and express views on how this government should shape development.
As she indicated, there may be confusion as to what we mean when we speak
of a government that is in a process of development, the so-called a
developmental state. I hope that those hon members who compile order papers
for Parliament will schedule a date on which this matter will be
discussed.]

I would also want to comment on the point, though maybe not in detail,
raised by the hon member from the DA with regards to the petrol price. One
does appreciate the concern that has been raised regarding the escalation
in the price of oil in the world. Obviously, as we know, there are very few
countries that produce and sell oil worldwide, which sometimes means that,
in terms of market forces, none of us can be the determinants of the
prices.

As much as we all appreciate the impact, I’m sure you’ll realise that the
storm yesterday and the day before in the United States has also had an
impact on how petrol prices are going in the world and are likely to go.
Unfortunately, in any market condition, some of these fluctuations do
happen. I think the issue, if I listened to you very well, is how we find a
sustainable way in which we as a country mitigate such fluctuations as they
happen.

Obviously, the issue of looking at liquid fuels in the broad sense is a
matter that the Department of Minerals and Energy has been examining. The
subject of biofuels has been one of the issues on which there has been a
discussion among the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Minerals
and Energy and the Department of Science and Technology, as well as the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to actually look at what
options we have as a country.

One of the issues you raised is an issue that relates to maize as one of
the commodities that can be used - sugar in terms of ethanol gel is one
such commodity. There are also plants that can be used for alternative
fuels. What would also be important is that we would need to balance issues
of food security, on the one hand, with issues of fuel need for the country
on the other.

Similarly, we will also have to look at issues of environmental concern.
So, I think in time we will be able to come to Parliament to indicate what
direction we think we as a country would go follow with regard to those
issues.

Regarding whether or not we need to subsidise tax concessions for those
farmers who would take this option, I would prefer not to comment. That’s a
matter that I think is still open for debate.

To respond to the hon Sheila Camerer’s question regarding the two
commissions referred to, firstly, as you would appreciate in the context of
the Hefer commission, I think it was correct that the President and
government appointed that commission, because the allegations that were
made to the National Prosecutor of the country indeed required that there
be clarity on the matter so that there could be confidence in all citizens
with regard to that issue.

Secondly, regarding the Khampepe commission, as you know the location of
the Scorpions has actually been a matter for debate, not just in this
House, but outside it too, and it is not a matter occasioned by the matters
surrounding the former Deputy President, Jacob Zuma. The issue, obviously,
is that within that context you wouldn’t just wake up and take a decision,
saying that you’re moving this element of the prosecution to wherever
without following a process.

I think that what has been good about the commission is that it has allowed
an opportunity for members of the public and for members of the political
parties in the country to say, according to their own experience, what they
think is best. We have seen, I’m sure, in the paper this weekend that
Khampepe has actually also gone to the United States to look at how their
judicial system works, vis-à-vis the FBI and other law-enforcement
agencies, so that we can also reflect for ourselves what is in the best
interests of the country going forward. The latter . . . [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Minister!

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Sorry, Deputy Speaker, just
. . . “kancane nje” . . . [ . . . a little . . . ]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you’ve responded to four statements, and actually
we can only allow one Minister to . . .

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: ``Ngiqedele nje?’’ [Just to
conclude?]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Asisekho isikhathi sokuqedelela, mama. Siyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] [There’s no time to finish,madam. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Are there any other ministerial responses?


 PROPER BUILDINGS TO HOUSE POLICE, WESTERN CAPE PEOPLE ASSISTING THE POLICE,
                             AND TEAM SHOSHOLOZA


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Deputy Speaker . . .
[Interjections.] Thank you very much for that ``pasella’’ [free] advice.
Thank you very much. You need to give it to the IFP.

The first thing is the issue that was raised by the MF - uMaMkhize. We do
agree with you that if there is a building that is inadequate, like that at
the Bay View police station, I should bring it to the attention of my
colleague, the Minister of Safety and Security, who I am acting for, as
well as to the attention of MEC for safety and community liaison in KwaZulu-
Natal. In order to have police members that work effectively, you need to
house them in a proper building. So, we will definitely look into that.

The second issue was that of the MEC in the Western Cape and the way that
people of the Western Cape were being trained to work together with the
police. We really call on all our people to work and support the police in
the work that they do.
The last issue – not ruling from the grave – is about Team Shosholoza. The
level of development that took place to prepare for Team Shosholoza – and
I’m not ruling from the grave because I know I was the Minister of Sport
and Recreation then – clearly indicates and confirms our belief that with
development and opportunities given to all our people comes winning and
support.

It also comes with cohesion for teams that adhere to the transformation of
our country. Whether Mr Lee likes it or not, it now is really showing what
we’ve been saying over the years works. It works the way that the
government of the ANC says it should work. Thank you. [Applause.]


                       SEXUAL ABUSE OF SCHOOLCHILDREN


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think, as I said last
week in response to a statement by a member, one of the things we need to
do as a country is to begin to examine how we regard our schools and our
children as a society.

I have been looking at a range of countries and disciplinary cases that
they have, and very few have situations in which teachers engage in the
levels of sexual abuse that we are seeing with respect to disciplinary
cases in our country. So, this is not a matter for us to merely raise here,
but to actually go into our communities to ensure that our parents, as they
serve on the school governing bodies, hold our teachers to account in that
our teachers are professional in their conduct.

We should recall as well that these 600 cases are 600 out of a teaching
profession of 350 000 teachers in South Africa. So while the number is
small – and I think I agree with some of the unions that said that we
wanted to make everyone seem bad - it’s important while we are concerned to
acknowledge that the majority of teachers are doing what they should be
doing and that the disciplinary cases you see actually show that the
department is acting, because it is through our institutions and structures
that these cases are being conducted and that the bad apples are being
weeded out.

We will continue to do so, but we require the support of every parent and
every member of Parliament to ensure that the people who enter the
profession conduct themselves in a manner that accords with the
responsibility that we have given to them – that of our children. Thank
you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

    THE IMPORTANCE OF ENSURING THAT ALL SOUTH AFRICANS REGISTER FOR LOCAL
                            GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS

                                  (Debate)

Mr B M SOLO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, members of society sitting in the gallery and South Africans out
there, on 3 September 2005, in fact four days from now, the Independent
Elections Commission, IEC, will launch a voter registration campaign.
Whilst 3 September 2005 is going to be a remarkable event, surely it is not
the end, save to say that it is the beginning of a process that would
ensure that people participate in determining their future and building a
caring society.

To avoid confusion, voter registration on 3 September 2005 is meant to
ensure that eligible voters are registered in order for them to be able to
vote in the coming local government elections.

Accordingly, from this podium, the ANC calls upon all our people to come
out in numbers to ensure that they are registered. The call goes
particularly to young people who will be voting for the first time. We
would further extend the call to women, people in rural areas, on farms and
in peri-urban areas.

Ibaluleke kakhulu into yokuba senze indlela yokuba abantu abahlala ezifama
bangavalelwa ngabelungu babo ngale mini, ukwenzela ukuba bakwazi ukuya
kubhalisela uvoto. Senzela ukuba nabo bakwazi ukubeka uluvo lwabo ngevoti.

Amava ethu abonisile ukuba kukho abantu abavalelwayo ngolu hlobo minyaka
le, ngakumbi kwiindawo ezifana neSuikerbossrand phaya kwiphondo
laseRhawutini. Akukho ndoda ingenayo kwaye kungekho napolisa livunyelwe
ukungena kule fama. Kufuneka ukuba sizame ukubalungiselela aba bantu, kuba
bona abakwazi ukuzithethelela njengathi, baxhomekeke kubelungu babo.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[It is going to be important for us to ensure that farmers allow their farm
workers to go and register on this day. By having them cast their votes, we
will be trying to ensure that their voices are heard.

We have had situations of people being prohibited from exercising this
right in places like Suikerbosrand in Gauteng. No man or police is allowed
on this farm. We should help these people because they cannot speak for
themselves the way we can. They depend on their white employers.]

Lest we forget, our people, in 1955, during the most historical event,
resolved that the people shall govern. The Freedom Charter, one of the ANC
policy documents, makes it clear in its demands that, and I quote: “Every
man and woman shall have the right to vote.” This was one of the demands of
the people. Therefore the people have the opportunity to exercise this
right.

For South Africans to realise all these demands, including the one that
says the people shall govern, it becomes critically important to play the
role that they are supposed to play in this democratic dispensation as
embodied not only in the Freedom Charter, but in the country’s supreme law,
the Constitution of our country.

In a structured form, our democratic dispensation provides for periodic
elections. To realise the vision of the Freedom Charter, we need not only
ensure participation but also develop enabling tools, efforts and resources
that will enable people to participate in the determination of their
welfare and future.

The slogan “Your vote is your voice” should be transformed to its logical
meaning: Let your voice be heard and acted upon through mass participation.
This government, of course ANC-led, introduced various pieces of
legislation to provide South African citizens with an affordable and
reasonable opportunity to exercise their rights in a democratic society.
Local government is at the coalface of delivery. It is this sphere of
government that is close to the people.

May I, once more, go back to the slogan that says “Your vote is your voice,
let your voice be heard”. The launch of the registration campaign should be
treated with the importance it deserves. The campaign is a conscious effort
to afford all and sundry an opportunity to go and register or check their
names where they registered before. We do this by bringing resources and
facilities closer to the people.

What is required from the people is to bring along their barcoded IDs to
register or check whether their names appear on the voters’ roll in the
different voting districts. People must ensure that they register at the
voting district where they are going to vote on the day of the election.

It is important to stress that structures and systems have been put in
place to ensure popular mass participation of the people in this
government. The next speaker from the ANC will deal with this matter;
suffice it to say that they will start with registration, elections and
move up to governance. Democratic structures have been established for
people to raise issues of concern.

Of course, people have rights to do certain things that would draw the
attention of elected representatives and institutions. But those who
exercise these rights should do so in a disciplined manner and make use of
the structures and systems. There are provisions that exist in many pieces
of our legislation, regarding local government.

This brings me to the following provisions in the Local Government:
Municipal Structures Act, chapter 1, which deal with rights and duties of
members of local communities, and chapter 4, which deals with community
participation. Whilst the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act has
provision for structures where the local community can exercise this right
. . .

 . . . siyazi ukuba bakhona oongantweni abazicingela ngcono, abangenza
nantoni na ukucitha into entle kuba ingabanelisi bona; oohlohlesakhe
abajonge ukufumana inzuzo okanye amalungelo athile, abaza kuzama ngazo
zonke iindlela ukugalela amanzi nokuchitha iphulo elihle njengeli.
Iyindlalo nje kubo, kukufa kuthi.
Banabo ke phofu nobuchule bokudungadunga isizwe ukuze iinjongo zabo
zobuqhophololo zibe nokuphumelela. Abanye bathi: “Kwekhu! Akundincedi
nganto oku, ngoba ishishini lam liqhuba kakuhle. Ndinento yonke: ipomakazi
lendlu, umnyobo wenqwelo-mafutha, abantwana bam bafunda phesheya
kweelwandle ngoko ke andiyi apho. Kwaye akukho kwanto eza kwenzeka.”

Kuthi ngengomso kwakufika imbalela, izikhukhula zeemvula okanye aqhekezelwe
zizihange, unkabi noogxa bakhe baba ngobokuqala ukukhonkotha okwezinja,
bethukisa bebiza amagama angaziwayo. Abanye ke ngenxa yokungamkeleki
kweenjongo zabo eluntwini nasekuhlaleni, baye nabo bakhawuleze ukugxeka.
Maxa wambi babhala zonke izinto ezingalunganga, babe bexoka ke phofu.
Baziingcuka ezombethe ufele lwegusha, bathi xa kuvela amathuba ubabone
bechwechwa besondela, besithi:  “Nathi besikhona xa ubuxovulwa lo mba.”

Abanye maxa wambi abacacelwa kakuhle, abanazo iindlela zokufikelela kwii-
ofisi zoncedo ngenxa yeemeko abaphila phantsi kwazo. Ngeli phulo senza
indlela yokufikelela kubo ukwenzela ukuba wonke umntu abe negalelo.

Kubalulekile ke ukuba abantu bethu baphume ngobuninzi babo ngomhla wesi-3
kuSeptemba 2005, baye kukhangela ukuba bakho na kumaxwebhu obhaliselo-voto.
Siyazi ukuba kumaxesha amaninzi, abantu abayi kubhalisa okanye kujonga
ukuba babhaliswe phi na kula maxwebhu, ze bathi ngosuku lovoto, mhlawumbi
kuba ilusuku lweholide, bavuke njengabanye abantu bafune ukuya kuvota,
babuye sele besithi bona bagxothiwe phaya, abafuneki.

Sicela bonke abantu abo bakwaziyo ukuthetha nabantu, amaphephandaba,
oonomathotholo, iicawa nabefundisi, amaKrestu, amaSlamsi, njalo njalo,
ukuba sincedisane ukwakha le demokhrasi ngendlela efanelekileyo ukuze
abantu basebenzise ithuba labo lokuvota banyule abantu ababafunayo.
Ndiyabazi kodwa ukuba baza kuvota njani, andizi kuchaza namhlanje.

Akuvotwa ngomhla wesithathu, koko kuyabhaliswa. Masingaxokisi abantu sithi
kuyavotwa, mabangayi, ngoba kaloku xa abantu bebhalisile bathanda ukuvotela
thina aba. [Kwahlekwa.] Ngoko ke masingabaxokisi abantu koko masibaxelele
ukuba kuyabhaliswa. Siza kuluchaza ke usuku lonyulo.

Singagaya iivoti ngamandla kuba iivoti ziyasetyenzelwa. Akasoze ancede mntu
amaphephandaba ngokuthi abhale yonke into embi emhlabeni ngalo rhulumente.
Siza kube sigaya iivoti ke thina, ngoba siyazi ukuba nina, bahlekazi,
anikwazi, kodwa ke sincediseni ukuze abantu babhalise bakwazi ukuthabatha
inxaxheba kuvoto.

Andithi sikhalela idemokhrasi ngalo lonke ixesha? Ngoko masincedise
ekwakheni idemokhrasi, singameli kude kuba sisoyika ukuba abantu baza
kuvotela uKhongolose. Enyanisweni wena, abantu bayamthanda uKhongolose.
Ungabona betsibatsiba, kanti bafuna ukuba sihlale phantsi sixoxe ngezinto
zethu. Yiyo ke loo nto sisitsho kubo bonke abemi beli lizwe ukuba mabaphume
ngobuninzi babo baye kubhalisa.

Ndingathanda kwakhona ukuthi nakula madoda alapha anento yonke, iinqwelo-
mafutha, ubuchule bokuthetha nabantu, nabanikazi beefama, mabathethe
nabantu. Xa kubanjwe iimbizo, abantu mabakhuthazwe ukuba baye kubhalisa.

Siyakhumbuza kwakhona ukuba siqinisekise ukuba ukuba baya kubhalisa,
sibancedise, sibacacisele, singabaxokisi sithi kuyavotwa ngomhla wesi-3
kuSeptemba, kodwa kuyabhaliswa, kulungiselelwa usuku lokuvota eliya
kukhankanywa kuyo le Ndlu.

Siyacela kumadoda amakhulu, njengoko sele nditshilo, ukuba athethe ngazo
iilwimi, ezicaweni phaya, emithandazweni ngoLwesine. Siyabacela oomama
ukuba baluthandazele olu suku ukuze bonke abantu baphume baye kubhalisa.

Ingayinto entle ukubona bonke abantu bethu bebhalisile, bethatha inxaxheba
kunyulo loomasipala, ngoba oomasipala babaluleke kakhulu ebantwini ngoba
ngabo abazisa iinkonzo nqo ebantwini. Xa ndigqibezela, sithi: Amaqobokazana
angalal’endleleni, yazini kunyembelekile. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . we know that there are useless people who think highly of
themselves, who would also do anything to disrupt a process if they are not
satisfied with it. Those are the greedy people, who are looking to gain or
enjoy certain privileges and who would, in every way possible, distract a
campaign such as this.

They seem to possess a certain ability to bring the nation into disrepute
in order to pursue their corrupt activities. Some would even say: This does
not seem to be working for me because my business is doing very well. I
have everything, a mansion, a beautiful expensive car, my children attend
school overseas, therefore I am going nowhere and nothing will materialise
of this government anyway.

When drought and heavy rains come or when their houses get broken into,
they and their friends are the first to complain. Some would be quick to
criticise if and when their ideas have not been accepted. They say a lot of
bad things, mostly giving incorrect facts. They are crooks and opportunists
and say: We were also there when this matter was discussed.

The day of 3 September 2005 is just a registration day and not the day of
the election. We should not lie to people and tell them that it is the
election day, and also discourage them because it is commonly known that
they will vote for us. [Laughter.] Let us not misinform people. Let us give
them the correct information. The election date will be announced shortly.

Certain things are not clear to some people, while some might not be able
to access information due to their living conditions. Through this campaign
we are hoping to reach everybody and ensure that they make their mark.

It is important that our people go to register in their numbers on 3
September 2005 or to check whether their names appear on the voters roll.
We know that in most cases people do not go to register or to check their
names on the voters roll but would, on the election day, perhaps because it
is a holiday, suddenly decide to go and cast their votes like others and
later claim that they were chased away from the voting stations.

We would like to call on all the people, the newspapers, radio stations,
church ministers, Christians, Muslims, and many others to assist us in
building our democracy in the manner that is most appropriate and ensure
that people exercise their right to vote and elect those delegates that
they feel confident would represent their needs. I know how they would
vote, but I am not going to tell today.

It is just the registration on 3 September 2005 and not the day of
election. We should not lie to people and tell them that it is election
day, thereby discouraging them because it is commonly known that they will
vote for us. [Laughter.] Let us not misinform people. Let us give them the
correct information. The election date will be announced in due course.

We campaign for the votes because we need to work in order to win them. It
would help no one to go to newspapers and criticise this government. We
will continue talking to people and hopefully win them because as you know,
you sirs over there cannot do that. However, we would like you to help us
tell people that they need to register to vote.

Do we not always talk about the significance of democracy? We should
therefore assist in maintaining it and not stand aside because we fear
people will vote for the ANC. It is true that people like the ANC. One may
find them embarking on a number of activities, some disruptive, and that
would be a way of trying to catch our attention. It is for that purpose
that we are calling on all the citizens of the country to come out in their
numbers and go and register.

I would like to ask those men who are rich and possess everything, those
who have cars, the ability to speak to people and farm owners to talk to
people. During izimbizo and ordinary meetings people should be asked to go
and register to vote.

I implore you to talk to the people and encourage them, explain to them the
significance of the day of 3 September 2005 and that it is in preparation
of the election date which would be announced at a later stage.

As I have already said, please go to the people and encourage them to
register. Talk to them in all languages in their churches and ask them,
during their Thursday prayer meetings, to pray for all the people to come
out in their numbers on this day.

It would be a good thing to see everybody registered to vote and taking
part in the local government elections, because it is the tier of
government that is vital to service delivery.

In conclusion I would like to say: Young women never sleep over at someone
else’s place. If they do, things are extraordinary bad. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, there are two issues I need to address
to the ANC and to the government before I move on to the more important
business of talking to the voters and potential voters of South Africa.

Firstly, it is simply wrong to hold a registration day without any idea of
when the election is going to be. Particularly for students, many of whom
are resident in more than one place. It is wrong, because they don’t know
where to register. If the government were serious about doing something
concerning “the apathy of the youth”, as the previous speaker has suggested
exists, it would have indicated the likely time of the election already.
Instead it plays politics by saying nothing, and hopes to gain an unfair
advantage in that way.

Secondly, it needs to be said right now that no election in South Africa
can be free and fair if the ruling party is being financed inappropriately
by taxpayers. [Interjections.] That is what happened when Imvume gave R11
million to the ANC and PetroSA had to use another tranche of public money
to buy the oil that Imvume was supposed to buy with that R11 million in the
first place.

Back in 1997, the Minister of Sport, whom I’m sad to see has left us, in
his capacity as the ANC’s treasurer-general, said that the ANC raised money
by being a facilitator for black business. In other words the ANC helps to
organise contracts and the business in question helps to fund the ANC. That
is a recipe for massive, systemic corruption that makes a mockery of a
properly functioning multiparty democracy. [Interjections.]

In theory, democracy is a system in which the voters have control over
their government and hence over their lives and futures. In a dictatorship
the people belong to the government. In a democracy it’s the other way
round and so, at the heart, democracy is about power and about the autonomy
of individuals – it is about having the power to decide who governs, and
the power to ensure that they govern on your behalf and in your interests.

But research and experience tell us that far too many voters in our country
do not feel a sense of ownership over the government. They do not feel that
they control the future of their country through their votes. Instead, they
feel ignored or misunderstood and consequently powerless.

And so, increasingly, voters are not registering to vote, and of those who
do, fewer and fewer actually vote, which is why the turnout in last year’s
election dropped by 12% when measured against the turnout in 1999. Now,
very often, political parties – I’ll get to you in a moment - are blamed
for this state of affairs. We are accused of not inspiring voters, or
worse, of turning them into cynics - and some of this criticism is
justified. [Interjections.]

If you look, for instance, at the way in which certain parties use and
abuse the floor-crossing legislation, it is no wonder that the voting
public gets turned off the political process - and I notice you are not
saying anything now, because politics is meant to be about people, not
about power, positions and perks. [Interjections.]

But on the other hand, in a country where every adult is entitled to vote,
you must also concede that the people get the government they deserve,
because a vote is a lever of power, and it only works if it is used. One of
the challenges of our democracy is not so much the fact that people don’t
register and don’t vote, but that they are so complacent when they do.

I watched in astonishment last year as fellow residents in the City of
Johannesburg waited patiently and without complaint as we were messed
around by an accounts department that was too busy chatting and having tea
to attend to the growing queue of ratepayers who wanted service.

An electorate should never be grateful. It should always be demanding, and
that is a lesson you are going to learn. [Interjections.] That is what was
positive about the protests around South Africa recently. People had to get
to the point where enough was enough. They wanted to make their voices . .
. [Interjections.]  . . . You took the Western Cape through floor-crossing,
actually - try to get your facts straight; and that’s exactly the point I
was making earlier: You don’t think about the voters, you think about
yourselves – the people want a reaction. [Interjections.]

So, to the voters of our country today, I would say that protests and
complaints are not enough. Take the opportunity to register on Saturday;
take the opportunity to vote; and then vote not out of gratitude and not
out of loyalty, but out of pure, unbridled self-interest, because if you
don’t register and don’t vote, then don’t complain afterwards when services
aren’t delivered and corrupt politicians steal your money.

Use your vote to get what you want from the politicians. If they have
served you ill, get rid of them and try something new. Your vote means that
you’re the boss. This election is your chance to put yourself in the seats
of Mr Trump and Sexwale and say to the ANC: “You’re fired!” [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Madam Deputy Speaker, colleagues, there are a number of
reasons why people should register to vote for the forthcoming elections. I
think the first point is that we are a multiparty democracy; one that we
are all extremely proud of and elections underpin that democracy - fair,
free and regular elections.

The second point is that of all the rights in the Bill of Rights probably
the most important, and certainly the hardest fought for, are the political
rights, the political rights which give you the franchise, and it is the
exercise of the franchise that in fact gives you the government that you
get and hopefully the government you want.

Thirdly, you cannot in this country exercise your franchise unless you
register, and in fact by not registering you are effectively
disenfranchising yourself.

Finally, if elections are to occur on the first possible date - it could be
early December - then 3 September is going to be the only day that people
would have to register in a nationwide registration drive. So, it is an
opportunity to be used and we urge everyone to use it.

For people who are not registered – that’s the process to follow. But if
you believe that you are registered, even then it is equally important to
go and check whether you are in fact still registered, because
administrative mistakes happen and people get removed from the roll.

Another factor is that a lot of voting districts and voting stations have
changed. So, if you don’t go and check where you are registered, you could
arrive on voting day to find the gates closed at what you thought was a
voting station. Then you’ll have to run around, scurry around, trying to
find where to vote.

One must remember that in this election, unlike previous ones, one has to
vote at the voting station at which one registered. You cannot go wandering
around the ward and just find another locality and fill in another form and
vote; that won’t happen.

In addition to those specific points, there are a few general observations
I would like to make in respect of registration issues:
The first is that the figures that we as parties are using to know whether
people are registered are often totally wrong. You can be told at a local
level that registration is 90% in this community or 50%, whereas in reality
the figures could just as well be the other way round, because they are
based upon very, very outdated statistics.

Secondly, in this country there is, ostensibly at least, a continuous voter
registration process, but this is more fiction than fact. I think it is
more important too that the municipal electoral offices and municipal
managers make some sort of effort to allow that process to unfold properly,
the way it’s meant to.

Thirdly, there is in this country a national schools’ project – a very good
one - in terms of which learners, who at the age of 16 are issued with IDs,
are simultaneously enrolled on the voters’ roll. It’s an excellent
programme. We want to urge that this is universally applicable to every
single secondary school in the country and not selectively used.
Fourthly, it is really problematic having a voters’ roll with no addresses
on it. A voters’ roll should have addresses, but in this country we do not
have a national address system. The issue has been addressed many times
over the past 10 years, with no agreement, no commonality on the way
forward. We would urge government to appoint a task team or a lead
department to take the leaders and drive some sort of resolution of the
matter. In the meantime we will go on election after election without
addresses and that needs to be sorted out.

Finally, I would like to make the following statement; in fact, I think it
is an important announcement: I have it on the highest authority that in
fact nearly all ANC supporters have already registered and that the ANC can
now relax regarding 3 September. On that basis, I would like to call on
every IFP supporter in South Africa to register on 3 September. Thank you.
[Interjections.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I have only one minute, and I want to
use that merely to say that of course it is important to register. Of
course it is important that Parliament and parliamentarians play a very
vital role in exhorting people to go and register to vote.

The people shall not govern unless the people vote, and the people cannot
vote if they do not register. It is extremely important that we make people
realise that the result of your vote is directly related to the result of
the service that you get. There is a direct link, and I think people in
South Africa don’t realise that there is a direct link between whom you
vote for and the results that you get in service delivery.

Therefore they must be made to realise that it is time now to wake up, to
register, and to vote, so they can get rid of the bunch of nepotistic
incompetents the ANC has put up to govern local government. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, there is widespread dissatisfaction with the
lack of service delivery at local government level. This has been evident
in countrywide, sometimes violent, demonstrations against incompetent or
corrupt local government officials and councillors. However, to demonstrate
is one thing; during elections the voter is given the opportunity to
replace incompetent or corrupt councillors. Therefore it is imperative that
our citizens register to vote in the local government elections.

One should not complain about service delivery if one does not, at the very
least, register and cast a vote. Whilst the ACDP appreciates that there is
a growing disillusionment with locally elected councillors due to
incompetence, nepotism and corruption, such disillusionment should only
increase the determination of voters to replace councillors and the parties
they represent.

Not to register and then not to vote, as an expression of disapproval,
should be the very last option. The ACDP therefore encourages every South
African citizen to register and to ensure that they are registered in the
correct ward. They will ensure that you, as a voter, will be able to
exercise your God-given right to vote for the leaders you wish to at local
government level. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, almal kla dat kiesers apaties is, én
dat hulle nie gaan registreer nie. Die werklikheid is dat dit is as gevolg
van politici en politieke partye soos die DA en die ANC . . .
[Tussenwerpsels.] . . . wat oorloopwetgewing ondersteun dat kiesers nou
vra: “Hoe kan ek stem vir ‘n kandidaat en die volgende jaar loop hy net oor
na ‘n ander politieke party?” Dan kom dié partye en wys vinger na ander
partye. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die VF Plus wil vir die kiesers daarbuite sê: U kan sê u is klaar met die
politiek, en u het die politiek gelos; die jammerte is net dat die politiek
u nie los nie. Daarom vra ons u om op 3 September te gaan registreer, want
al voel u nie dalk nou daarvoor om te gaan stem nie, wanneer stemdag kom,
wil u dalk graag stem, maar as u nie geregistreer is nie, kan u nie stem
nie. Daarom, registreer, en sorg dat u dan deur middel van u stem ook
plaaslik - die regeringsvlak wat die naaste aan die kieser is - u stem kan
uitbring, en stem vir daardie partye wat nie gaan oorloop na ander
politieke partye nie, maar wat u belange sal behartig. Dankie,
Adjunkspeaker. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Hon Deputy Speaker, everybody is complaining that voters are apathetic,
and that they are not going to register. The truth is that it is because of
political parties like the DA and the ANC… [Interjections]… that support
floor crossing legislation that voters now ask: “How can I vote for a
candidate and the following year he crosses the floor to another political
party?” Then these parties come and point fingers to other parties.
[Interjections.]

The FF Plus wants to tell the voters out there: You can say that you have
finished with politics, and that you left politics; the problem is that
politics do not leave you. That is why we ask you to register on 3
September, because even if you don’t feel like voting now, when election
day comes you might want to vote, but if you are not registered you cannot
vote.  Therefore, register, and make sure that you are able to, by means of
your vote, also cast your vote locally – the level of government which is
closest to the voter, and vote for those parties who will not cross the
floor to other parties, but who will look after your interests.  Thank you,
Deputy Speaker.]

Rre B E PULE: Motlotlegi Motlatsa-Sebui, go botlhokwa gore moagi mongwe le
mongwe mo Aforika Borwa a ikwadisetse ditlhopho tsa puso selegae. Santlha,
ke tshwanelo ya gagwe e a e neilweng ke molaotheo wa naga ya Aforika Borwa
go tlhopha. Sabobedi, ke tshwanelo ya gagwe go neela lekoko kgotsa
mokgatlho wa gagwe tetla ya go mo tsamaisetsa dilo tse di amang botshelo
jwa gagwe jaaka ditirelo.

Ga go kitla go thusa Maaforika Borwa sepe go ngala ba sa tlhophe mme morago
ba ngongoregele gore ga go na ditirelo. A ba ikwadise, ba tlhophe gore ba
itse kwa ba tla lebang gona fa ba na le mathatha. Le fa go ntse jalo, rona
UCDP, re rata go kgalemela ka bogale ba e reng ba tlhophilwe, ba bo ba
sutlha ka difensetere ba matlhabaphefo leba kwa makokong a mangwe ba bidiwa
ke sefadi jaaka ntša.

Re rotloetsa batho ba makoko a a farologaneng go ikwadisa le go tlhopha, ka
gonne go siametse demokerasi ya Aforika Borwa, mme re kgalemela ba ba
sasankang le makoko a mangwe fa go bulwa matlhabaphefo gore ba tlogele
bogodu ka go utswa diboutu tsa batlhophi. Ba tlogele go nna bomalatswa-
thipana le bomaora o tuka. Ke a leboga. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr B E PULE: Hon Deputy Speaker, it is very important that every South
African citizen registers for the local elections. Firstly, it is a right
of every person to vote as enshrined in the Constitution of our country.
Secondly, it is a right to give a party a vote as permission to administer
things that affect the voter‘s life, such as delivery of services.

It will not help South Africans to boycott elections and thereafter
complain about lack of services. Let them register and vote so that they
know where to go when they experience problems. However, as the ACDP we
would like to admonish those who cross the floor over to other parties
during the window period.

We would like to encourage people from different political parties to
register and vote because that is good for our democracy in South Africa.
We would like to admonish those who cross over to other parties during the
window period to stop stealing voters’ votes and being opportunists. Thank
you.]

Mong M T LIKOTSI: Sephadi, PAC e kgothaletsa baahi bohle ba naha ya rona ho
ingodisa bakeng sa dikgetho, mme ba kgethe PAC ha dikgetho di fihla. Mmuso
o nehe mekgatlo ya dipolotiki tjhelete ho kgothaletsa batho dikgetho.
Mekgatlo e fuwe tjhelete bakeng sa matsholo a dikgetho. Dikgetho tsena di
tlamehile ho re tlisetsa makhanselara a ikemiseditseng ho sebeletsa
setjhaba, ho ntlafatsa dibaka tsa bodulo.

Bakgethi ba ye dikgethong ka bongata, ho bea makhanselara a senang
manyofonyofo le bobodu ho bomasepala. PAC ke mokgatlo o tshepehang, oo
makhanselara a ona a sa kenang bobodung bo etsahalang ka hara naha. Baahi,
ngodisang ka bongata bakeng sa dikgetho, le kgethe PAC bakeng sa ho fedisa
tlala, bofutsana le boqitolo, le bobodu bo teng ka hara bomasepala. Ke a
leboha. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chief Whip, PAC urges all South African citizens to
register for the coming elections, and to vote for the PAC on election day.
The government must allocate funds to political parties to enable them to
campaign for elections. We expect the elected councillors to be loyal, hard-
working people willing to improve the living conditions of the people.

We implore the voters to turn up for elections in big numbers and to elect
incorruptible councillors to municipalities. The Pan Africanist Congress is
an honest party whose councillors are not involved in pervasive corruption
in the country. We plead further with the electorate to register for
elections in big numbers. They must vote for the PAC to eliminate poverty,
treachery and corruption in municipalities. Thank you.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, just a while ago we were all engaged
in massive campaigning for the national and provincial elections, which
were proudly successful. The MF takes this opportunity to express to the
South African citizenry the importance of voting in the local elections.

Local governments rest closer to the hearts of the people. They are
national government’s ground view and attend to community needs. It is
local government that interacts more on a personalised footing with the
communities, addressing their needs and wants, and maintaining local
service.

By registering on 3 September at your nearest voting station to vote in the
local election you are seizing the opportunity to elect the best suited
candidate to address your community’s needs. In so doing, you will be
ensuring that the maintenance and development of your area is headed by an
effective and efficient leadership that would excel at its duties.

Failure to register on 3 September and vote for the right person means
failure to ensure that you are well looked-after in your community. Thank
you.

Mrs Z A KOTA: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Let it be praised!]

Mrs Z A KOTA: Deputy Speaker, allow me to just respond to the DA. I think
that they should stop moaning, because no matter how much they try to
tarnish the image of the ANC, voters don’t have confidence in them.
[Interjections.] Absolutely! Yes, you are right; we have taken the Western
Cape through floor-crossing, but you must remember that your “swart gevaar”
didn’t help you either. [Interjections.]

The ACDP? I’m not sure. You’re not listening to the programmes of our
people. Dr Brigalia Bam stated clearly, on Asikhulume on Sunday, that the
protests around the country are a positive sign that the people out there
are very conscious of their destiny – it’s positive - and the ANC welcomes
that. We want our structures to deal with those issues and to be involved
in ward committees so that the committees themselves are able to solve
those problems with the ANC.

Deputy Speaker, Ministers, comrades, colleagues and honoured guests, I
greet you this afternoon, during this important debate that is taking place
as we wind up August, the women’s month. It is for that reason that it
would be fitting to remember some of the women who paid a supreme sacrifice
so that South Africa could be what it is today, a prosperous democracy with
a growing economy. These are Comrades Nonyamezelo Mxenge, who passed on 20
years ago; Comrade Ruth First, who fell in Mozambique; Jeanette and Kathryn
Schoon, who fell in Angola; Nomkhosi Mini, who fell in a Lesotho raid;
Coleen Williams, who fell in Athlone; Nomsa Mapongwana, who fell in
Khayelitsha, to mention just a few.

As women we have committed ourselves to picking up those fallen spears in
their memory, and we shall ensure that the ANC wins the coming local
government elections.

We thank the ANC for committing itself to a 50% representation for women
councillors in the local government election process. This shows the ANC’s
continued leadership in affirming and empowering women. That is the reason
we have a Deputy President who is a woman.

Our government has many capable women Ministers. Women in general in South
Africa are very grateful and proud of the ANC’s stance. The ANC is also
aware of and recognises the positive role played by women in their areas of
deployment. It is true that to educate a woman is to educate a nation; to
empower a woman economically is to empower a nation economically.

Our organisation is aware that women are realistically the ones who are the
biggest consumers of municipal services. They are the ones who do the
washing and ironing, and many of our households are female-headed.

It is critical, therefore, that women should participate actively in this
sphere of government. It is important that many women come out and
register, as they will be able to ensure that their voices are heard within
municipalities.

Our approach is that service delivery at local level should be geared
towards building communities. It is communities that should, through
participation in ward committees, determine the priorities of budgets at
local level. It is communities themselves that should continue to hold
public representatives accountable as far as service delivery is concerned.
Registering gives us an opportunity to participate in democratic processes
and to be able to vote in the coming local government elections.

On 13 August 2005 I attended a service at J Z Zwane in Gugulethu, where the
theme was: “You should take a stand”. This was a call by women for women to
empower women and for women to actively take part in changing their lives
for the better. These women, called “speakers”, were from social services,
the health department, the economics department and the red door project,
which is a finance department in our province.

Women wanted to hear about the opportunities that exist within government
and want to grab such opportunities with both hands. They called on other
women to continue brightening the corner where they are. Women must come
forward and be counted. That is the reason I used the same platform to
encourage them to register on 3 September, the registration day.

At the centre of speeding up service delivery has been the importance of
intergovernmental relations and how these three spheres of government have
been able to work together to fast-track delivery.

Corporate governance and intergovernmental relations in South Africa are
reflected in chapter 3 of the Constitution, which determines a number of
principles. Section 41(2) of the Constitution determines that Acts of
Parliament must establish, promote and facilitate intergovernmental
relations. As a result of this the government has formed a number of
intergovernmental structures that promote and facilitate corporate
governance and intergovernmental relations between the respective spheres.

These include the Presidential Co-ordinating Committee comprising the
President, the Minister for Provincial and Local Government and the nine
Premiers, and Ministers’ clusters, the directors-general’s cluster, that is
Forsat, promote the integration of the programme.

In Parliament we have committees that are formed in terms of this cluster
approach, including the study groups. What has been the core of these
processes, particularly at local government level, has been the issue of
the IDP, the integrated development planning, through which municipalities
are able to plan and prioritise according to their budget.

The ANC government is calling upon communities to participate and influence
these processes at ward committee level so that their voices can be heard
at council level.

Delivery of basic services and the development of infrastructure have been
high on the agenda of municipalities. The Minister of Water Affairs and
Forestry, Buyelwa Sonjica, has called for the strengthening of corporate
governance to tackle water and sanitation backlogs. Her department has made
progress in placing water services schemes with municipalities, where they
belong.

The department is also working with the department of local government and
municipalities, the MIG, to eradicate the bucket system. A total of R1,2
billion has been allocated for this through MIG. The Department of Housing,
through the Breaking New Ground strategy, has intensified the building of
houses for the poorest of the poor.

Minister Lindiwe Sisulu, through her leadership, has instructed provinces
to come up with nine pilot projects of sustainable human settlement. The
national pilot project, N2 Gateway, is expected to deliver 24 500 houses by
the end of 2006. We have seen positive development in Cosmo City, Gauteng,
where the rich and poor are poised to live together, with bank-financed
houses ranging from R150 000 to R600 000, with 5 000 low-cost houses next
to them. This is real integration. We have also seen that this is the
success story of integrating our communities.

Recently, the Brickfields Development Project has been very positive.
Opening that project, the President said that the Brickfields housing
project is a tangible expression of how the worldwide phenomenon of
decaying inner cities can, through sustainable urbanisation, be transformed
into peaceful, better havens and friendly neighbourhoods.

The President went on to say that clearly this project is in line with the
government’s strategy and is making an important contribution to the
efforts of reversing apartheid spatial patterns along racial and class
divisions. Undoubtedly, to truly realise the noble ideas of the Freedom
Charter we need to move faster towards new cities where we are able to use
housing to integrate our communities so that we should no longer have parts
of our cities designated exclusively for the rich and others for the poor.

Although our Parliament and government have eradicated apartheid laws,
there is still perpetuation of settlement patterns along racial lines,
gender and class divisions, which is an obstacle to the objective of
building a non-racial and non-sexist society. This we must bring to a
speedy end.


To succeed in this task we have, amongst others, an urgent challenge to
bring an end to the pro-rich housing development strategies that ensure
that the best located land, which is close to all the best facilities, is
always available to the rich; a situation in which the best land is
allocated specifically to create gated communities and golf estates.


We welcome these comments by our President because they are in line with a
settlement plan that is aimed at addressing these social ills. The
Department of Social Services has been central in protecting the rights of
the vulnerable groups.

The provision of social assistance to children is a case in point. By May
2004 we had been able to get more than four million children into the
system. More than 7,9 million people have benefited from social grants.

In response to the issue of impact of HIV and Aids, the department
implemented a home-based care community programme. The number of sites
increased from six in 2001 to 400 in 2003. It has also been brought to our
attention that the government has also increased its efforts in the area of
early childhood development so that women can use these child-care projects
for income-generation.

We welcome the Expanded Public Works Programme, which has created a lot of
job opportunities for the unemployed at local level, particularly the new
definition of the Expanded Public Works Programme, which includes home-
based care, dog dipping, waste removal and recycling. These are
opportunities created for poverty alleviation by our caring government.

Sibulela nakubo bonke abantu abasebenza ezigadini, njengakwiprojekthi
ehlanganisa iidolophu nemimandla yasezilalini ephaya kwaLanga. Ezi ziinzame
zokulwa indlala ukwenzela ukuba abantu bethu bakwazi ukuphuma baye
kubhalisa besazi ukuba lo mbutho ngumbutho okhathalayo ngabantu.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[We are grateful to everyone who works with the garden project in Langa, a
project that integrates both rural and urban development. This project is
one of the means to alleviate poverty. People must acknowledge these
efforts by the ANC-led government by registering to vote.]

All provinces are busy with growth and development strategies whose mandate
is to assist with economic growth. The injection of R20 billion by Gauteng
for infrastructure is commendable, and addresses the gap between the first
and second economies.

Mabuyakhulu, the MEC in KwaZulu-Natal has injected . . .

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, op in punt van orde: Ek
wil net graag by u, Adjunkspeaker, weet of die agb spreker by die punt van
registrasie bly, en of sy propaganda maak oor behuising en ander
infrastruktuur vir die plaaslike verkiesings. [Gelag.][Hon Madam Deputy
Speaker, on a point of order: I would just like to find out from you
whether the hon speaker is keeping to the point of registration, or whether
she is spreading propaganda on housing and other infrastructure for the
local elections. [Laughter.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sit down, Mr Groenewald, that’s not a point of order.
Continue, hon member.

Mrs Z A KOTA: I’m glad that you understand that it’s important that we
motivate our people to go out and register because they understand that the
services out there are for their benefit. If they go and register, they
will understand exactly . . . [Interjections.] . . . They will register,
whether you like it or not. They’re wasting my time, Deputy Speaker; let me
ignore them.

In KwaZulu-Natal an MEC has forked out R1 billion to bail out
municipalities to enable them to deliver basic services. The City of Cape
Town’s growth rate is reflected as standing at four per cent and
contributes to 11,2% of the GDP.

Our people have shown that they are confident and correct to trust our
movement as a principal agent of change in our country that is genuinely
committed to the objective of building a non-racial and non-sexist
democratic South Africa.

This has been shown by the resounding mandate given freely, in big numbers,
during the 2000 and 2004 elections. The ANC won 68% of municipal councils
in 2000. People’s own experience in the past 11 years of our freedom
relating to what has been achieved in this regard confirms that their
confidence in the ANC is not misplaced.

Kule mpelaveki, ngomhla wesi-3 kuSeptemba, iya kuba ilithuba lokuba
abahlali baye kubhalisa, baqiniseke ukuba amagama abo akhona kuluhlu
lwabavoti. Ziya kube zivuliwe zonke iindawo zokubhalisa. Hamba uye
kuzijonga kolwaa luhlu lunamagama abavoti, ukhangele ukuba igama lakho
likho na. Ukuba alikho, nceda ubhalise.

Kufuneka uphathe incwadi-sazisi yakho enebhakhowudi. Ukuba awunayo loo
ncwadi-sazisi, yenza isiqinisekiso sethutyana. Ungabhalisa nangaso. Lo
rhulumente ngurhulumente ojongene neemfuno zabahlali. Kubalulekile ukuba
ube nenxaxheba, ulisebenzise eli thuba.
Kananjalo, sibulela bonke abantu abathe gqolo besebenzisana norhulumente,
benceda abantu ekuhlaleni ngeendlela ngeendlela. Yiyo loo nto sisithi
ukwanda kwaliwa ngumthakathi. Sifuna ukuba sibe nabahlali abakhathalayo
ngezinto zokuhlala. Intle inkathalo kwanento yokuba abantu basebenzisane
norhulumente bephucula iindawo zokuhlala apha eMzantsi Afrika.

Akukho kubuya ngamva. Urhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC kuninzi akwenzileyo,
njengokuba besenditshilo. Kambe siyazi ukuba kusekuninzi ekufuneka
sikwenzile ukugutyula amabibi ukuze sikwazi ukufezekisa iimfuno zoMqulu
weNkululeko.

Urhulumente we-ANC uyakhathala ngabantu. Siphumile kwaFaro kodwa asikafiki
eZweni leDinga. Siya kufika kulo ukuba sibambene ngezandla nabantu bethu.
Ukwanda kwaliwa ngumthakathi kodwa ngalo lonke ixesha siya komelezwa kukuba
abantu baye kumvotela lo rhulumente we-ANC ngobuninzi babo, ekucacileyo
ukuba bamthembile njengorhulumente omele iimfuno zabo.

Masibambisane naye nangalo mzuzu wonyulo loomasipala ngoba nguye onemigaqo-
nkqubo ejonge ukuphucula abantu abahluphekileyo. Lo rhulumente ikwanguye
okhathalayo nobonisa igalelo loomama emzabalazweni. Liyabonakala igalelo
loomama emzabalazweni. Siyayibona indlela urhulumente anyule ngayo
amakhosikazi.

Ngokubhekisele koorhulumente bezekhaya, urhulumente uthi inani labagqatswa
abangoomama liza kuba ngama-50 ekhulwini. Boomama, eli lithuba lokuba
siphume sisonke, sibhinq’ omfutshane, ngoba lithuba lokuba sigxothe ikati
eziko. Eli gcuntswana limana libhontsholoza apha ecaleni kwam akufunekanga
lifumane nantwana.

Masiye kubhalisa abantu. I-DA yona ayisoze ikhothe naphantsi. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[This weekend, 3 September, would be an opportunity to register to vote as
well as to check one’s name against the voters’ roll. All stations for
registration will be opened. If your name is not on the voters’ roll,
please register.

Bring your barcoded identity book. If someone does not have one, she or he
must bring a temporary ID.  This government takes care of its people.
Therefore it is important to take part and use this opportunity.

We thank everyone who constantly helped government by providing different
kinds of services to communities. We are grateful.  We want people who care
about our communities. Efforts made by people trying to improve the living
conditions of people of South Africa are appreciated.

There is not turning back. What has been accomplished by the ANC–led
government is overwhelming. Nevertheless, there is a lot that needs to be
put right to achieve the objectives of the Freedom Charter.

The ANC–led government cares about people. We left Egypt, Pharaoh’s place,
but we are not yet at the Promised Land, Canaan. We will reach Canaan only
if we are one. We are grateful but we will be stronger if people vote for
the ANC–led government, as they have already showed their trust.

Let us hold each other’s hands during this time of municipal elections, as
this is the government with the policies to develop poverty-stricken
communities. It is this government that cares about people and that reveals
the undying efforts of women in the struggle for democracy. Their efforts
are acknowledged. We do observe how many women are elected in government.

Government is committed to increase the number of women representation in
local government by 50 %. This is the opportunity for women to participate
in their numbers. It is the time to alleviate poverty in communities. The
crying minority must not get any opportunity. Let us go and register. The
DA will not get any votes. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.


                   DEFENCE SPECIAL ACCOUNT AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Chair, hon members, the Defence
Special Account Act, Act 6 of 1974 – the principal Act – refers to certain
Acts of Parliament which have been substituted by the Public Audit Act, Act
25 of 2004, the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of 1999, the Armaments
Corporation of South Africa, Limited Act, Act 51 of 2003, and the Defence
Act, Act 42 of 2002.

The principal Act also refers to certain procedures which are no longer
applicable, for example the procedure for the accounting officer of the
Department of Defence to enter into commitments for expenditure from the
Defence Special Account, referred to in section 1A(1) of the principal Act,
is no longer necessary under the Public Finance Management Act of 1999.

The Defence Special Account Amendment Bill of 2005 seeks to bring the
principal Act in line with current legislation by replacing or removing the
said obsolete references and procedures. I therefore move that this House
accept this amendment, as mentioned and indicated above. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Chairperson, Deputy Minister of Defence, Ministers,
comrades and colleagues, the Defence Special Account Bill, which we are
amending here today in this House, differs substantially from previous Acts
promulgated in 1952 and 1974. Those Acts made provision for Armscor as a
procurement agency to supply the SADF with armaments to suppress our own
people.

Since our first democratic elections in 1994, this government, in
partnership with Armscor, the defence industry and the private sector has
started to liberate South Africa and Africa from racial and colonial
oppression. This represents a remarkable turnaround in approach within one
generation to the benefit of our people and our continent. The importance
of the Defence Special Account arises from the need to acquire defence
material for military use or material which conforms to military
specifications.

The need may arise to enter into government-to-government contracts with
payment of scheduled costs influenced by fluctuating exchange rates. There
may also be a need to defray expenditure where the procurement of items is
subjected to extended and uncertain lead times or where we need strategic
defence capabilities. It is important to realise that the acquisition of
defence material takes place according to a proper acquisition process
before funds can be utilised from this account.

Spesifieke veranderinge in hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp sluit in
opgedateerde terminologie, dit wil sê om dit op datum te bring met ander
bestaande wette, soos die verwysing na die Nasionale Tesourie in plaas van
die voormalige Departement van Staatsbesteding.

Ander wysigings sluit in: die verwysings na nuwe wette - waarna die
Adjunkminister verwys het – in die Wetboek wat spesifiek nà 1999 goedgekeur
is, en wat vorige wetgewing vervang het. Dit sluit in: die bekende Wet op
Openbare Finansiële Bestuur, die Wet op Verdediging, die Wet op Krygkor en
die Wet op Openbare Oudit. Laastens is hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp meer
geslagsvriendelik gemaak, met verskeie klousules wat nou verwys na manlik
en vroulik, byvoorbeeld: hom/haar en hy/sy.

’n Belangrike punt om op te let is dat hierdie spesiale
verdedigingsrekening jaarliks deur die Ouditeur-Generaal van Suid-Afrika
geoudit word. Vir die afgelope drie jaar het die Ouditeur-Generaal
ongekwalifiseerde verslae oor hierdie rekening ter tafel gelê. Sedert 1
April 2003 word hierdie rekening as ’n afsonderlike betaalmeesterrekening
bedryf met voldoende interne beheer.

Hierdie verslae van die Ouditeur-Generaal toon aan dat hierdie rekening
goed bestuur word, en dat ons ons langtermynverpligtinge in hierdie land
kan nakom.

Die grootste gedeelte van die spesiale verdedigingsrekening se geouditeerde
uitgawes, naamlik R6,5 miljard, is aangegaan deur Krygkor, terwyl die
balans van R280 miljoen aangegaan is deur die Departement van Verdediging.
Die hoof-uitvoerende beampte van Krygkor, mnr Sipho Thomo, en die
Sekretaris van Verdediging, mnr January Masilela, is onderskeidelik
verantwoordbaar ten opsigte van hierdie uitgawes. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Specific amendments in this Bill include updated terminology, that is to
say amendments to bring it up to date with other existing legislation, such
as the reference to the National Treasury, instead of the former Department
of State Expenditure.

Other amendments include references to new Acts – to which the Deputy
Minister has referred – on the statute book, specifically Acts passed after
1999, and which have replaced previous legislation. These include the well-
known Public Finance Management Act, the Defence Act, the Armscor Act and
the Public Audit Act. Lastly, this Amendment Bill has been made more gender-
sensitive, with several clauses now referring to the masculine and feminine
form, for instance him/her and he/she.

An important point to note is that this Defence Special Account is audited
annually by the South African Auditor-General. For the past three years the
Auditor-General tabled unqualified reports on this account. Since 1 April
2003, this account is being managed as a separate paymaster’s account, with
adequate internal controls.

The Auditor-General’s reports indicate that this account is being managed
well, and that we are capable of meeting our long-term obligations in this
country.

The greater part of the Defence Special Account’s audited expenses, namely
R6,5 billion, was incurred by Armscor, while the balance of R280 million
was incurred by the Department of Defence. Armscor’s chief executive
officer, Mr Sipho Thomo, and the Secretary of Defence, Mr January Masilela,
are respectively accountable for these expenses.]

The public in general and public representatives in particular should
realise the importance of the Defence Special Account for the Department of
Defence. I want to emphasise three points: firstly, the availability of
appropriate defence material for the SANDF to carry out its strategic
objectives, namely to enhance and maintain comprehensive defence
capabilities; to promote peace, security and stability in the region and on
the continent; and to support the people of South Africa.

Secondly, in order to obtain such optimal defence material, a process of
defence material acquisition is followed with the necessary scrutiny and
oversight by the Auditor-General, by Parliament and by the executive.
Thirdly, the acquisition of defence material is guided by the Defence White
Paper where the need to maintain and improve our defence capabilities is
acknowledged within budgetary constraints.

In this regard, we as government have entered into numerous memoranda of
understanding, defence agreements, pacts and treaties. There is also
government support for international ventures, that is, government-to-
government agreements.

In conclusion, I can say without risk of contradiction from members of our
Defence committee that we have full confidence in the Department of Defence
and in particular in the SANDF to execute their mandate, including the many
challenges they face.

Secondly, there is effective civil oversight by, amongst others, the
Portfolio Committee on Defence over the Department of Defence and the SANDF
through regular hearings; visits to bases and units by the committee; the
scrutinisation of the budget; the annual reports; the business plan and
other plans; and regular interaction with the public entity – the only
public entity within this department - Armscor. And our committee had a
long session with Armscor and its chief executive officer only this
morning.
Thirdly, our men and women in uniform are professional people, inspired by
the loyalty and love for our beautiful country and its people, and
committed to defending our democracy and its values.

Ons nasionale Weermag het ’n kontrak met die mense vir ’n beter Suid-Afrika
en ’n beter wêreld. Die ANC steun hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Our national Defence Force has a contract with the people for a better
South Africa and for a better world. The ANC supports this amending Bill. I
thank you. [Applause!]]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Chairperson, the Defence Special Account Act was
accepted in Parliament during 1974 at the height of the apartheid
government regime and surprisingly still exists today. This is so despite
indications by the government that it is in favour of transparency and
accountability within a democratic state.

This special account is utilised for expenditure relating to the
procurement of armament; the purchase of military equipment; the
procurement of items subjected to extended and uncertain lead times and for
sensitive activities. In addition thereto, and as you all know, it is also
used for the purchase of strategic defence capabilities and weapon systems,
such as the notorious arms deal.

This amending Bill intends to bring the Act in line with the requirements
laid down in the Public Finance Management Act. These amendments relate to
amending the titles of certain Acts, which have been repealed, as well as
removing processes that are no longer valid in terms of the PFMA.

One of these procedures is for the accounting officer of the Department of
Defence to enter into commitments with the prior approval of the Minister
of Finance for expenditure from the defence special account, which is no
longer necessary in terms of the PFMA.

The importance of this Act is reflected in the fact that this account deals
with a constantly increasing amount of money - at the current moment
approximately 40% or an estimated R9,3 billion of the defence budget of
R22,4 billion.

It is, however, unfortunate that, although the Auditor-General - as has
been mentioned earlier this afternoon - has access to this account for
purposes of financial accounting, Parliament’s role of holding the
executive to account is severely curtailed due to the secrecy of the
amounts and financing deals of purchases made in terms of this account.

Parliament has experienced first-hand knowledge of the above due to the
secrecy and incomplete answers relating to the infamous arms deal issue,
which has to date not yet been satisfactorily concluded. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo neNdlu ehloniphekile, bahlonishwa, lo
Mthethosivivinywa olapha phambi kwethu uqoqa okwakwenziwe ngeminyaka yawo-
1974. Wenza isimo sokuba umuntu okunguyena ofanele agade izimali kube uyena
obikayo lapha ePhalamende ukuthi izimali zisebenze kanjani.

Bekuthi-ke njalo uma ngabe kuthengwa izimpahla zokubhekela izwe,
ezokuvikela izwe nezempi, kusayine abantu abaningi abahlukene. Kodwa,
ngenxa yokuba khona komthetho wezimali obizwa nge-Public Finance Management
Act, okuyiwona oshoyo ukuthi ubani okufuneka aqondane nezimali, lokho
kwenze ukuthi uNobhala wezokuVikela kube uyena muntu oqondene ngqo nokuthi
achaze lapha ePhalamende ukuthi izimali zisebenze kanjani.

Ngakho-ke lo mugqa owodwa nje wale Special Defence Account ngowokulungisa
leso simo ukuze kungabi khona abantu abaningi abenza into abayithandayo
kodwa abe munye umuntu ozoqondana nokubika lapha ePhalamende nasekomidini
eligadayo ukuthi izimali zisebenza kahle yini.

Sithemba ukuthi njengoba uNobhala enikwe leli gunya, nomhlonishwa
uNgqongqoshe uzombheka ukuze konke okwenziwayo kuhambe kuqonde kuthi ngqo.
Siyethemba ukuthi laba abanye abakade besayina ngeke besenza lutho oluthe
phecelezi olubheke eceleni ngoba abazukulithola igunya . . . (Translation
of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, hon House and hon members, the Bill tabled here summarise
what was done in 1974. It makes the person responsible for finance to be
the only one accountable to Parliament on how the money was spent.

Previously, when there were defence systems to be acquired, defence weapons
and warfare, many different people would sign the procurement documents.
However, because of the Public Management Act, which states who should be
accountable, that has led to the Secretary of Defence being the sole
signatory, and he is directly accountable to Parliament.

Therefore, this insertion in the Special Defence Account is for rectifying
that, so that people will not do what they like but to have one person
accountable to Parliament and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.

We hope that as the Secretary has been granted this authority, the hon
Minister will monitor the Secretary, to see to it that everything is done
accordingly. We also hope that those who used to sign procurement documents
will not do anything untoward because they won’t have authority.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member!

Mr V B NDLOVU: I still have twenty seconds.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I regret to inform you that your time
has expired. I have given you 27 extra seconds.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Really? [Laughter.] Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, ’n minuut is maar kort. Die
wysingswetsontwerp ter tafel wat onder bespreking is, is eintlik ’n
tegniese wet in die opsig dat die wet verwys na ou wette wat intussen
verander is. Hierdie spesifieke wysigingswetsontwerp stel dit dan nou net
reg sodat dit na die korrekte wette verwys. Dit is al wat hierdie
wysingingswetsontwerp ter sprake bring. Die VF Plus sal dit steun.

Ek deel egter nie die optimisme van my kollega, die agb dr Gerhard
Koornhof, oor die beheer oor hierdie spesiale verdedigingsrekening nie. Dit
is ongelukkig so dat die Parlement en die portefeuljekomitee wel ’n
toesighoudende rol speel oor die Nasionale Weermag in sy geheel, maar ons
het nie insae in hierdie spesiale verdedigingsrekening nie, en miskien moet
ons gaan kyk na wetgewing om ook dít te verseker. Dan sal die
portefeuljekomitee ’n behoorlike rol kan speel om seker te maak dat die
spesiale verdedigingsrekening korrek aangewend word vir die doel waarvoor
dit bedoel is. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, a minute is quite short. The tabled
Amendment Bill being debated is actually a technical Act in that it refers
to past Acts that have already been amended. This specific Amendment Bill
now rectifies that so that it refers to the correct Acts. That is all that
this Amendment Bill raises. The FF Plus will support that.

However, I do not share the optimism of my colleague, the hon Dr Gerhard
Koornhof regarding the control over this Special Defence Account.
Unfortunately it is so that Parliament and the portfolio committee do
indeed play a supervisory role over the National Defence Force in its
entirety, but we are unable to scrutinise this Special Defence Account and
perhaps we should take a look at legislation to ensure that as well. Then
the portfolio committee will be able to play a proper role to ensure that
the Special Defence Account is used correctly for its intended purpose.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, the MF acknowledges the introduction of this
Bill by the hon Minister of Defence on 19 May 2005. We note that the
principal Act, namely the Defence Special Account Act of 1974, is out of
date in terms of the procedures it contains, and Acts which it refers to
have been substituted.

The Defence Special Account Amendment Bill clearly brings the principal Act
in line with current legislation and procedures. The MF strongly supports
such amendments. We take this opportunity to briefly applaud our superb
Defence Force and its efforts and sacrifices made, not only in South Africa
but on the entire African continent.

The safety of all South Africans is secured by these heroes and heroines
who so courageously put their lives on the line for this country. The MF
supports the Defence Special Account Amendment Bill. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Chair, I want to thank all the
parties who supported this amendment. It is encouraging that people
understand the importance of the Department of Defence, especially people
like Baba Ndlovu.

It is a pity that some members, especially in the DA, in spite of the fact
that they supported the Bill, still have the guts to come and vent hot air
here. Mr Schmidt knows, as an MP and as a member of the Committee on
Defence, that he is entitled to see and scrutinise the Special Defence
Account. He can even ask the Minister or the Ministry for the briefing. He
knows that, but he comes here and complains, as usual. I now understand why
the voters of South Africa have no confidence in the DA. [Interjections.]

I thank all members for supporting the amending.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.


        ARMAMENTS CORPORATION OF SOUTH AFRICA, LIMITED AMENDMENT BILL


      (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Defence Bill)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, I move that the
Report be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I’m looking for a speakers’ list, hon
members.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Chair, I understand your confusion. I
feel sorry for you. If you have to come into contact with the members of
the DA from time to time, you are bound to be contaminated with their
confusion. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Madam Chair, I’m going to sort him out, don’t
worry.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms S-C Botha): Order, please!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Before the House is the Armaments
Corporation of South Africa, Limited Amendment Bill. This Bill seeks to
remove the Chief of the SA National Defence Force and the Secretary for
Defence from the board of directors of Armscor.

When Cabinet approved the introduction of the Armaments Corporation of
South Africa, Limited Bill in Parliament in 2003 it indicated that the
Chief of the SA National Defence Force should not sit on the board of
directors of the corporation.

The reason was that membership of the board by the Chief of the SANDF could
constitute a potential conflict of interests. Such a conflict would arise
from the fact that the Chief would have been part of the decision to
determine the requirements of the SANDF, as well as being part of the
decision to determine procurement and acquisition, and that is which
supplier should provide goods and services.

Similarly, the inclusion of the Secretary for Defence on the board of
directors of Armscor raises a potential conflict of interests in view of
the supporting role that he or she plays as head of the department towards
the Minister in exercising political oversight over Armscor.

As head of the department and accounting officer, the Secretary for Defence
is responsible for ensuring compliance with prescribed roles and
regulations for acquisition purposes. As head of the department also
sitting on the Armscor board, he or she cannot therefore be expected to
account for ensuring effective and efficient utilisation of transferred
funds or any financial assistance rendered to Armscor, and also be
accountable in terms of his or her membership to the board at the same
institution. This will not enable him or her to exercise his or her
judgment objectively and independently, as he or she would be referee and
player at the same time.

Madam Speaker, Madam Chairperson . . . [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You’re also confused, Minister.

Mr M J ELLIS: He’s very easily confused; he’s from the ANC.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: It is within this context that I introduce
the Armaments Corporation of South Africa, Limited Amendment Bill for
approval by the House. I hope that the opposition parties will support the
approval by the House of this Bill, as this is testimony that the ANC-led
government is serious about ensuring good governance in and between all
state structures. I thank you.

Prof A K ASMAL: Madam Chairperson, Ministers, ladies and gentlemen and
comrades, this is a very short Bill, possibly the shortest Bill before this
House since 1994, because it comprises one section. But it is enormously
important, because there are layers and layers of meaning in this Bill,
which I will bring to your attention.

It also, of course, as part of the commitment of the ANC, ensures that
where there are issues that arise, where conflict of interests may arise,
they are dealt with legislatively.

The parent Act is that of 2003. The Minister of Defence asked the President
not to bring it into force, because there was this one particular
obstructive clause that the Minister wished to take out. So before I deal
with this amending Bill may I just bring to your attention, particularly in
so far as the younger members of this House are concerned, the procurement
process within the Department of Defence.

You see, Armscor was established in terms of the Armaments Development and
Production Act of 1968. Armscor was part of the sanctions-busting regime of
the South African apartheid forces. It was corrupt; there was no
transparency; it confused its role as procurer, manufacturer, meddler,
intervener, and sometimes with nefarious purposes too.

It was an evil time because a combination of procurement and manufacture
was irresistible for purposes of corruption. So we departed from that
period, because this Act was enormously important, and introduced the
Armaments Corporation of South Africa, Limited Amendment Bill of 2003,
which repealed all the Armscor legislation from 1968 onwards, and that is a
clean-slate approach.

Why didn’t the Minister then ask the President to bring it into force? We
have to look at the elaborate system of evaluating all capital acquisition
projects in armaments through the armaments acquisition system.

The ultimate political authority, responsibility for acquisition, is vested
in the Minister of Defence. The Secretary for Defence, as the accounting
officer of the Department of Defence, will perform those functions and
duties as laid down in the Act and in the Public Finance Management Act.

There is a two-page statement as to how you acquire things. Basically, it
is the Chief of the Defence Staff, in consultation with colleagues, who
produce the document and approach as to what is to be acquired by our
Defence Force. The acquisition requirements, the funding and the
procurement are all laid down there.

It is a very complex and very important system to overcome the previously
closed, obscure and occluded system that we had in South Africa. This is in
line with standard practice in most democratic countries. There is also
open competition.

The authorisation goes through the committees and the management forums
that are set up. That is the reason why when the Minister had Parliament
pass the 2003 Act, he was very anxious about this because Armscor is the
primary acquisition agent of the Department of Defence for military
equipment required exclusively for military purposes.

In fact, the Act lays down that the Department of Defence cannot
participate in any way as far as the direct acquisition is concerned. It is
part of that process. Armscor, therefore, works in relation to the
legislation laid down.

Now, the President has not brought it into force for the simple reason that
the Department of Defence recognised that the Chief of Defence Staff could
not be a member of the board of Armscor for the reasons that I will expand
on, which the Deputy Minister has given quite clearly.

If the Chief of the Defence Staff initiates an acquisition process, he or
she cannot deliver what we wish for. If we have a Deputy President who is a
woman we might soon have a Chief of Defence Staff who is a woman. Give
these young people time. [Laughter.] He or she cannot be party to the
actual ordering of the material; it’s inconsistent and incompatible. In
some countries, by the way, the Chief of the Defence Staff runs the whole
system and there is no openness or transparency.

So the Minister is introducing an amendment, which came through the Cabinet
to the committee. At the Cabinet decision - I am coming to the committee -
it transpired that the Minister recognised that the Secretary for Defence
was a member of the Armscor board and that would then give rise, to serious
incompatibilities in function.

Although this is a one-line Bill, the committee spent a considerable amount
of time testing the ground, as it were, asking the department to come and
give us good reasons as to why both the Chief of Staff and the Secretary
for Defence should not be on this. So I said that it may seem a very simple
one-section Bill, but, in fact, it has enormous implications, and the
Minister delayed implementation of the Act for this very purpose, because
they could not be ex-officio members. So, because of the conflict of
interests in the mind of the Minister, both of them should therefore be
removed.

After our deliberations the committee unanimously proposes to the NA that
the provision in section 6 of the 2003 Act should now be excised, should
now be removed. I think we should take particular care since these
acquisitions possibly, as has been said, take up 40% of the budget of the
department. There should be absolute clarity about their respective roles.

Then I say that Armscor’s role is to be looked at in the context of what
the law lays down. Armscor gets a grant of more than R300 million from the
department. Quite clearly the view is emerging in Cabinet and elsewhere
that Armscor should not have to rely on the government grant, but that it
should be self-sufficient in its operations.

So the transfer payment of R350 million is an important factor and
therefore we have to evaluate what Armscor does in relation to the subsidy
it gets from the government. Other options have to be looked at as to
whether, as in other countries, Armscor should not, first of all, operate
purely on business principles and have a contract with the department for
acquisition purposes. There has to be a service level agreement that is
laid down in the Act. There has to be a service level agreement with the
department. That is one option.

The second option is that Armscor could be reincorporated back into the
Department of Defence and function, as in many countries, as a specialist
procurement unit in the department, under the control of the Minister of
Defence, with the same degree of openness and transparency.

This will result, of course, in enormous savings as the Department of
Defence will no longer pay the transfer payment of more than R300 million
and, of course, save the department the rent it pays to Armscor of nearly
R40 million.

These are issues that the department can look at because they are
restructuring the arrangements, and I understand that since December last
year Cabinet has set up a committee of Ministers to look at the whole issue
of the arms industry and all the other issues associated with it. This
could be a factor to be fed into such an investigation.

Of course, the committee has no views on this as it is merely expanding on
the discussions we had this morning when we looked at the Armscor annual
report - and a most stimulating discussion we had there. We were looking at
what Armscor has undertaken to provide to the department as far as
deliverables are concerned - astonishing word this, much better than
“delivery”, by the way - in the contract with the department.

Can I say, therefore, that the new Armaments Corporation of South Africa,
Limited Act of 2003 and the amendment before you close the book on a rather
horrendous past. They get rid of the past legacy and perceptions that
procurement processes were flawed. This is especially true when large
commitments are made for requirements that may arguably be sensitive.

The Deputy Minister is right, as a committee we will be able to get
information on any issue from the department and from the Minister. There
are no closed doors, as we learnt, for example, when we had the discussion
on the preparedness of the Defence Force.
The role of Armscor has changed dramatically because the world has changed
as far as global involvement in arms procurement is concerned.

With the establishment of Denel and its restructuring by the new chief
executive officer, it is an opportune moment to look at the question of
what the old baggage of Armscor was and to what extent the present role and
name change to the defence procurement agency clearly acknowledges its
procurement function of the state.

The portfolio committee is grateful to the department for its co-operation
in the discussion of this Bill. I thank the members of the committee for
looking at this very important element. Therefore, on behalf of the
committee, I commend this measure to this House. Thank you, Madam
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Madam Chairperson, the House has already heard
about the purpose this amendment seeks to achieve.

Just a few observations: When Cabinet approved the introduction of the
Armaments Corporation of South Africa, Limited Amendment Bill into
Parliament in 2003, it also indicated that the Chief of the SANDF should
not sit on the Board, and for valid reasons.

The Bill was, however, passed – that’s what we heard - with the Chief
remaining as a member of the Board of Directors. We can only wonder why the
House did not seriously take into account the recommendations of the
Cabinet at that time. This Bill now seeks to amend the Act by removing the
Chief and the Secretary for Defence on the very same grounds in order to
address the concern of the potential conflict of interests.

Armscor is the procurement arm for the DoD and obviously the SANDF. Let me
remind the House that, in terms of the Bill, the objectives of the
corporation are to meet the defence material requirements of the department
effectively, efficiently and economically. It must do so by adhering to the
accepted corporate governance principles, maintaining fairness,
transparency, accountability and lawfulness. Hence if Armscor is to fulfil
its mandate, as expressed in the Bill, it will have to avoid the many
pitfalls such as experienced in the controversial arms deals.

Furthermore, in June this year we expressed our concern at the sale of
helicopter spare parts by Armscor to the Zimbabwean Air Force, which we
found to be morally outrageous. Armscor’s role during the apartheid era is
well documented, as we heard from our hon chairperson as he described it.
Surely, under our new democratic order and political dispensation, one
would expect an Armscor different from its predecessors. Therefore under no
condition must Armscor be forced to implement political decisions of the
ruling party.

In conclusion, it is sad that Armscor had no visible role to play in a
major acquisition such as the A400M aircraft, which the Minister of Defence
referred to as a “unique acquisition”. Unique indeed it is, and the silence
on the part of Armscor is amazing indeed. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Deputy Chair, hon Minister and the House, since
Armscor is the buying arm of the SANDF, the Chief of the Defence Force and
the Secretary for Defence cannot sit on its Board because that would
constitute a conflict of interests. There cannot be a seller and a buyer at
the same time. And there cannot be a referee and a player at the same time.

The 41st line amendment of this Bill emphasises the point that we are
taking out, for the second time now, the Secretary for Defence, because he
is the chief executive officer, and cannot sit on the Board of Directors
and decide what to buy and when to buy when he is actually the one who is
going to pay at the end of the day.

Therefore the amendment that was effected before with regard to the Chief
of the SA Army and now with the Secretary for Defence is intertwined -
combining those two officers not to be members of the Board. We ask this
House to accept that, because it is a principled decision that is going to
wipe out the decision-makers not to make them to pay for what they think is
correct, but to pay for the needs of the country. Thank you, Madam Deputy
Chair. [Applause.]

Mr S B NTULI: Chairperson, Deputy Minister and other Ministers and Deputy
Ministers present, hon members and members of the public in the gallery,
Armscor was formed on 1 April 1977 from the amalgamation of the then SA
Armaments Board and the Armaments Development Corporation. Its mission then
was to supply the then SA Defence Force with its material requirements.

The then Armscor and the current Armscor are quite different. Let me just
extrapolate from its mission of today. Its mission is to meet the
acquisition, maintenance and disposal needs of the Department of Defence
and other clients in terms of the defence material, related products and
services.

As members are aware, we are also part of the signatories to the Ottawa
Convention that deals with disposal needs – environment - part of the
concern is that the Defence Force can no longer throw its remaining
material or unused material into our seawaters because that would be a
contravention of the law. This is what the Armaments Corporation South
Africa, Limited Act is also stating and this makes the difference between
how Armscor looked like yesterday and how it looks today.

Furthermore, today’s Armscor under the SA National Defence Force is quite a
different Armscor. It is different because this one is transparent,
accountable and has to comply with democratic values by doing the
following: firstly, Armscor must be audited by the Auditor-General
annually; secondly, its accountability is judged in compliance with the
Public Finance Management Act; and thirdly, Armscor must comply with
democratic values. For instance, Armscor product sales and services are
subjected to control and regulated by the National Conventional Arms
Control Committee. In other words, Armscor is restricted - we can no longer
sell to countries with no culture of respect for human rights, and that do
not respect human rights in their own countries. This is part of what the
Act actually states. [Applause.]

Among other things, today’s Armscor is the one that is also trying to
propel the democratic values forward in a defence environment. Hence we are
saying today that we are effecting the amendments to the Arms Act by
removing the Chief of Defence, as well as the Secretary for Defence, for
the reasons that have already been stated.

As you have heard from my colleagues, particularly the Chairperson of the
Defence Committee, the removal of the Chief of Defence and Secretary is
aimed at addressing the possibility of conflict of interests that may
arise, as one will be a referee and a player when looking at the Chief of
Defence, but when we look at the Secretary for Defence he himself is
actually the accounting officer in the Department of Defence. Therefore he
has to oversee and account for Armscor as well.

This we do in an effort to pursue good corporate governance in alignment
with our PFMA. Therefore from the Portfolio Committee of Defence,
particularly the ANC, we call upon the House to support us in this
amendment. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, ter aanvang wil ek sê die VF Plus
ondersteun hierdie Wysigingsontwerp. Dit is te verstand dat die Hoof van
die Weermag en die Sekretaris van Verdediging nie op die direksie van
Krygkor sit nie. Ek wil ook vandag vir u sê dat as ons Krygkor beoordeel,
moet ons hom beoordeel in die konteks van die tyd toe hy ontstaan het.

Krygkor is in die lewe geroep om die destydse wapenboikot teen Suid-Afrika
teen te werk. En ek wil vandag vir u en die agb lede sê Krygkor het hom tóé
met onderskeiding van sy taak gekwyt, dermante dat van die voorste
wapentuie in die wêreld daardeur ontwikkel is, en wat vandag nog tot
voordeel van Suid-Afrika aangewend word, soos die G5- en G6-kanonne wat nog
steeds van die kanonne is wat die verste reikafstand in die wêreld het.

Ek wil vandag vir u sê ek was feitlik tien jaar ‘n werknemer van Krygkor.
Ek vra nie verskoning daarvoor nie; ek is baie trots daarop en ek sal altyd
daarop trots wees. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, at the outset I want to say that the
FF Plus supports this Bill. It is understandable that the Chief of the
Defence Force and the Secretary of Defence cannot be members of the board
of directors of Armscor.

I also want to say to you today that if we evaluate Armscor, we should
evaluate it in the context of the time in which it was established. Armscor
was established to counteract the arms boycott against South Africa at the
time. And I want to tell you and hon members that at that stage Armscor
acquitted itself excellently of its task, to such an extent that some of
the top armaments in the world were developed in the process. Some are
still used to the benefit of South Africa today, such as the G5 and G6
guns, still some of the guns with the longest range in the wold.

I want to say to you today that I was an employee of Armscor for almost ten
years. I do not apologise for it; I am very proud of it, and shall always
be. I thank you.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chair, as introduced by the Minister of Defence in the House
in May 2005, the MF notes this Bill primarily serves to amend the Armament
Corporation of South Africa, Limited Act of 2003.

We acknowledge that the Bill basically caters to bringing into being the
Armaments Corporation of South Africa, as well as its function,
accountability and finances. In terms of the amending Bill, we note the
removal of the Secretary for Defence and Chief of the SA National Defence
Force as members of the board of directors of the corporation due to the
potential conflict of interests.

We further note that this was proposed when the Bill was first introduced
in 2003, but they were nevertheless on the board added. If the precaution
was adhered to then it would not have been necessary to reintroduce it
again. However, the amendments are wise, even though late.

All respect is paid to the above authorities on such amendments. The MF
supports the the Armament Corporation of South African, Limited Amendment
Bill. Thank you.

Mr M S BOOI: Madam Chairperson, our chairperson and the Deputy Minster have
already eloquently explained the nature of the Bill, and what role it is
supposed to play, but there are a few other things that we should always
continue clarifying, especially when you deal with the opposition. Even if
you want to be positive, you should always help them to achieve the goals
and the things that they don’t understand.

The trends and in the manner in which we are moving forward, and the
progress that we are making with Defence, as a department, as Armscor
becomes part of Defence, are helping, as hon Ntuli has already outlined,
the vision, maintenance, and capacity-building of Defence.
But, crucially to us, what does this type of decision imply? For the ANC
this says that the tenets of the Constitution are being it upheld, you are
continually emphasising opening up Defence, the issues of transparency. If
you do not do that, the Defence of the old, which was in the apartheid era,
is totally closed up the public. Nobody knew what was happening within that
department, but here with this progress that we are making, and with the
way that we are beginning to open up Armscor, it means that we are saying
that we are complying with the Constitution, and besides complying we are
not afraid of the public.

The way we spend the public’s money, we say to the public: Have an inside
look; we do not want to put a stop to that. You remove the Secretary for
Defence, and you remove the Chief of the SANDF, so that they are able to
see what exactly is going on.

That is what should be appreciated by South Africans, and that is what
South Africans have always been calling upon us to do. So, when you say to
us ``you are dealing with a notorious arms deal’’, we are shocked. We
wonder about this, because those of us who deal with Defence are looking at
the progress that has been made since we have been in government the past
ten years.

You look at the contribution that the strategic package has made to improve
the capacity of the Defence Force. It is not the Defence Force, in the
sense of the army or the navy, that is managing the strategic package, but
Armscor. The progress under Armscor means that it has been possible to make
sure that if you want corvettes, if you want helicopters - all those issues
are in progress, and they are going very well.

It means that all the goods that are related to the strategic arms package
are in progress. The capacity of the Defence Force is of particular
importance at this moment for us who are proud and who are constitutional
upholders. As the ANC, we are saying that this is happening.

The Constitution says one of our responsibilities as Defence is to defend
democracy, and that is what is happening. And the strategic package is
contributing to that.

When you call it notorious, we do not know what that is based on, because
investigations have been made, but what we are looking at now, in relation
to Armscor and the department, and the good work under Comrade Kader’s
chairpersonship, is how much is being contributed to improving the capacity
of the Defence Force.

That good work is happening, and that is how we should view the strategic
package. We should not always try to be negative about it. As regards the
peacekeeping role that we are beginning to play on the African continent,
as was outlined by the President of this country and which is not being
opposed by any opposition party, the Defence Force is playing such a
significant role. It is assisting us to stabilise the African continent.

When we say that the strategic package is notorious, you are really
misleading the public. You are really saying that the Defence Force is
unable to play its particular role.

But, from the ANC’s point of view, the Defence Force has the capacity.
Whatever you have been trying to do by leaking the documentation about its
own readiness, to us  it sounds as if we are misleading the public
continuously because you are not telling the public the honest truth.

The honest truth is that with this capacity and the way in which we are
conducting ourselves, even by opening up Armscor and by being transparent
about Armscor, weare showing the confidence that we have the leadership of
the Defence Force; it is the confidence that we have in the executive of
our country; and it is the confidence which we have broadly in all the
institutions that are monitoring the work that we are doing.

We are saying - look at how we are making sure that procurement is outlined
by our chairperson - our procurement policies are very open and you are
able to engage and have another look at them and see if the way in which
they are conducted under Armscor are delivering what we need.

As a country, there is even an analysis that says you do not understand a
threat; with the Defence Force you will always be expected to be ready. We
as the ANC are saying, we have the confidence that they are a ready force,
and Armscor is helping to build up that particular capacity. You should
always be able to say whether they are doing that, because since we have
come into power this Defence Force has never violated the Constitution.

It has maintained the Constitution, it has defended the Constitution, and
these are the elements that we say are so positive and very important. Even
any opposition member who comes here will appreciate that good work is
being done.

When you give your support, you give support based on the integrity that
the Defence Force is representing at this particular moment within our
country, with some of the institutions, even the industry, in the way it is
conducting itself.

The other improvement that we are looking at is that Denel is under the
leadership of Labuschagne. We are saying there is a lot of improvement that
is beginning to take place and we are saying that the DA must keep on
watching out. [Time expired.][Interjections.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: We will support peacekeeping; you don’t need
submarines for that. You don’t need a submarine in the Great Lakes.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, in thanking all parties for
supporting this amendment, I want to emphasise what the chairperson of the
portfolio committee stated, that Armscor is the procurement arm of the
department.

We are at the moment in a process of restructuring the department, and in
that restructuring Armscor will also be affected again. We have gone a long
way in transforming Armscor, but we are now going to take the last run, to
make sure that Armscor does exactly what it was created for.

We want Armscor to do one thing, and one thing only, and that is to be a
procurement arm of the department, and that will ensure that all other
activities that Armscor, even now, is trying to do, are properly cut off,
so that we have a system which is very transparent, but also a system which
is very democratic, to make sure that all citizens of this country,
including opposition parties, are happy with what Armscor will be doing.

I thank you for your support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

         THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN ELIMINATING ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES

                                   Debate

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: I feel sorry for you, Mike, because I know
you don’t like me. [Interjections.]

Madam Chairperson and hon members, the International Committee of the Red
Cross reports that the only purpose for which mines have been used with
total success by the minelayer and with total impact on the target is for
the containment or harassment of civilians. Totally unprepared for the
effects of mine warfare, civilians suffer terribly.

Graham Hurley, in his novel about the conflict in Angola asks, among other
questions:

   In this welter of blood and confusion, finding out who really killed
   James becomes a nightmare. Was it the young soldier who laid the mine,
   the guerrilla leader, or was it the shadowy businessmen from the West and
   the East who sell the mines?

Soon after the first democratic elections in 1994, the ANC-led government
took up the issue raised by the fight against the manufacture and use of
anti-personnel land mines. In 1996, Cabinet prohibited the export of all
types of land mines; the following year, Cabinet further decided to
prohibit the use, development, production and stockpiling of anti-personnel
mines.

By 1998, 312 000 anti-personnel mines held by the Department of Defence had
been destroyed. Furthermore, when the South African government approved the
restructuring of Mechem, Denel’s demining technology powerhouse, government
insisted that the demining component would neither be shut down nor
privatised, precisely because it is a critical component of humanitarian
assistance that cannot be driven by profit.

South Africa is a signatory to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction. On 26 June 2005, through their Parliament, the people of
South Africa and government ratified the Anti-personnel Mine Ban Treaty.
This followed the Anti-personnel Mines Prohibition Act, which was passed by
this House. Supported and guided by Parliament, South Africa is engaged in
a number of efforts aimed at promoting mine action on our continent and
beyond.

These include, firstly, mine action assistance in terms of financial
support to the International Committee of the Red Cross for mine action in
Angola; secondly, the provision of training, information and advice to
industries engaged in the removal of mines for humanitarian purposes in
foreign countries by the SA National Defence Force; and thirdly, assistance
provided by the SA Police Service to the Republic of Mozambique in the
destruction of personnel mines from 1995 to 2002.

Through the Department of Foreign Affairs, South Africa has played an
important role in the formulation of a common African position on anti-
personnel mines. This is in keeping with the country’s efforts to help
eradicate conflicts in our region and on our continent. We believe that
peace and stability in Africa are prerequisites if we are to succeed in
fighting poverty and deprivation on our continent.

One of the goals of Nepad is to create long-term conditions for
development. These include building capacity in the areas of post-conflict
rehabilitation and reconstruction. A key element in creating such
conditions is for us to strive for a mine-free continent and indeed for a
mine-free world.

There are, however, certain challenges that we face in going forward.
Parliament must brace itself for some hard work so as to meaningfully
contribute to efforts to ensure that achievements made to date are secured,
that effective co-operation between state parties is strengthened and
sustained, and that all states that remain outside the treaty join our
ranks. Even more challenging is to ensure that mined areas are completely
cleared of mines, and resources mobilised to meet the financial demands of
victim assistance.

I must re-emphasise the good work our Parliament has done in ensuring the
ratification process of the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Treaty and the passing
of the relevant and supporting legislation.

Parliament will have to continue to play its oversight role to ensure the
implementation of legislation. I remind the House that in terms of the Anti-
personnel Mines Prohibition Act, South Africa cannot perform military
operations in alliance with a state that uses anti-personnel mines in the
theatre of war. It is therefore encouraging to know that, by November 2004,
143 states had signed the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Treaty.

However, whilst we do not understand why three countries that are permanent
members of UN Security Council have not signed the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Treaty, it is nevertheless encouraging that these three superpowers -
namely Russia, the United States of America and China – attended, as
observers, the UN meeting held in Nairobi in December 2004 on the Anti-
Personnel Mine Ban Treaty. I believe that in their contact with other
countries, these three superpowers will one day be converted, because if
they change, many countries that have not yet signed this treaty will be
able to sign.

In conclusion, I would like to assure you and this House that this
government is totally committed to the banning of anti-personnel land
mines, the destruction of existing stockpiles, mine awareness, the
clearance of emplaced mines, and victim assistance. The reason is very
clear, as I have stated before: You do not win a war with anti-personnel
land mines. All they do is maim and kill innocent civilians, especially
after the war has ended. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Deputy Minister, must I give the
two minutes that are left over to the hon Asmal? [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: No! No!

Prof A K ASMAL: Madam Chairperson, all war is violence. All weapons are
meant to kill or to maim. But anti-personnel weapons are, like nuclear
weapons, different from the normal methods of destruction and killing; they
do not discriminate.

That is why there is a very unusual basis for this debate. It is not an
executive-sponsored debate, because the Speaker wrote to the chairperson of
the portfolio committee in July to say that they had received requests from
the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which had convened the conference in
Nairobi, enquiring what Parliament would do to ensure the stricter
application of the convention, and what Parliament would ask our government
to do to involve the 50-odd - and some of them are very odd! – countries
which have not become party to the convention.

So, Parliament has a role here of scrutiny over executive decision and
action, we are addressing by saying that how our government, as the Deputy
Minister has said, will play its enormous role in ensuring that the
countries who have not ratified the convention will do so.

Let me say that anti-personnel mines have caused a profound medical, human
and social crisis in all the situations in which they were used in this
time. They’ve had a devastating effect. The International Committee of the
Red Cross, which is a kind of guardian over this, has said that in medical
terms anti-personnel mines have created an “epidemic” of exceptionally
severe injury, death and suffering.

In Angola, particularly, prosthetics - artificial limbs - is the biggest
industry, because Angola and Mozambique, through the extraordinary grace of
the apartheid regime for which South Africa bears a heavy responsibility,
have suffered grievously from this.

The indiscriminate nature of anti-personnel mines goes against the
customary principles of the law of armed conflict, that there must be a
separation between combatants and noncombatants. It is a war crime,
actually, not to separate them. That is why many of us have very strong
views of what happened at Fallujah in Iraq, and the war crimes that were
committed in the indiscriminate destruction at Fallujah. So, the General
Assembly of the United Nations has appealed to states in various
resolutions from 1993 onwards to place a moratorium on the trafficking of
such mines and to take steps to restrict their use.

So, we are very proud in the portfolio committee to have raised this matter
at the NA, because the NA is, in fact, the spokesperson of the juridical
and moral conscience of our country. The second reason why we are very
proud is that South Africa played an enormous role in the drafting of the
convention that we are talking about, the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and
on their Destruction. Remember, only anti-personnel mines are banned. Any
other mines that may have an impact on tanks and troop carriers,
regrettably, are allowed. But, of course, they have an effect, a spillover
effect, on civilians also.

But the reality of negotiations is such that you had to make a bargain to
exclude the other kinds of mines that are used against tanks and troop
carriers. So the OAU. Again, this is very interesting: African countries
moved in this regard,and an important thing to note is that the countries
that are refusing to accede to this convention or to become parties are
predominantly non-African countries. So, the African countries had made
their positions very clear.

South Africa then started to move towards an alternative that would totally
ban these mines and not regulate them as some of the other conventions
tried to do. This movement became known as the Ottawa Process and the
organisation associated with the Ottawa Process subsequently got the Nobel
Peace Prize as part of the great antiland mine campaign that was led from
there.

By 1997 a treaty was finished. That is remarkable, again, because an
initiative came from Africa, from South Africa, and within two years it was
adopted. It is exceptional that a treaty could be adopted by December 1997,
and South Africa was one of the first countries to become a party to it. So
it was a third source of great pleasure that our country took the lead in
this.

This was the first time that states had agreed to completely ban a weapon
that was already in widespread use, because by 1997 millions and millions
of land mines had been planted all over the world, and so the use, the
stockpiling, the production and the transfer of anti-personnel mines are
forbidden, and we are enjoined to destroy them. So this was the first time
that this had happened. The humanitarian consequences of this were enormous
because states were obliged to remove the threat of mines already on the
ground. There was a time limit laid down, and they must remove them.

There’s another reason, also, of which the Deputy Minister has made
mention, and that is Denel’s demining capacity. You see, when I was
chairperson of the Committee on Arms Transfers the UN started to use our
demining capacity in other parts of the world. We won’t allow demining
capacity to be sent to countries, because demining can be an aggressive
posture. A country could remove the mines and attack another country, so we
only allow the UN or international agencies to use that capacity. Therefore
we have a situation in which countries can only retain some mines for
development and training in mine detection, in clearance or destruction
techniques, and each country has to say whether it has destroyed its mines.
Mines in stock must be destroyed within a four-year period and emplaced
mines within a 10-year period.

The training programme, as the Deputy Minister said, is enormously
important and a state must therefore report to the UN the number of mines
it owns, the location of mine areas and the decommissioning of these. South
Africa’s role here was enormously important and because of its role there
were 153 accessions or ratifications of the convention by August of this
year. Very quickly, 150 states had signed by then.

There are a number of significant states that are not parties to the
convention. Apart from the three members of the Security Council, there are
other states that have said they have enemies on their land frontiers.
Well, if you have enemies on your land frontier then you use the mines to
stop aggressive action by tanks, troop carriers and others. You do not use
anti-personnel mines.

All my life I have had what I call the Asmal shame factor. I think these
countries should be shamed into ratifying, because these are the very
situations in which anti-personnel mines should not be used, in those areas
of great sensitivity. The countries that are involved in that are the
countries in the strategic areas of the world where there are tensions, and
you can imagine where these tensions are: the Middle East, all the Russian
regions, India, Pakistan and other areas where countries have not ratified
this.

It is a very important element in the policy of our government that there
should be universal adherence to this convention. The portfolio committee
therefore asked for a debate on this issue to ensure that we would employ
our absolute best efforts to ensure that other countries ratify. There are
many opportunities available, either in the African Union or in the
meetings of the UN. Resolutions are introduced at the General Assembly to
ensure that other countries are aware of this legislation and that they
respond.

So, this is the appeal we make as Parliament and the appeal that we will
make to a government that has taken the initiative in this. And as the
Deputy Minister has said, we cannot stop yet.

I think that we have suffered as a continent, particularly in civil wars,
more than any other continent. We have begun to put a stop to it. We must
ensure, therefore, that civilians in more vulnerable situations elsewhere
are not captives to this wanton act of destruction. So, we appeal to our
government to employ its best efforts in all the forums of the world so
that the world becomes a more civilised place and, if it does not sound
very incongruous, that we fight slightly more civilised wars rather than
the barbaric wars that have blotted our landscape for the past 20 years.
Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Thank you, hon Asmal. I hope we can
do without all kinds of wars, and not only the uncivilised ones.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Chairperson, the role of Parliaments in eliminating
anti-personnel mines is dealt with in the 2004 Nairobi Declaration and the
Nairobi Action Plan of the Inter-Parliamentary Union document.

The Nairobi Action Plan calls for 70 steps to be taken by state parties
during the period 2005-09. Before dealing with the constructive steps
detailed in the Nairobi Declaration, it is important to note that the
number of new victims affected by land mines has reportedly decreased
drastically. Additionally, it has also been reported that 37 million
stockpiled mines have been destroyed.

One very essential requirement placed on state parties is to ensure that
all anti-personnel mines in mined areas under their control by no later
than 10 years after the coming into force of that particular convention for
the state party.

However, despite the achievements of the convention due to the spirit of co-
operation between states, international organisations and civil society,
the convention does not cover anti-vehicle mines with anti-handling devices
or sensitive fuses.

Although there is no consensus with regard to the above, it is the role of
Parliament to legislate according to what it regards as morally and
ethically permissible by its government in the use of armaments, such as
illustrated by the ban on land mines. So, too, Parliament should take a
proactive step in legislating against the use of anti-vehicle mines with
anti-handling devices or sensitive fuses as mentioned here.

Finally, state parties are to submit annual reports to the UN Secretary-
General about the type and quantity in stock, as well as other measures
taken by the government. It is Parliament’s duty and prerogative to ensure
that this is done. It is also required by government to attend meetings
held on an annual basis with the possible review of the treaties, such as
the First Review Conference held during 2004.
As the success of the convention is based on co-operation between party
states, and therefore a high degree of trust is involved, it is the task of
parliaments in exercising their oversight role over the executives to
ensure that governments’ undertakings are met. I thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Chairperson, in 1998 thousands of land mines were
destroyed in this country. As a signatory to the protocol and the treaty,
South Africa has been spearheading in the AU to ensure that all other
countries adhere to the protocol, and all of them have signed the protocol.

We as the Portfolio Committee on Defence want to encourage the Department
of Foreign Affairs to spearhead the positioning of the AU and to assume the
position that all countries should sign the protocol and make sure that the
convention is accepted as it stands. Therefore, such ratification compels
other countries like America, Russia and China to do the same and sign the
protocol and adhere to the treaty as such. It is by no means acceptable
that the so-called big countries don’t adhere to the land mine treaties and
the protocol.

There are innocent civilians that need to be compensated. It is highly
irregular to see that in other countries there are so many people that do
not have legs and arms because of land mines. We urge all countries that
have suffered this scourge to make sure that they have a commission
compensating those people who have suffered, who have no legs or arms
because of the land mines.

We also urge the Department of Foreign Affairs and our Department of
Defence to undertake such a commission and to make sure that when they sit
on the AU, they take a position that will go to the Security Council to
urge countries to compensate those people who have suffered because of
these land mines and to make sure that those people and their families are
compensated. Only then can they live like human beings, because at this
moment they all suffer because of what happened before.

As we are adhering to the standards of a civilised world, we urge those
countries where most people have suffered to make sure that they are
correctly compensated. We thank you, Madam Chairperson.

Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Deputy Chair, hon members, South Africa is a leading
member of the international campaign to eliminate anti-personnel mines.
Within the Southern African region, especially, we have a specific
obligation in this regard. Firstly, it is in our national interests to
ensure that these cruel and indiscriminate killing devices are not present
in our neighbourhood.

Secondly, we have a moral obligation, too, namely that we must assist in
the removal of anti-personnel mines in the regions to which we sold them or
in which they were set by the previous South African regime.

The role of Parliament is to continuously assess our specific efforts in
eliminating anti-personnel mines in countries such as Angola and
Mozambique. This Parliament’s role extends further insofar as we are
obliged to ensure that the international, protocols and agreements that we
acceded to, and specifically those of the UN, are in fact being complied
with.

As a country that has vocally campaigned on the international scene against
war and aggression, and in particular against the use of anti-personnel
mines, we must be seen to be vigorously implementing and promoting the
international undertakings that we have made. Failure to do so will merely
cause us to be labelled as hypocritical crusaders. [Interjections.] And, in
the process, we would undermine our standing and diplomatic influence in
the community of nations. I thank you, Madam Deputy Chairperson. [Time
expired.]

Mr G P MNGOMEZULU: Madam Chair, hon members, in a speech delivered by the
Minister of Defence, Comrade Mosiuoa Lekota, on the Anti-Personnel Mine
Bill, on 5 June 2003, he said the following:


   South Africa remains totally committed to the banning of anti-personnel
   mines, the destruction of existing stockpiles, mine awareness, the
   clearance of unplaced mines, and victim assistance.

The Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction is an
international agreement that seeks to ban anti-personnel mines. This
treaty, in our view, is the most comprehensive international instrument for
eradicating the deadly scourge of mines.

The treaty commits member states to putting an end to the suffering and
casualties caused by these anti-personnel mines. South Africa, in its
commitment to the treaty, has thus far placed a moratorium on the export of
all mines; has destroyed its stockpiled anti-personnel mines; has passed
the Anti-Personnel Mines Prohibition Act, Act 36 of 2003; and is
implementing it to the letter. It has also signed and ratified the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction.

South Africa has also, as prescribed by the convention, taken appropriate
legal measures to prevent the activities prohibited by the convention.
Penalties include 25 years of imprisonment or a fine not exceeding R1
million, coupled with forfeiture of affected property to the state.

The ANC-led government is committed to ensuring that its citizens live in a
safe environment. We are all well aware that this deadly scourge visits
immense pain and suffering upon defenceless victims and their families.
Many of those afflicted are innocent children and the consequences are
always devastating, as they result in death and loss of limbs even after
the conflict has ended.

We are also aware that conflicts in peacetime and a lack of socioeconomic
development lead to the proliferation of poverty, hopelessness and despair.
These are conditions that are hard to recover from when you have been
disempowered through the loss of loved ones, and when everything you owned
and worked for is destroyed through a conflict not of your own making.

South Africa must not waver in its resolve to provide a safe environment
for its citizens and to promote peace and stability in Africa and in the
entire world.

In conclusion, let me reconfirm our commitment to fully supporting the
Nairobi Declaration, and I further wish to state that we will strengthen
and increase our efforts to clear those areas littered with mines that
cause so much pain.

South Africa will continue to destroy stockpiled anti-personnel mines in
accordance with our time-bound obligation and will continue to assist land
mine victims. Equally important to us is the promotion of the universal
acceptance of the convention and adherence thereto.

Lastly, the ANC-led government remains firmly committed to the banning of
anti-personnel mines, the destruction of existing stockpiles, mine
awareness and victim assistance. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, an anti-personnel mine is defined as, and I
quote, “a mine designed to be exploded by the presence, proximity or
contact of a person and that will incapacitate, injure or kill one or more
persons”.

This sounds more like a trap set for rodents than humans. Many innocent
lives have been taken and compromised by the use of such anti-personnel
mines.

In line with international agreements and commitments, the MF supports the
prohibition of the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of anti-
personnel mines within South Africa and promotes their allegiance to the
rest of Africa. We need to learn that war and genocide are not means to
victory. As Parliament, we have the power to enforce legislation and
policies to ban the use of anti-personnel mines in South Africa.

This plight can be extended to our African brothers and sisters in that
innocent lives have been taken, and in order to end that, we need to act
now. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr L N DIALE: Madam Chair, hon President, Deputy President, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers in absentia, chairperson of the portfolio committee
Comrade Kader Asmal, members and comrades, Chief of the Defence Force and
Secretary for Defence in absentia . . . ``ke a le dumediša ka moka’’. [I
greet you all.]

The decision of Cabinet on 19 February 1997 prohibited the use,
development, production and stockpiling of anti-personnel land mines. The
South African Cabinet further decided that South Africa’s existing
stockpile of anti-personnel land mines be destroyed. I am dealing with the
policy anyway. We are still standing by that decision.

As a result, on 21 May 1997 the first public destruction of a limited
number of South Africa’s stockpiled anti-personnel land mines commenced. On
3 October 1997 the final phase of the destruction of South Africa’s
stockpiled anti-personnel land mines was carried out.

From 3 December to 4 December 1997, South Africa took part in the World
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, and South Africa
continues to participate in other conventions and meetings aimed at
promoting these programmes.

In conclusion, we call upon all remaining states that are still to sign the
convention to do so. We also encourage those signatories of the convention
that have not done so to ratify it as soon as possible. The ANC supports
this policy decision of the country.

Motšwa-gabo ga a laele; go laela ke go se boe. Ke a leboga. [I will not say
goodbye because this is my home, and that might mean that I will not
return. Thank you.]

Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Chairperson, hon members, thank you
very much for your support. Again, I commit the Department of Defence and
the government to the total ban on anti-personnel mines. We will try,
through the Department of Foreign Affairs, to influence those countries
that are still sceptical. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS ON OVERSIGHT TOURS TO DE AAR (97 AMMUNITION
  DEPOT); BLOEMFONTEIN (AIRFORCE BASE BLOEMSPRUIT, TEMPE MILITARY BASE AND
                THE ARMY SUPPORT BASE) AND SWARTKLIP PRODUCTS

Mr T S DODOVU: Madam Deputy Chairperson, one of the most important study
tours that the Portfolio Committee on Defence has undertaken as part of its
oversight function over the department and the SA National Defence Force
during the period under review, was the visit to the Tempe Military Base in
Bloemfontein.

We recall that, several years ago, a fatal shooting incident occurred at
the SA Infantry Battalion at the Tempe Military Base. This fatal shooting
incident reminded all of us about the past racial divisions and
polarisation which had catastrophic consequences for the future of South
Africa.

The tragedy that befell the Tempe Military Base was without parallel in the
history of South Africa, particularly after the advent of our new
constitutional dispensation in 1994. Indeed, that was a tragedy that shook
and stunned the progressive mankind. It was a staggering blow to the
efforts of building a unified, disciplined and professional Defence Force,
capable of fulfilling the Constitutional imperatives of defending and
protecting the Republic, its territorial integrity and its people, in
accordance with the Constitution and the principle of international law.

When the portfolio committee visited the Tempe Military Base it, indeed,
recalled that the tragedy was a blow that was felt most intensely by those
men and women who were expected to play a leading role in conflict
management operations and international peace missions. It was a tragedy
that can never be forgotten.

The primary objective of the study tour therefore was to ascertain progress
in respect of the transformation of the SA National Defence Force,
including the successes and challenges at the military units, after the
fatal shooting incident, at the SA Infantry Battalion. As part of this
study tour, the portfolio committee visited the 44 Parachute Regiment,
which provides combat-ready airborne infantry for the SA National Defence
Force. It is important to mention that the parachute regiment provides
training for the army, the navy, the air force and the military health
service.

We feel that the challenges facing the SA Infantry Battalion need to be
attended to as well. This includes the poor state of facilities and
equipment and the filling of vacant posts. If these challenges are fully
addressed, they will further raise the morale of our troops as they are
deployed in Burundi, in the DRC, and internally in areas like Pongola in
KwaZulu-Natal.

Modulasetulo ya hlomphehang, komiti e ile ya etela sebaka sa Group 36, moo
ho bonahetseng hore ho na le mathata a mannyane a amanang le ho nyollwa ha
basebetsi le maemo a badudi.Ke nahana hore lefapha le tlamehile ho lebella
mathata ao hore le tle le kgone ho a fedisa. (Translation of Sesotho
paragraph follows)

[Chairperson, the committee visited the area known as Group 36, and judging
from what we heard from the people there, it was clear that there are
problems with regard to employee promotions and the living conditions. I am
of the opinion that the department should look into those problems and take
measures to solve them.]

Despite enormous improvements since the last fatal shooting incident, the
department has to continue to attend to the transformation challenges
facing members of the SA National Defence Force.

As members of the portfolio committee, we reaffirm our unflinching
commitment to help the SA National Defence Force to prepare and employ the
defence capabilities, which are commensurate with the needs of South
Africa, as regulated by the Constitution, by national legislation, as well
as the parliamentary and executive direction.

Our strongest commitments will fail if we neglect to maintain avenues of
dialogue within the SA National Defence Force. Such dialogues thrive in a
climate of humility, credibility and trust.
To this end, we pledge to facilitate understanding and collaboration. We
also pledge to engage and embrace all constituencies, so that they must
share our vision, which is that a sustainable future for humankind depends
on peace and stability, a precious heritage for future generations.

We express, lastly, our deepest gratitude to the whole management of the
Department of Defence, for organising a programme and the study tour on
behalf of the Portfolio Committee on Defence. In particular, we further
express our appreciation to all members of the SA National Defence Force at
the Tempe Military Base for their generous hospitality and excellent
arrangement of the programme. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson, the parliamentary committee for
defence made a successful study tour to the De Aar 97 Ammunition Depot and
Bloemfontein. We received a thorough briefing at these respective
establishments and noted, with a great deal of interest and concern, the
very many challenges that they are confronted with.

It is the view of the parliamentary committee for defence that many of
these challenges are not restricted to one service, but are generic of the
SANDF. All of these are included in the report and, where necessary,
critical recommendations have been made to address those challenges.

The following are but just some of the issues that need our urgent
attention: At the De Aar ammunition depot, we learned that there are
currently 78 000 tons of obsolete ammunitions, of which 23 000 tons are
stored at De Aar. Up to 90% of the SANDF ammunition is older than 20 years
and it would take approximately 34 years for the Department of Defence to
dispose of its unserviceable ammunition in the conventional manner.
Therefore there is an urgent need for us to look at the purchase of a
disposal plan, or else there is a disaster waiting to happen.

At the air force base at Bloemspruit we learned that the recruitment and
retention of pilots, air traffic controllers, technicians and engineers
pose a serious challenge to the operational capacity of the SA Air Force.
Funding for the Rooivalk was another matter for concern.

There are issues of staffing that are also challenges. For example, at one
SA Infantry Battalion there are 1 019 available posts, but only 747 are
filled, with 42 civilian personnel. The same situation prevails at the
armour formation and the SA Tank Regiment. There are a host of other
issues, including representivity, repair and maintenance of infrastructure
and equipment, etc, all of which cannot be corrected or addressed without
adequate funding, which is highly unlikely to be forthcoming, thanks to the
strategic defence packages which consume the bulk of the special defence
account, which is currently standing at just over R9 billion.

In response to my member statement regarding the operational capacity and
the challenges of the SANDF, the Deputy Minister, instead of honestly
dealing with the problems confronting the SANDF, chose to divert attention
from the real issues, making false allegations against the DA, accusing it
of leaking the confidential report on the combat readiness of the SANDF
and, in doing so, by implication, cast aspersions on my personal integrity.

Only this morning, the chairperson of the committee informed us that no
member of the parliamentary committee of defence was found to have been
responsible for this leak. Therefore you owe this House… You had the
courage to make that accusation so, when you get the chance, use that
courage and retract your remarks. [Interjections.]

Our conclusion about the crisis facing the SANDF is based on information
gathered from numerous DoD briefings – I don’t go and sleep in the
committee, I make notes - and oversight visits such as this one, including
but not limited to the closed briefing in question.

In conclusion, Winston Churchill believed that criticism performs the same
function as pain. It hurts but, more importantly, it identifies that which
needs attention. We will continuously highlight the problems confronting
the SANDF, no matter how much the Deputy Minister is going to protest, to
ensure that South Africans have a professional and efficient Defence Force.
Show some courage and retract your remarks. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Mphathisihlalo, ngize lapha ukuzogcwalisa ukuthi saya e-De
Aar sabona ukuhlala kwezimpahla zethu nomsebenzi, ikakhulukazi izinhlamvu
ezindala. Sabona ukuthi kunengozi enkulu kabi, ngakho uMnyango wezokuVikela
kumele wenze ongase ukwenze okusemandleni ukuze kutholakale indawo la
uzobeka khona yonke leya misebenzi enjeya eyingozi engaqhuma noma yinini
bese iqhumela abantu abasebenza kuyona nezakhiwo eziseduze bese ziba
sengozini.

Okwesibili, saya ukuyobona la kufundiswa khona labo abandizisa amabhanoyi
sabona indlela abaqeqeshwa ngayo nendlela abasebenza ngayo. Lapho-ke sabona
ukuthi umsebenzi usemkhulu wokuthi kufundiswe izingane zethu ukuthi ziqale
ukuyobonwa, ziyofunwa . . . [Ubuwelewele.] Cha ngiyacela Sihlalo,
ungithulisele loya nkosikazi lowaya. [Uhleko.]

Saya kubona ukuthi izingane zifundiswa kanjani ukundiza. Ngakho-ke njengoba
zifunda ziqhubeka siyethemba ukuthi mhonishwa lezi zingane zakithi
zizofunwa manje emanyuvesi ngoba zincane ezakithi izingane kunezezinye
izinhlanga. Ngoba kuyabonakala ukuthi ukufundela ukundizisa amabhanoyi
kungumsebenzi omkhulu kakhulu, siyacela ukuthi uMnyango uye kumanyuvesi
uyozifuna lezi zingane.

Okokugcina, saya laphaya eSwartklip sayobheka saze samema abasebenzi
bakwaDenel ukuthi bayobheka ukuthi ubudlelwane phakathi kwabo nabantu
abakhelene nabo embonini ela eKapa kuhamba kanjani. Sathola ukuthi
kunobudlelwane obungebuhle neze phakathi komakhelwane, abantu abakhe
laphaya, nemboni. Abantu basuke benze iphutha bavule izingcingo bangene
ngaphakathi kanti mhlawumbe laphaya ngaphakathi kwakhiwa izinhlamvu
eziqhumayo, eziyingozi ezingase zibabeke esimweni esilukhuni.

Angazi ukuthi ngenzeni kuloya nkosikazi, Sihlalo. [Uhleko.] Ngakho-ke
siyacela ukuthi uMnyango uyiqaphele le nto ukuthi lapho kukhona khona
abantu bomphakathi, okwenziwa khona izinto eziyingozi . . . (Translation of
Zulu speech follows.)

[Chairperson, I am here to confirm that we went to De Aar and we saw how
our resources, especially old ammunition are kept. We saw that there is a
big danger; therefore the Department of Defence must do whatever it can
within its powers to make a storeroom available where all dangerous
products that could explode anytime like the ones we saw there could be
kept. These, if they explode, can put the lives of those who work with them
and the neighbouring buildings in jeopardy.

Secondly, we went to see where the pilots are trained and we saw the way
they are trained and the way they work. We then saw that there is still a
lot to be done to teach our kids to want to be seen and be wanted . . .
[Interjections.] Mr Chairperson, I am pleading with you, could you please
tell that woman to keep quiet, that one. [Laughter.]

We saw how our kids are taught to fly; therefore as they continue with
their flying lessons, we hope that there will also be a search for black
students at the universities, because they are in the minority as compared
to the other races. We ask the department to go on a recruitment drive and
look for these students at the universities because it is clear that flying
a plane is such a huge task.

Lastly we went to Swartklip on an oversight visit and we even invited
personnel from Denel to see how the relationship between the workforce and
the surrounding communities here in Cape Town is. We found that there is an
unhealthy relationship between the surrounding communities and Swartklip.
People make a mistake by encroaching on the facility and opening gaps in
fences to enter there in Swartklip and this is a safety risk, because you
would find that there are explosive products which are very hazardous that
can put them at risk.

Chairperson, I do not know what I have done to that woman. [Laughter.] We
therefore ask the department to monitor this so that things that put
people’s lives in danger are not done in public places . . . ]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Ndlovu, could you take
your seat, please.

Mnu S E ASIYA: Sihlalo obekekileyo, ukulungisa imposiso; ndicela ukuba
ilungu elibekekileyo lithi xa lithetha nelinye ilungu lilibize njengelungu
elibekekileyo, lingathi: “Lo nkosikazi.” Ndicela ukuba lirhoxise loo
magama, Sihlalo. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mr S E ASIYA: Hon chairperson, to rectify a mistake, I would like to ask
the hon member to address the other member as the hon member and refrain
from saying: ``That woman.” I would like him to withdraw those words,
Chairperson.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, would you please
address members as honourable? And I thought the hon member there was very
impressed with your presentation, but please proceed, hon member.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. Ngenzenjani, ngishaye ihlombe ngokuthi
uyangesekela? [Thank you Chairperson. What do I do, must I clap hands
because he supports me?]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Uyakusekela. [She supports you.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: O, Nkosikazi! [Ubuwelewele.]

Bengithi-ke uMnyango kufanele ukuthi ukuqaphele ukuthi lapho kukhona khona
imboni kukhona nabantu eduzane, kube khona ubudlelwane obusemthethweni
nobuhlanganisa abantu noMnyango, abantu bangawubuki uMnyango njengento
engale bona bengapha, kube nguthina nabo, kube negebe phakathi kwabo. Lokho
kuyasiza ukuthi bakwazi ukusebenzisana.

Siyayibeka-ke le mibiko ukuthi yamukelwe lapha eNdlini.

Mhlonishwa ngiyabonga, ngibonga futhi nakumhlonishwa wenkosikazi okade
engisekela. [Uhleko.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Oh, woman! [Interjections.]]

I was saying the department should see to it that where there is an
industry and people around it, there is at least a legal bond between
surrounding communities and the department. People should not see the
department as the other and they, the self. Instead it should be us. That
helps in building a healthy working relationship.

We ask your support of these reports.[Applause.]]

Honourable Chairperson, thank you I also thank the honourable woman who
supported me.]

Mrs X C MAKASI: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister and hon members,
today it is a pleasure for me to table the report on our oversight role as
defence portfolio committee in this august House. On 8 March we visited
Denel’s Swartklip after concerns were raised about the plant itself, as it
is located in the heart of different communities. Surrounding communities
are Khayelitsha and Mitchells Plain, which resulted in a facility becoming
a health and safety risk.

Sasikhokelwa ngusihlalo wethu, uQabane uKader Asmal, samkelwa ngobubele
nguMnu Picket olibambela likamanejala jikelele apha eNtshona Koloni, kunye
neqela lakhe. Sibulela kakhulu kubo. Eyona nto isivuyise kakhulu
kukufumanisa ukuba kukho abantu basekuhlaleni abangamalungu ekomiti
kaDenel. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[We were lead by our chairperson, Comrade Kader Asmal, and we received a
warm welcome from Mr Picket, an acting manager-general here at the Western
Cape, and his group. We are very thankful to them. What make us happier is
to discover that there are members of the community who are members of the
Denel committee.]

Swartklip Products are used for commercial, military and rock-breaking
purposes. The products include calibre ammunitions, as well as high
explosives and pyrotechnic products. Swartklip is a world leader in forming
low and high velocity ammunition rounds. It exports 90% of its products;
70% is military and the rest is commercial.

I-Swartklip inabasebenzi abangama-554, kwaye ama-80 ekhulwini abasebenzi
ngabantu abamnyama. Basixelele ukuba enye inkxaso abanayo liziko loluleko .
. .  [Swartklip employs 554 workers, and 80 percent are Blacks. They told
us they got another support from the correctional centre . . . ]

 . . . a community and personal training and development centre, as well as
assistance with small and medium enterprise development, and driver’s
training for workers. According to Swartklip, the turnover was R208 million
in 1999-2000, with a net profit of R9 million, and labour cost was 20%. In
2003-04 the turnover was R478 million, the net profit R54 million, and
labour cost was 16%.

The Swartklip property covers about 517 hectares and there are different
bird and plant species. Swartklip received the ISO 14001 certificate in
2001. A requirement for this environment certificate was an existence of an
integrated waste management system. This system was approved in 1996-98.
The five-star Nosa certificate, a safety rating funded by the industry, was
received in 2000.

I-Swartklip inomntu wonyango ohleli ekhona ngamaxesha onke, nekomiti ehleli
ikhona yokuhlala ejongene nokhuseleko nempilo yabasebenzi. Siyile komiti
saye saxelelwa ukuba iingozi emsebenzini zinqabe kakhulu, noxa kukho amarhe
okuba abantu abathe bathatha umhlala-phantsi baye bahlaselwe sisifo sombefu
nomhlaza, nto leyo eqwalaselwe ngamandla yile nkampani.

Isicelo sasenziwe yile nkampani kwiSebe leMicimbi yezeNdalo noKhenketho
nakumasipala sokuba kwakhiwe indawo yokutshisela ukuthoba umgangatho
wongcoliseko lwendalo kuba betshisela kwindawo evulekileyo intsimbi
ezinobunzima.

ISebe leMicimbi yezeNdalo noKhenketho lathembisa ngokukhupha ingxelo
ngophando oluzimeleyo ngoJanyuwari ka-2005. Basayilindile loo ngxelo.

Kwakhe kwakho nesinye isithyolo sokuba ungcoliseko lwendalo lukho emanzini
eSwartklip. Uphando lwe-CSIR zange luyifumanise inobunyani loo nto. Ikhona
irhasi eyakhe yavuza ngomhla wesi-6 kuAgasti 2003.

Siyile komiti saye saxelelwa ukuba olo ngcoliseko aluzange lwenze monakalo
ungako, ngakumbi ebantwaneni. [Laphela ixesha.] (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Swartklip has got a health worker who is always present, and a community
committee, which is there to ensure the safety and the health status of the
workers. As the committee we were told that accidents at work seldom occur,
although there were rumours that people who went on pension were attacked
by fever and cancer, something which this company is safeguarding very
strong.

This company made an application to the Department of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism and the municipality that a burning place be built to reduce
the amount of nature pollution, because heavy metals were burnt in an open
space.

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism promised to release a
report concerning an independent enquiry in January 2005. They are still
waiting for that report.

There was also an allegation that nature pollution is present in the water
at Swartklip. The CSIR investigation did not find any truth in that. There
was gas that leaked on the 6th of August 2003.

As this committee we were told that pollution did not cause much damage,
especially to people. [Time expired.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF acknowledges and applauds the hard work
put in by the Portfolio Committee on Defence on both reports. According to
the reports circumstances between De Aar, Bloemfontein and Swartklip are
very similar. The MF strongly supports the relocation of the Swartklip
products company, noting the threat it poses to the surrounding community.

A further recommendation made for Swartklip is the view of the situation
there. It is found suitable and should be mobilised as soon as possible. In
view of the report made on the De Aar School of Ammunition and 97
Ammunition Depot, recommendations are agreed to consider the situation
there. As for the Airforce Base Bloemspruit, the Tempe Military and the
Army Support Bases, the MF notes the predicaments in these areas and
unanimously supports the recommendations suggested.

We specially support recommendation 9, which says military justice should
be fast-tracked because justice delayed is justice denied. Thank you very
much.[Applause.]

Mr O E MONARENG: Mr Chairperson and Ministers, if they are still around . .
. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: No, they’ve all left!

Mr O E MONARENG: Oh, all Ministers and their Deputies have left!
Allow me to give a vivid exposition of the visit to De Aar, 97 Ammunition
Depot, and Bloemfontein Airforce Base, Bloemspruit, etc. I’m sure that my
comrades have covered the visits to Swartklip and other military bases.

Mine is just to put into context the reasons that made our committee
undertake the oversight visit, which to our minds is an endeavour that
should not be reduced to mere excursions and leisure exercises. I’m sure
that all of us know that oversight visits are very important.

At the De Aar 97 Ammunition Depot the delegation had the benefit of a
briefing by Officer Commanding Col N Majola and the then Maj-Gen Binda, the
then Chief of Joint Support, and Mrs V Daniel of the National Conventional
Arms Control Committee and Mr B van Staden of Armscor, were also in
attendance.

The committee learnt that the SA National Defence Force acquired large
quantities of ammunition during the 1970s and 1980s, most of which was not
used and is currently being stored in De Aar, Jan Kempdorp and
Naboomspruit, which are the major ammunition depots of the SA National
Defence Force.

In earlier years, until 1995 the regime dumped tons and tons of ammunition
in the sea. Due to the advent of the new dispensation, our government had
to adhere to international conventions and agreements, and had to stop
these wrong practices.

At De Aar our delegation also learnt that the depot consisted of 186
magazines, meaning magazines where ammunition is kept and stored, not
magazines for your AK-47! The depot is the size of 29 rugby fields and has
a 49 km rail network; it is secured by a high-voltage fence, detection
alarms, an X-ray machine, metal detectors, a monitor room and surveillance
cameras, which means it is very secure.

There are currently 78 000 tons of obsolete and unserviceable ammunition at
the three major depots, of which 23 000 tons are at De Aar, and this is a
fact which was alluded to by Mr Shah. The percentages of unserviceable or
obsolete and serviceable or usable ammunition are 67% and 33% respectively.
The guaranteed shelf life for shells and pyrotechnics is 10 years and for
small arms ammunition 20 years. The point, however, is that 90% of the
SANDF’s ammunition is older than 20 years.

As the committee we have urged the department to investigate the
feasibility of erecting an ammunition disposal plant, which would address
the backlog of ammunition to be disposed of in seven to eight years instead
of the 34 years it would take if the old methods of disposal were to be
used. It is therefore against this background that the committee in its
final report had to make the following recommendations: firstly, the
possible inclusion of ammunition disposal in the revised White Paper on
Defence and the Defence Review; secondly, the country’s continuance of the
observation of international agreements and conventions that seek the
protection of the environment; thirdly, the investigation of the NCACC-
approved sales of serviceable small calibre ammunition to fund the disposal
of obsolete ammunition; fourthly, the pursuance of the erection of a
disposal plant, but in the short term the danger of ammunition storage
should be addressed through innovative means.

At Airforce Base Bloemspruit, which we visited, we also investigated the
reasons why such a base existed. We discovered that the base provided an
air capacity for the Defence Force through basic flying training at
Langebaanweg, helicopters at Bloemspruit, transport aircraft at Waterkloof
and fighter aircraft at Hoedspruit and Makhado.

The committee had an opportunity to witness the manoeuvres of the Rooivalk,
and an explanation was given on the difficulties of marketing and selling
the Rooivalk. Yet the project on it is ongoing and funding of R200 million
per annum, of which R10 million would go to missiles, is needed to operate
it effectively over a period of three years.

The following recommendations were made by the committee in the report:
firstly, recruitment, training and the retention of scarce skills in the
helicopter environment are challenges and should be addressed through
incentive programmes; secondly, clarity should be sought about the
operational funding of the Rooivalk over the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework so that the Rooivalk receives financial and institutional
support.

In conclusion, the committee has made many more visits which are tabled in
its report before Parliament to make oversight work a very worthwhile
exercise, to encourage the department to adhere to the Cabinet’s and
government’s imperatives and parities, and lastly, to exercise civilian
oversight over the military.

I just want to take this opportunity to clarify a small point. Earlier Mr
Shah came forward with a very honest presentation with which I, as his
colleague in the committee, agree despite the fact that he’s from the DA.
The only point he raised when we held the portfolio committee meeting,
which was a closed meeting, was that he said on record he had a right to
make notes.

We didn’t want him to exercise his right to make notes, precisely because
on that day we were actually avoiding leaking information, because the
meeting on the combat readiness of the entire SA National Defence Force was
a closed session, and we promised as members of the committee that we would
withhold the secrets of the department so that the department, in dealing
with the committee, could trust us and that we should be in a position to
trust the department.

This morning I can confirm that the chairperson has actually alluded to the
fact that members of the portfolio committee did not leak information. If
there is any leak it was done from outside that meeting and not from within
the portfolio committee. I want to thank you one and all. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Good afternoon, Mike. [Interjections.]

Hon Chairperson, members of Parliament, I want to start by saying effective
oversight is crucial for the transformation of the department. We thank the
committee for these oversight visits. We take note of the reports and we
will consider the recommendations made. The issue of erecting a disposal
plant is already at an advanced stage. We will definitely at some stage
report to the committee about that.

The air force has already started the exercise of recruiting young black
children for various responsibilities in the air force, and we have told
the department in no uncertain terms that if they cannot train these blacks
here in South Africa we will send them to other countries such as Zimbabwe
and Ethiopia, which have got the best training facilities on the continent,
so we are addressing that.

What I would probably ask the members of Parliament to do is to make sure
that they convey this message to especially those young blacks who are
doing maths and science in their schools.

We are embarking on a programme of improving the image of the department,
and the most important thing in that respect is the relationship between
the department and the people, because we want to make sure that the image
of the past is removed and that there is a close relationship between the
department and the people it is supposed to serve.

Xa ndiza kuyeka, Mhlalingaphambili, ndiyavuya ukuqaphela ukuba intshumayelo
yam imshukumisile umhlekazi lo wam, uSayedali-Shah kangangokuba
uyaxhumaxhuma. Ukuba bendisecaweni, bendiza kucela ukuba kubekwe isitulo
ukuze uSayedali-Shah aguquke ukuze izono zakhe zixolelwe, ngoba xa ulivile
ilizwi, okulandelayo kukuba uguquke endaweni yokuba ube utakataka.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[In conclusion, Chairperson, I am happy to note that my sermon has touched
the hon Sayedali-Shah and that he is jumping up as a result of that. If I
were in church, I would have asked for a chair to be brought forward so
that the hon Sayedali-Shah could repent and his sins could be forgiven.
When the sermon has touched you, the next thing to do is for you to repent
instead of jumping up and down.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: I don’t understand. You should say it in
English! Why don’t you say it in English?

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, before I rise to
move the motion, I just want to rise on a point of order: While the Deputy
Minister was speaking, the hon Shah interjected by saying: “Why don’t you
speak in English?” Now, my understanding is that our Constitution
recognises 11 different official languages, all of which have equal right
in this Chamber, so if a member wishes to follow a speech, there is an
interpreting service. I don’t think it’s in order to shout at members about
what language they should be using. [Interjections.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson, could you give me an opportunity,
please?

HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I haven’t recognised you yet, but
proceed.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: When I said: “Why don’t you say what you said in
English?”, it didn’t mean that I didn’t recognise the other languages.
[Interjections.] The allegation was made in English. There are those who
don’t understand the indigenous languages, and if he gives clarity on what
he intended to say or if he denies what he said, people should understand.
I don’t understand isiZulu, so I don’t even know what he’s saying.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon member! Hon Sayedali-
Shah, could you please address the Chair. I see you are communicating
directly with the member who raised the point of order.

Firstly, I think the point should be taken in the context that we do
respect all languages and I think we should accord those languages the
respect they deserve. There is a service provided by this House for all
members to follow, and I think we should adhere to that. Now, hon Shah, I’m
going to . . . [Interjections.] Often in debates . . . [Interjections.]
Hold on, please hold on. Often in debates I have indicated to you that
shouting at members who are at the podium is not desirable.

There are mechanisms in this House. You could rise on a point of order and
address the issue, but simply shouting at members at the podium is not
acceptable. I would ask that in future you adhere to the mechanisms that
exist in the House of addressing issues. [Interjections.] Mr Shah, I’m
addressing you.

I would like you to adhere to that. We do everything in our power to
accommodate as many people and views and ways of addressing one another as
possible, but really, I think we should use the existing measures that work
for everybody. Could we agree on that?

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Yes, Sir.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Very well, you may respond.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: When the hon Deputy Minister made the false
allegation it was heard on television by a vast majority of the public of
this country. Now if he wants to exonerate me – and I want to come clean,
because my personal integrity was involved, not yours, Chief Whip! - he
should say it in English so that those who don’t understand isiZulu will
now understand that I wasn’t responsible for the leak.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, Mr Shah! [Interjections.]
Order! [Interjections.] Mr Shah, may I remind you that when whatever was
said – you are making an allegation that an accusation was made – I was not
in the Chair, and I cannot then respond on behalf of another presiding
officer. I hope the matter is now laid to rest. Thank you. Could we
proceed, hon Deputy Chief Whip?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We move that the report be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Oversight Tours to De Aar(97 Ammunition Depot); Bloemfonein
(Airforce Base Bloemspruit, Tempe Military Base and Army Suport Base)
accordingly adopted.

Report on Oversight Tour to Swartklip Products accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:32.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           FRIDAY, 26 AUGUST 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    The following papers have been tabled  and  are  now  referred  to  the
    relevant committees as mentioned below:

      1. The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on Public


        Accounts  for  consideration  and  the   Portfolio   Committee   on
        Provincial and Local Government:

          a) General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of
             Local Government for the financial year ended 30 June 2004 [RP
             73-2005].

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Foreign Affairs:

           a) Report of the South African Delegation to the Third Ordinary
              Session of the Pan-African Parliament, 29 March2005, held at
              Gallagher Estates, Midrand.


            b) Report on Information and Update Workshop for Pan-African
               Parliament Standing Committee on Cooperation, International
               Relations and Conflict Resolution, 1-2 April 2005.

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
             Bank for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
             Southern Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.[RP 51-2005].

    4.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:

          a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Malaysia for the
             Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
             Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of
             section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Double Taxation Convention
             between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the Republic of Malaysia.

    5.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance:
          a) Activities Report of the Development Bank of Southern Africa
             for 2004-2005.


          b) Development Bank of Southern Africa – Footprints of Development
             2001-2005.

          c) Government Notice No 1114 published in Government Gazette No
             27773 dated 15 July 2005: Amendment of the list of public
             entities as contained in schedule 2 and 3 of the Public Finance
             Management Act, 1999.

          d) Proclamation No R.32 published in Government Gazette No 27766
             dated 8 July 2005: Appointment and Re-appointment of members of
             the Tax Courts in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 53
             of 1962).

    6.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications. The Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
         Corporation (SABC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     7. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public
        Enterprises. The Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Escom Holdings Limited (Escom)
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    8.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report:

          a) Report on the provisional suspension from office with
             remuneration: Mr K Sulliman, an additional magistrate at the
             Durban Magistrate Court.

          b) Report on the provisional suspension from office with
             remuneration: Mr M S E Khumalo, magistrate and Head of office
             at the Amsterdam Magistrate Court.

          c) Report on the provisional suspension from office with
             remuneration: Mr M F Mathe, an additional magistrate at the
             Pine Town Magistrate Court.

    9.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development:

          a) Proclamation No R.26 published in Government Gazette No 27719
             dated 27 June 2005: Referral of matters to existing Special
             Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
             Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74
             of 1996).


          b) Proclamation No R.27 published in Government Gazette No 27719
             dated 27 June 2005: Referral of matters to existing Special
             Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
             Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74
             of 1996).

          c) Government Notice No R.614 published in Government Gazette No
             27719 dated 27 June 2005: Amendment of Regulations in terms of
             the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of
             2000).

    10.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence. The Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation
              of South Africa Ltd (ARMSCOR) for 2004-2005, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
              Statements for 2004-2005.

    11.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report:

           a) International Plant Protection Convention, tabled in terms of
              section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of
              1996).


           b) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Plant Protection
              Convention.

    12.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
Labour:

           a) Recommendation of the International Labour Organisation (ILO)
              – Recommendation No 195 concerning Human Resource
              Development: Education, Training and Lifelong Learning,
              adopted by the Conference at it’s 92nd Session – Geneva, 17
              June 2004.

     13. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education. The Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of Umalusi – Council for
              Quality Assurance in General and Further Education and
              Training for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
              2005.

    14.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism. The Reports of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           a) Report and Financial Statements of the Johannesburg World
              Summit Company for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2002-
              2003.


           b) Report and Financial Statements of the Johannesburg World
              Summit Company for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.


2.    Membership of Assembly

    In terms of Rule 319 of the National Assembly Mr J H Jeffery, formerly
    counsellor to the Deputy President, has been designated as
    Parliamentary Counsellor to the President and Ms S D Motubatse-
    Hounkpatin has been designated as Parliamentary Counsellor to the
    Deputy President. Both designations are with effect from 18 August
    2005.

3.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 25 August 2005:


          i) Constitutional Matters Amendment Bill [B 22 – 2005] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)    Report of the South African Law Reform Commission on the Repeal
        of the Black Administration Act, 1927 (Act No 38 of 1927).


                           MONDAY, 29 AUGUST 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson



1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


            i) Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27 – 2005] (National Assembly –
               sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
               in Government Gazette No 27929 of 19 August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 30 August 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 29 August 2005 in terms of Joint
    Rule 160(4), classified the Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2005],
    introduced in the National Assembly, as a section 76 Bill and as a Bill
    falling within the ambit of section 18(1) of the Traditional Leadership
    and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No. 41 of 2003).


National Assembly


The Speaker


1.    Membership of Committees


       (1)  The following changes  have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
           Portfolio Committees, viz:


           Housing:


           Appointed: Cupido, Mr H B
           Discharged: Khumalo, Rev M S


           Trade and Industry:


           Appointed: Cupido, Mr H B



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation Board
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 149-2005].


2.    The Minister in The Presidency

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
        Council (IMC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly:



1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Agreement between
    the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
    Malaysia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
    Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes, dated 17 August 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request
        for approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of Malaysia for
        the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
        Evasion with respect to Taxes, referred to it, recommends that the
        House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the
        said Agreement.


Request to be considered.

                           TUESDAY, 30 AUGUST 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders


       The Secretary to Parliament has, in accordance with section 18(1) of
         the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act
         No. 41 of 2003), referred the Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 -
         2005] to the National House of Traditional Leaders, which must
         within 30 days from the date of this referral, make any comments
         it wishes to make.


2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
     (1)    National Road Traffic Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the
         Minister of Transport on 26 August 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Transport and the Select Committee on Public
         Services.

     (2)    National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill, 2005,
         submitted by the Minister of Transport on 26 August 2005. Referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Transport and the Select Committee
         on Public Services.

     (3)    Electricity Regulation Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of
         Minerals and Energy on 30 Augustus 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs.



National Assembly



The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


     1. The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr C B Herandien vacating his
        seat in the National Assembly with effect from 1 August 2005, has
        been filled with effect from 26 August 2005 by the nomination of Mr
        J Schippers.

     2. The following member will vacate his seat in National Assembly with
        effect from 1 September 2005:

        Nhleko, N P.

2.    Vacant position of House Chairperson

    The position of House Chairperson occupied by Mr N P Nhleko becomes
    vacant with effect from 1 September 2005, due to his resignation as
    member of the National Assembly.


3.    Officials authorised to receive forms on floor-crossing

    I hereby authorise the following officials to receive,  on  my  behalf,
    all submissions regarding change of membership  of  political  parties;
    mergers of political parties; subdivisions of  political  parties;  and
    subdivisions that have merged with  other  parties,  occurring  in  the
    National Assembly during the period 1 – 15 September 2005, in terms  of
    item 4 of Schedule 6A to the Constitution:

    Mr K Hahndiek, Secretary to the National Assembly
    Mr M Xaso, Senior Procedural Officer (HP), National Assembly




    B Mbete, MP
    Speaker of the National Assembly


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
        Manufacturing Sector and Training Authority (Foodbev SETA) for 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 91-2005].

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre Foundation
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
        Foundation for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 144-2005].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker Museum for 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005.

     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2004-2005,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005.



COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
    Patents Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75),
    dated 26 August 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
        the
        subject of the Patents Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2005] (National
        Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B 17A – 2005].

