---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 October 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-10-25
---

TUESDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Acting Speaker, Ms G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde, took the Chair and requested
members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

   MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT AND ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Acting Speaker, hon President, Deputy
President, Cabinet colleagues, Governor Mboweni – there he is – and hon
members, I want to advise that, occasionally, at the time of big speeches,
we have been known to give very expensive gifts, but the gifts of love
today, the red roses, are not from the Treasury, but from a group of very
young ladies who have come from KwaZulu-Natal, Roy Padayachee told me. We
would like to welcome them here to the House today. [Applause.]

In tabling the national Budget on 21 February 2001, at the start of the
present expansionary phase in fiscal policy, I used the words of the poet
David Diop. Let me just remind colleagues of those words. He wrote:


  Africa tell me Africa


  Is this you this back that is bent


  This back that breaks under the weight of humiliation


  This back trembling with red scars


  And saying yes to the whip under the midday sun


  But a grave voice answers me


  Impetuous son, that tree young and strong


  That tree there


  In splendid loneliness amidst white and faded flowers


  That is Africa your Africa


  That grows again patiently obstinately


  And its fruit gradually acquire


  The bitter taste of liberty



Are we ready to return to that tree, to measure its growth, to gather its
fruit, and to taste how sweet they are? Shall we take stock of our harvest,
and have we planted well for the season ahead?
The years since 2001 have seen steady improvements in the momentum of
economic growth, employment creation and accelerated investment expenditure
remains brisk, and government revenue in 2005-06, the present fiscal year,
will once again exceed the main Budget estimate by a substantial margin.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement provides an overview of these
developments, and sets out a broad framework of spending plans for the next
three years. I am also tabling an Adjustments Appropriation Bill – the Bill
is in here somewhere; there you go - for the consideration of the House,
the implications of which are set out in the thicker document alongside it.

Before returning to these budget proposals, allow me to comment briefly on
the broader challenge of accelerating growth and broadening participation
in our economy.

Under the leadership of Deputy President Mlambo-Ngcuka, work is in progress
on an accelerated and shared growth initiative. She has an acronym that we
don’t know works yet – she calls it “Asgisa”. It sounds like a kwaito song.
[Laughter.] She says that it needs some refinement, this “Asgisa” of hers.

What the project is about is an in-depth review of the dynamics of economic
progress and the constraints that hold back our development. This is a
project that includes consultation with international experts, because we
are keen to learn from the experience of other countries. But we are also
mindful that our growth strategy has to address our particular history and
the special structure and circumstances of the South African economy.

And so our search is not for a blueprint that receives some dispassionate
approval in distant banks or academic journals. Our search is for a vision
that brings South Africans together to invest in our shared future, jointly
confronting challenges and celebrating opportunities, constructing a
strategy that will confidently be embraced by business leaders and workers,
provinces and cities, civic organisations and community activists.

This is work in progress, and it builds on the policy foundations and the
economic transformation that has been under way over the past decade. Many
of the new programmes and budget priorities of the past few years will gain
further impetus as components of the growth initiative, and several social
and economic policies will undergo further refinement.

The focus is clearly on accelerating growth, but there are profound
implications also for equity and empowerment. Firstly, accelerated growth
expands the resource envelope. It makes the redistribution of wealth and
income possible through the process of development, and not at its expense.
It is the dynamic that underlies employment creation. It is the source of
increasing revenue collections and the resulting expansion in public
services.

But the causality also runs the other way. Against the background of South
Africa’s unequal history, investment in people’s capabilities; investment
in housing, water services and electrification; and investment in our
second economy are also necessary, growth-enhancing initiatives. By
broadening participation and opportunities, we will also strengthen the
dynamic of growth itself.

A growth strategy rests on understanding and analysis, but it is primarily
an action agenda. It is about putting plans and implementation schedules in
place, and then monitoring progress and ensuring delivery. In that spirit,
the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement invites all South Africans to join
this project, to engage with us in building a faster growing, broad-based
engine of economic mobilisation and the discovery of opportunities.

Kodumela moepathutse . . . [One has to work very hard . . . ]

Moh S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: . . . ga go lehumo le tšwago kgaufsi. [ . . .
in order to achieve good results.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Ke a leboga, mma. [Thank you, Madame.]

Phezu komkhono, phezu komkhono! [Let us plough, let us plough!]

Economic growth as measured in the national accounts has increased steadily
from 2,8% in 2003 to 3,7% last year, and an estimated 4,4% this year. These
are preliminary figures, and once the full-year survey data have been
incorporated into the accounts, I expect the growth estimates to be revised
upwards, as in past years. Several supplementary indicators signal that a
notable acceleration in growth is under way. These include broad measures
of demand and spending in the economy, such as the increase in VAT receipts
over the past two years, strong real growth in wholesale and retail trade
and the expansion in credit extension.

They also include key indicators of production trends, such as cement
sales, food and beverage output growth and furniture production, which have
grown at over 10% in real terms, and continued expansion in employment and
improvements in productivity.

More important for the sustainability of the growth acceleration, gross
fixed capital formation increased by 9% in 2003 and 9,4% last year, and
will continue to increase steadily as a share of expenditure and GDP over
the years ahead. This is a key foundation of our growth strategy. Our
estimates indicate capital expenditure plans of the public sector amounting
to R111 billion next year, rising to R136 billion by the fiscal year that
ends 31 March 2009.

Private sector investment also remains healthy, including residential
construction growth of over 20% and manufacturing sector investment growth
of 6,5% in the first half of 2005. Subdued inflation and the low interest
rate environment have contributed to particularly buoyant conditions in the
property market and demand for mortgage advances.

In the present context of higher oil prices and slower growth
internationally, we may see some moderation of South African growth next
year, and inflation is expected to rise to an average of 5,2% for the year.
But the overall impact on our economy is offset by buoyant prices for our
commodity exports, and the fact that a large share of our oil needs are met
by domestic synthetic fuel production.

I would just like to digress for a moment. There is a view out there that
this government continues to increase the price of petrol because, if we do
so, then somehow we get more tax. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Firstly, we have to buy oil and today the price for a barrel of crude oil –
you can hear it on the radio and see it on the TV – is about US$58. That’s
the price. It’s fixed. You can convert that back into rands and see what we
pay for a barrel. That price changes every hour of every day. It’s not
something we have control over.

The tax we have on fuel is set, and we shared it with Parliament at the
time of the Budget. This year, every litre of fuel has a tax of R1,16 plus
4c for customs and excise, so call it R1,20 as taxes on fuel. If the price
drops to R4 at the pump, government still gets R1,20. If the price should
rise to R10, government would still get R1,20. So, we don’t benefit from
any additional tax from an increase in the price of fuel.

People don’t often understand this, so I ask that we pause and just
consider this as the reality of the way in which we tax on fuel. I know
that there are countries that tax differently. They would tax as a
percentage of the pump price. We don’t do that in this country.

In this system then, if the price rises very suddenly, then people might do
less driving. They will then use less fuel, and we will then take less tax
as a consequence. It hasn’t happened, because you see the numbers where
people continue driving despite the price of petrol. I wanted to clarify
that so that we understand what the issues are.

It is important to understand that even the synthetic fuels industry is a
strength on which we can and should build.

A healthy alignment between fiscal and monetary policy over the past three
years has contributed to greater macroeconomic stability. Governor Mboweni
and I have agreed that the inflation target for CPIX, or consumer prices,
excluding mortgage interest rates, will remain in the 3% to 6% range over
the three-year period ahead.

On the growth and investment front, our plantation is well and truly
flourishing. But there is more to be done. Our growth initiative recognises
that capacity and systems must be upgraded in our freight logistics sector;
we need to see lower prices and greater competition in telecommunications;
we need to strengthen our research and technology capabilities, and there
are aspects of pricing and market conduct that need attention in several
sectors.

These are under review, and financial sector development, trade promotion
and labour market policies will also come under scrutiny for their
contribution to maintaining and enhancing a favourable investment
environment.

If economic growth is our first joint project, then bringing the second
economy into the mainstream of economic life must be our second. These are
closely related challenges. Improved economic growth means that we are now
seeing measurable advances in employment, and the official unemployment
rate has declined from nearly 30% in 2001 to 26,5% in March this year.

The increase in employment is partly reflected in formal sector job
opportunities, but it also arises from strengthened linkages between formal
businesses and emerging entrepreneurs, and an improving environment for
informal and small-scale traders.

However, we don’t yet know enough about the dynamics of employment.
Following a review last year, the present six-monthly labour force survey
will be replaced in due course with a simplified, quarterly survey. The new
survey will be piloted in 2007, parallel with the present series.

Now, Mr President, I’m very cautious, but I want to assure the Minister of
Labour that we should welcome this initiative together, but I’m scared that
he might tell me that there’s only one Minister of Labour. [Laughter.]
However, we want to improve on the frequency and reliability of data that
we collect about employment, failing which we don’t know whether the
policies that we have in place actually work or not.

The policies and programmes that contribute to building bridges between the
first and second economies are many and varied. They include procurement
policies of both the public sector and large private businesses, focused on
small enterprise support and black economic empowerment. They include our
Expanded Public Works Programme and associated training and skills
development activities, our land reform initiatives, agricultural support
programmes, consolidation of small enterprise support in the new Small
Enterprise Development Agency, and new directions in housing policy,
community investment and local economic development.

Developments in the financial sector also play their part. Today is the
first anniversary of the launch of Mzansi, and the banking association this
morning advised that there are now 1,98 million Mzansi account holders.
[Applause.] These are 2 million people who, 12 months ago, would never have
dreamt that they would be able to have banking accounts, but are suddenly
part of the system. It’s one of those achievements that we must all take
collective responsibility for, share the joys of and ensure that more and
more South Africans can have access to first-level financial services.

Better consumer protection is incorporated in our new credit control
legislation. A framework has been developed for extending R42 billion in
housing finance on affordable terms to households largely excluded from the
mortgage market until now. New institutions have been proposed to support
community savings and loan facilities, and to provide credit services to
emerging farmers.

Within the framework of the Financial Sector Charter, greater impetus will
be given to mobilising private sector resources in support of housing,
small businesses, emerging pharmacists, sorry, emerging farmers ...
[Laughter.] ... I was looking at the Minister of Health and I thought about
the pharmacists ... [Applause.] ... community development and public
infrastructure development.
In bridging the divide between the first and second economies, I believe
that a central challenge ahead is to strengthen co-operation between the
state, the business sector and community organisations. Co-operation means
trust and a shared vision, but it also means tough negotiations, firm
agreements, co-financing arrangements and careful attention to the risks,
the rewards, targets and performance measures. We have an excellent policy
framework; we now need to construct the developmental partnership that will
translate policy into practice.

Where the Deputy President comes from, at this time of the year they look
for a little bird that sings, and they say: “Phezu komkhono.” It’s that
bird, the Piet-my-vrou, that sings: “The time is ripe for planting; let’s
get out there and do it!”

The third platform of our shared vision is the social solidarity on which
health, human development and welfare services rest. In this cluster,
budget allocations and how effectively they are used feature most strongly.
The recently published Provincial Budgets and Expenditure Review for the
years 2001-02, right through to 2007-08, provides a valuable guide to our
progress and the challenges ahead in meeting education, health and social
development needs, which together account for nearly 60% of consolidated
noninterest expenditure.

Over the past five years the fastest growing component of social
expenditure has been income support to vulnerable groups. Social assistance
grants to the elderly, the disabled and to support vulnerable children now
reach more than 10 million beneficiaries. The administration of grants will
in future fall under a national Social Security Agency, and I am confident
that better information systems and management reforms will yield
significant results in the years ahead.

Welfare services will remain a provincial function and will see
considerable reform in the years ahead as part of government’s progressive
extension of improved protection and care to older persons, families
affected by HIV and Aids and children in conflict with the law.

Expansion of income support for the vulnerable has been the priority of the
past five years. These programmes will continue to be responsibly financed
and managed. But for the decade ahead, we need to give particular priority
to strengthening and improving public health care and education.

Cabinet, together with provincial Premiers and Finance MECs, has agreed on
several key initiatives to be reinforced in the 2006 Budget, which hon
members know will be tabled on 15 February next year. These include:
firstly, the upgrading and revitalisation of hospitals, and additional
funding for medical equipment and information systems; secondly,
consolidation of primary health care services under provincial
administration; thirdly, increased funding for school buildings, facilities
and curriculum materials, together with the phasing out of fees at schools
serving low-income communities; fourthly, progressive expansion of early
childhood education opportunities; fifthly, introduction of a new national
subsidy programme for community libraries; sixthly, investment in
facilities and equipment at further education colleges and ... [Applause.]
... modernisation of curricula, and improved linkages with skills
development programmes; seventhly, increased funding for school sport and
community sport participation. [Applause.]

Health care, education, retirement provision and welfare services are not
exclusively the responsibility of the state. We will continue to encourage
private sector development and to seek partnerships that contribute to
improved service delivery and more efficient management and use of
resources.

Changes in the tax environment and regulatory reform also play their part
in promoting fairness, transparency, equity and long-term development. The
work of the Pension Fund Adjudicator is a reminder not just to the
regulatory authorities, but also to this House, that we have important work
to do in ensuring that savings and consumer interests are appropriately
protected. [Applause.]

In measuring progress in social solidarity, we need clear indicators of
performance for the public sector, and also broader measures of the
complementary progress of public and private sector provision towards
greater equity, broader access and improved quality and reliability of
services.

Improved public administration is part of the challenge we face in health
and education, but is also an aspect of growth and development in its own
right. Governance and administration is a fourth cluster around which
targets must be set, performance monitored and accountability strengthened.

We are surely all in agreement that in our classrooms, hospital wards,
courts, police stations and municipal offices, the Public Service must be
characterised by diligence, honesty, care, compassion and personal
responsibility. [Applause.]

Key initiatives include management training and improved reporting systems,
investment over the next three years in an integrated financial management
system to replace outmoded information processing systems, and targeted
support for municipalities under stress and for critical infrastructure
development capacity in identified provincial departments and local
authorities.

Measurement of service delivery progress against published targets is
central to the public administration reform challenge. This has been an
important part of the success of the SA Revenue Service in building an
effective organisational culture, and it’s also evident in the progress of
the Police Service in responding to priority crimes and implementing sector
policing initiatives.

Measurement and monitoring are at the centre of formal, contractual public-
private partnerships, where the detailed specification of service
obligations is tied to explicit penalties for nondelivery.  Measurement and
monitoring are central to the quality improvement plans for education and
health that have been agreed between national departments and their
provincial counterparts for the 2006 Budget and beyond.

This House needs to keep track of these projects; needs to keep score, in
effect, of the development of government’s in-house scorekeeping capacity.
Progress has to be measured not by the weight, volume and glossiness of the
strategies and reports tabled for consideration, but by their practical
content, accuracy, reliability and attention to remedial measures where
implementation lags behind plans and budget allocations. [Applause.] It’s
exactly the same thing that we are calling for action to be taken on:

Kodumela moepathutse ... [One has to work very hard ...]

Moh S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: . . . ga go lehumo le tšwago kgaufsi.
[ . . . in order to achieve good results.]
The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you. Fifthly, there is a special
international dimension to many areas of public affairs. I just saw JJ
talking, so I decided to do that; it works. [Laughter.]

We have a particular obligation to promote Africa’s reform agenda on the
global stage, and we are actively involved in the pursuit of peace and
security, promotion of trade and debt relief and investment in good
governance and regional co-operation.

We welcome our visitor today, President Festus Mogae, the Chairperson of
SADC. It is important that in this context we recognise the important role
that SADC has to play in the pursuit of regional integration in this part
of Africa. [Applause.]

Our responsibility for hosting the Pan-African Parliament, support for the
Nepad Secretariat and our contribution to building the institutions of the
African Union are key, long-term commitments. Alongside this diplomatic and
institution capacity-building, South African business and public
corporations are increasingly building partnerships in Africa, and our
financial institutions are at the forefront of addressing the financing
challenges of Africa’s Renaissance.

I am pleased to be able to announce that Governor Mboweni and I have agreed
on further steps in exchange control reform, which will again include
special encouragement for investment and joint ventures in Africa.
[Applause.] As a matter of fact, we are announcing today that our banks can
have 40% of their supervised assets held outside of South Africa on the
African continent. [Applause.] It’s an important stimulus to development on
the continent, ensuring that there are finances available for that economic
expansion around the continent.

We will continue to watch closely how these young plants grow and bear
fruit. The whole world will be watching how we nurture the Soccer World Cup
project. Planning of transport arrangements is now well under way. Within
the framework set out in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, R3
billion has been set aside for the modernisation of stadiums and decisions
need to be taken over the next few months with a view to construction
beginning early next year. [Applause.] Mr President, that feeble applause
says we don’t really want the Football World Cup. [Applause.] Thank you.

Turning then to the adjustment estimate - as in the past, I need to table a
variety of adjustments to the Budget, which this Parliament approved in
February, for the consideration of this House. These are of four main
kinds: firstly, the unspent funds from last year amounting to R1,5 billion
are proposed for roll-over and reappropriation in the present year;
secondly, after consideration by the Treasury Committee, R1,1 billion in
additional allocations is proposed for unforeseeable and unavoidable
expenditure.

A further R1,1 billion is proposed for infrastructure projects, in keeping
with the announcement in the February Budget that such allocations would be
made where project plans were sufficiently advanced. Seven hundred million
rand is proposed for appropriation in respect of self-financing
expenditure. Against this, savings and underspending of R2,5 billion are
anticipated, and state debt costs will be R1,3 billion less than the
February projection.



The revised expenditure level is R416 billion, or R2 billion less than the
main budget estimate. Details are set out in the Adjusted Estimates of
National Expenditure - that is the fat, red book. I wish to highlight the
following recommendations of the Treasury Committee: firstly, R311 million
is proposed on the Provincial and Local Government Vote, to contribute to
water supplies in municipalities affected by drought, and R40,7 million is
for emergency infrastructure repairs in the Western Cape and Eastern Cape;
R32 million goes to the Disaster Relief Fund administered by the Department
of Social Development; R140 million is proposed as a contribution to the
World Food Programme’s relief efforts in SADC countries; R120 million will
go to the Department of Agriculture for farmers affected by drought, and a
further R20 million to cover costs related to the control of classical
swine fever outbreaks in the Western and Eastern Cape; R30 million is
recommended for emergency housing measures.

Amounts of R39 million and R21 million go to the Departments of Foreign
Affairs and Defence for costs related to engagements in the Côte d’Ivoire.
In addition to these and other allocations to national departments, a
supplementary amount of R200 million is recommended for the Primary School
Nutrition Programme, administered by provincial departments of education.
[Applause.] We are doing this in order to ensure that this critical support
programme can fully meets its obligations. Some provinces have scaled back,
and we would like to ensure that the money is there and that the learners
are fed on a daily basis.

In respect of infrastructure projects for which provision was made in the
February Budget Speech, I am pleased to be able to confirm that good
progress has been made in identifying municipal transport improvement
projects, several of which relate quite directly to the 2010 World Cup. The
first allocations, amounting to R242 million, will be transferred to
municipalities in the present financial year. A further amount of
R241,5 million is recommended on the Sport and Recreation Vote to complete
planning design work and begin construction at stadiums earmarked for use
in the 2010 World Cup.

Also included in the infrastructure allocations is an amount of
R580 million for further work on the demonstration plant of the pebble bed
modular reactor project.

Over the MTEF period ahead, additional allocations of R31,5 billion are
proposed for infrastructure projects, including significant increases in
spending on national and provincial roads and refurbishment of passenger
rail services. Hospitals, schools, water resources, industrial development
zones, scientific research capacity, courts and police stations and public
administration will also benefit from further growth in capital spending
and allocations.

I indicated in February that plans for a rapid rail link between
Johannesburg, Tshwane and the Johannesburg International Airport were far
advanced. This is a project of the Gauteng province, but it is an
investment of national economic significance and its place in a larger
transport development strategy for the Gauteng region is currently under
final scrutiny. The overall costs to the fiscus of Gautrain, and this would
be to all three spheres of government, will exceed R20 billion over the
next five years.

It is clear that major strategic investments of this kind cannot be
undertaken within the confines of the provincial equitable share of revenue
and the existing conditional grants. In the Eastern Cape, similarly,
completion of the Coega Industrial Development Zone requires funding from
the national fiscus; the De Hoop Dam on the Olifants River in Limpopo will
be financed in part by the Department of Water Affairs. Major housing
projects such as Gateway on the N2 in the Western Cape go beyond the
resources of the normal subsidy programme. The Eastern Cape coastal highway
project will include several major bridges to be built by the SA National
Roads Agency, and the upgrading of major ports and airports requires the
resources of the Ports Authority and the Airports Company of SA.


Infrastructure investment, in brief,  is  a  shared  responsibility  of  the
national  government,   provinces,   municipalities   and   various   public
corporations. Financing arrangements vary, and as major projects  get  under
way, over the years ahead, we will need to adapt and refine  our  approaches
to strategic regional investment  projects.   Details  of  the  cost-sharing
arrangements for major infrastructure projects and the  appropriate  balance
between direct budget support, project borrowing and internal  financing  of
state-owned enterprises will be announced in the February Budget.


We are fortunate, in giving consideration to options for stepped up
infrastructure funding, to have a healthy fiscal position as point of
departure. For the 2005-06 financial year we expect revenue to exceed the
main Budget estimate by R30 billion, and the budget deficit will be 1% of
GDP, compared with the February projection of 3,1%.
[Interjections.][Applause.] I expected howls of derision and I get “ha-ha”!
[Laughter.]

The revised growth outlook, robust revenue performance and the steadily
declining burden of debt service costs as a percentage of GDP allow, once
again, for a substantial upward adjustment in public expenditure plans over
the MTEF period.

As announced in February, RSC levies, which are a significant source of
revenue at the local government level, will fall away with effect from July
2006. The framework set out in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement
includes amounts of R7 billion, R8 billion and R9 billion over the three
successive fiscal years, effectively providing for phasing in a new tax
base or grants to compensate for this loss of revenue, within the new
revenue envelope.

I want to express a personal hope that we can encourage our municipalities
to still collect some tax, and to use this money for some physical
infrastructure in areas of need. Areas like water and sanitation are
vitally needed, but we need to work together with local government, and
very importantly, between now and the February budget we must be able to
announce the plans to drive the difference in many areas of local
government.

Other tax policy measures that will take effect over the period ahead
include: firstly, a revised treatment of medical scheme contributions to
provide greater relief to lower-income taxpayers; secondly, more stringent
parameters for calculating tax benefits associated with travel allowances
and company cars; thirdly, the relaxation of exemption criteria for
offshore banking activities and of the treatment of restructuring of
companies; and fourthly, a further extension of the tax depreciation
benefit for urban development zones. Hon members would know that as part of
the Revenue Amendment Bill we are also extending this scheme to the
developers so that the benefit can be passed on and we can get people
living in our cities once again.

In February the Budget will include details of revisions to the rates and
thresholds applied to individual taxpayers, and other tax adjustments. As
always, there are many options to consider. The tax treatment of retirement
funds, taxation of the mining sector and the fiscal regime that applies to
the synthetic fuels industry are all under review.

Our expenditure plans for the MTEF period ahead include the following
changes to baseline allocations: R31 billion more over the next three years
for the provincial equitable share to finance improved resources for
schools, clinics and hospitals; augmentation of social development and
welfare services; implementation of early childhood development, and
increased investment in roads, economic services and support for emerging
farmers; R20 billion for investment in the built environment, that would
cover housing, municipal infrastructure grants, water schemes, public
transport and community facilities; R12 billion for higher education,
hospital revitalisation, community libraries, social grants and cultural
institutions; R9 billion for science and technology, industrial policy,
communications infrastructure and national roads; R7 billion for courts,
police and improved access to justice services; and R8 billion for
investment in public administration, including government accommodation and
modernisation of financial administration.

Over the MTEF period ahead, the main budget deficit is expected to be about
two per cent of GDP, and the overall public sector borrowing requirement,
which takes account of the investment and borrowing plans of state-owned
enterprises, will rise to between 3% and 3,5% of GDP.

Members of this House should also know that in the course of 2005 South
Africa’s sovereign debt rating has been raised by all three major
international ratings agencies, signalling both the improved macroeconomic
outlook and the health of our public finances.

In conclusion, the 2006 Budget will provide greater impetus to the
infrastructure investment, improved public services and overall fiscal
environment required for accelerated economic growth over the decade ahead.
But faster growth and broader participation also require reforms in our
industrial policy, in small business development and the labour market
regulatory framework, better local administration and urban planning and
stronger partnerships between government, the business sector and civil
society. The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement sets out government’s
budget plans for the period ahead, and invites this House and all South
Africans to embrace the journey ahead to contribute to our action agenda
for accelerated growth, for all.

Kodumela moepathutse . . . [One has to work very hard . . . ]

Moh S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: . . . ga go lehumo le tšwago kgaufsi.
[... in order to achieve good results.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: We have set out here what we, as government, must
do. We have pleaded with Parliament here this afternoon to strengthen its
oversight over what we do. Together we must get away from the ideological
debates and rhetoric. Let us focus on getting schools working, the police
responsive, the roads built, the water and sanitation rolled out, the
cattle dipped and making clinics places that we would actually like to go
to. [Applause.]

Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to the brand-new
chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Finance, Mr Nhlanhla Nene, and I
wish him well in his tasks ahead. Thank you very much for your patience
today. [Applause.]

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement referred to the Joint Budget
Committee and the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration, in
accordance with their respective mandates.

The Bill, together with related papers, referred to the Portfolio Committee
on Finance for consideration and report.




  CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY RULES COMMITTEE, 2005


There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PART: Madam Acting Speaker, I move:

  That the report be adopted.


Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.




                              NOTICES OF MOTION



Adv P S SWART: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the
DA that I shall move:

  That this House discusses the role and effectiveness of South Africa’s
  intelligence structures in safeguarding our national security.

Thank you.

Mr S J MASANGO: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the
DA that I shall move:

  That this House discusses the performance of government in giving effect
  to our children’s right to basic education, particularly with regard to
  literacy and numeracy.


[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: On a point of clarity, Madam Acting
Speaker: Is this a notice of motion or a motion without notice?

The ACTING SPEAKER: I really needed your assistance to ensure that I can
follow that. It was very difficult for me to hear the hon member. He
obviously has the benefit. We are still on notices of motion. Are you
satisfied, Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I am clarified, Madam Acting Speaker.
Ms J A SEMPLE: Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the DA
that I shall move:

  That this House discusses South Africa’s performance in respect of our
  people’s opportunity to live a long and healthy life, to be educated, and
  to have a decent standard of living, as measured by the UN Human
  Development Index.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Acting Speaker, I give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the ACDP:

  That the House –

     1) debates the issue of abortion on demand and the consequences not
        only for the babies who always lose their lives, but also for girls
        and women who suffer postabortion syndrome (PAS), which, according
        to research, affects a high percentage of those who have abortions;
        and

  (2) notes that since the promulgation of the Choice on Termination of
        Pregnancy Act, the official number of abortions done is 440 000.


Thank you.

Mr M M SWATHE: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the
DA that I shall move:

  That this House discusses the state of local government and service
  delivery in South Africa.

[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Madam Acting Speaker, I just want to find out whether it is
parliamentary for a member to say that he wants to move even if the floor-
crossing period is closed?

The ACTING SPEAKER: I don’t think it is fair to provoke other hon members.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Acting Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf
of the DA that I shall move:


  That this House discusses problems affecting the public health care
  system.

Thank you.

Mr M WATERS: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the DA
that I shall move:

  That this House discusses South Africa’s Aids orphans crisis.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, whilst we
concede that it is proper for members to move notices of motion for
consideration, it really turns us into a circus if each and every member
can move a motion because then it really takes the time of the House for
the other programmes.

The ACTING SPEAKER: What do you expect me to do in the absence of a rule to
limit such notices?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: What I expect, Madam Acting Speaker,
is co-operation amongst the Whips to really uphold the decorum of the
House.

The ACTING SPEAKER: That is exactly something that is outside my
parameters. I would plead with the Whips to . . .

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, in that regard
I would like to appeal to hon Douglas Gibson to please . . .

The ACTING SPEAKER: But you are not going to use the House to do that. You
have your own Chief Whips Forum where you can raise some of these things.
Hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party, please, take your seat.


Mr T D LEE: Madam Acting Speaker, on behalf of the DA I hereby give notice
that I shall move:


  That this House discusses whether South Africans are able to realise the
  socioeconomic rights contained in the Constitution.


Thank you.


Mrs S M CAMERER: Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the DA
that I shall move:

  That this House discusses whether South Africa’s Chapter 9 institutions,
  established to strengthen and support our constitutional democracy, are
  fulfilling their watchdog role in that some of them are excessively
  deferential to the executive, lack constitutionally required independence
  from the ruling party, and therefore do not adequately promote the rights
  and freedoms of our citizens.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the
DA that I shall move:

  That this House discusses the state of government’s antiretroviral roll-
  out programme.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the DA
that I shall move:

  That this House discusses whether the government is winning the fight
  against crime.

Thank you.
                       CHEETAHS AND PROTEAS VICTORIES


                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr T D LEE: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House congratulates –

     1) the Free State rugby team, the Cheetahs, on their Currie Cup
        victory on Saturday; and


     1) (2)      the Protea cricket team on their victory against New
        Zealand in the first one-day international played on Sunday.


[Applause.]

Agreed to.


                                MARTIN LUTHER


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that on 31 October 1517, Martin Luther posted his Ninety-
        Five Theses in Wittenberg; and . . .


        [Interjections.]


   (2)      notes that this is an important historic event in the Christian
        calendar, and it is marked . . .


[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, on a
point of order: The motion without notice that the hon member is trying to
read now was circulated to parties. Our party did indicate to the ACDP that
we had a problem with the motion. So, we ask that it please stand down. I
think we can discuss it outside the Chamber.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Was that communicated to them? All right.
Mrs C DUDLEY: Not to me. [Interjections.]

                 ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS OF NATURAL DISASTERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that the world has and is being rocked by a number of
        natural disasters, resulting in many lives being lost and people
        injured and displaced;


        (2)            kindly appeals for assistance to be given to all
        those victims of the earthquakes in Pakistan and Kashmir, as well
        as the areas in America devastated by the hurricanes;


     1) (3)            pleads for our assistance to go beyond governmental
        efforts and that our citizenry’s efforts for relief for these
        victims be greatly extended;


   (4)            humbly recognises that many of these victims are Muslims
        and are unfortunately being exposed to these calamities during
        their holy month of Ramadan; and


   (5)            prays that God may lighten these victims’ burden and bring
        all victims relief and a return to a normal life and a safe
        environment.

Agreed to.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Seemingly, we are done with motions without notice.




                     PASSING AWAY OF MRS STELLA OBASANJO


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move
without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)            notes with great sadness and regret the passing away on
        Sunday, 23 October 2005, of Mrs Stella Obasanjo, wife of the
        President of Nigeria, His Excellency Olusegun Obasanjo;


   (2)            encourages His Excellency President Obasanjo and the
        people of Nigeria to draw strength from the knowledge that the
        thoughts and prayers of the people of South Africa are with them in
        this difficult time; and
   (3)            conveys its condolences to His Excellency President
        Obasanjo and his family and the people of Nigeria.


Agreed to.

                           PLANE CRASH IN NIGERIA


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

   (1)            notes with profound sadness the untimely death of 117
        people aboard a Nigerian plane on Sunday, 23 October 2005;


   (2)            further notes that amongst the dead are three officials of
        the regional body Ecowas and a South African television producer,
        Adele Lorenzo;


   (3)            recalls that as from yesterday, Monday, 24 October 2005,
        the government and the people of Nigeria began a three-day national
        mourning period; and


   (4)            conveys its deep-felt condolences to the government and
        the people of Nigeria, the families and friends of all those who
        lost their lives in the plane crash and its condolences to Ecowas
        as well.


Agreed to.




                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                          (The late Mr S Haasbroek)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Acting Speaker, I move the motion
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


   That the House –


   (1)      notes –


           a) with regret that the hon Sarel Haasbroek, MP, passed away on
              Sunday 16 October 2005;


           b) that the late Mr Haasbroek served on the Communications and
              the Foreign Affairs portfolio committees;



           c) that he was a conscientious, kind and well-mannered person
              who treated everyone with respect and courtesy; and


           d) that he will be missed by his party and by the Somerset West
              constituency; and


   (2)      expresses its sincere condolences to his partner, his family and
        all who loved him.

The DA and his many friends were saddened at the passing of the hon Sarel
Haasbroek, MP on Sunday afternoon, 16 October 2005. He was 59 years old.

Mr Haasbroek, who became an MP in 2004, represented Helderberg in the
Western Cape and served on the parliamentary committees on communication
and foreign affairs.

He spoke with sincerity and conviction both in the committee and in the
House, and his speeches were always well prepared, he made his points
politely, but firmly.

Before he came to Parliament, he was a junior diplomat and an educator for
many years. He held several degrees from Potchefstroom University,
including an MA in Political Sociology and BA Hons degrees in Sociology and
History.

Sarel also held a teaching diploma for higher education, and worked as a
senior history teacher at Milner High School in Klerksdorp. He also
lectured in medical sociology at the then Western Transvaal Nurses Training
College, and went on to counsel drug addicts and alcoholics at the Bekker
Clinic.

Sarel began his career as a diplomat in the late 1970s, when he worked as
the First Secretary of the South African Embassy in Stockholm, Sweden.
After this, he returned to South Africa where he completed his Master’s
degree and worked as a company director in the private sector.

Sarel served in numerous positions in the Western Cape DA before entering
Parliament as an MP in 2004. He was chairperson of various wards of the
party in the Helderberg district. He was deputy chair of the local
management committee and a member of the provincial council.
He was also a member of the Somerset West Community Police Forum and served
on the N2 Action Committee.

He was responsible for launching various branches of the party in Macassar,
Somerset West, Strand, Gordon’s Bay and at Stellenbosch University, and
organised numerous fundraising events in the Helderberg area.

He was a great gentleman who enjoyed a reputation for good manners and good
humour. He was a kind and decent person.

Sarel is survived by his life partner, Llewelland MacGregor – Mac - who has
supported him devotedly during his long battle with cancer.

We send our sincere condolences to his sister, her family, to Mac and all
who loved him. We will miss Sarel Haasbroek.

Adv Z L MADASA: Chairperson, the ANC would like to express its heartfelt
condolences to the family and loved ones of the late Mr Haasbroek, MP. Mr
Haasbroek was a member of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs. He
played a meaningful role in the affairs of the committee, drawing from his
long political experience and career in the diplomatic world.

He was an easy person to relate to, a gentleman with good people skills. To
him the difference of party politics did not affect his love for other
people. He was able to reach out to everyone. He openly discussed his
political opinions on a wide range of issues with others outside his party.
This is what made him likeable, because he was not a pretender.

The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs, the NA and the people of South
Africa have lost a compatriot in the late Mr Haasbroek. The ANC supports
the motion and may the God of peace grant his family and loved ones peace
in this moment of loss. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr H J BEKKER: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die IVP spreek sy simpatie uit
teenoor die familie en naasbestaandes van wyle Sarel Haasbroek. Nie alleen
was hy akademies bekwaam nie, maar hy het ook ’n besondere bydrae gelewer,
en ons erken veral sy bydrae ten opsigte van buitelandse diens en sy diens
hier aan ons in die Parlement.

Ons steun die voorstel voor ons en ons vertrou dat wanneer die dag  vir  ons
aanbreek om te gaan, ons ook op so ’n besondere wyse soos  hy  die  pad  sal
loop. Ons dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)


[Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Chairperson, the IFP expresses  its  sympathy  to  the
family and relatives of the  late  Sarel  Haasbroek.  He  was  not  only  an
academically able person, but he also made an exceptional  contribution  and
in particular we acknowledge his contribution with  regard  to  the  foreign
service and his service to us here in Parliament.




We support the motion before us and we trust that, when the time comes for
us to depart, we will also walk this road in the exceptional way that he
did. Thank you.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, the UDM joins the House in
paying tribute to the late hon S F Haasbroek. We extend our heartfelt
condolences to his family, friends and colleagues during this time of
bereavement. It is an unpleasant reminder of our own mortality when our
colleagues pass away, but perhaps that too can be seen in a positive light,
namely that we should make the best of our time here.

We are certain, irrespective of party politics and ideology, that the late
hon member was a dedicated democrat, committed to the hopes and ideals of a
free and united South Africa. Those are ideals that all of us hopefully
share and that should underpin our reasoning even when we disagree and
argue in this Chamber.

As with every other member of Parliament dedicated to the new democratic
dispensation, the family and friends of the late hon Haasbroek can take a
measure of consolation from the fact that the legacy of all democrats lives
on in the activities and debates of this Parliament.

Our thoughts and prayers are with the late hon member’s loved ones. Thank
you.

Mr A HARDING: Madam Chair, the late hon Haasbroek had a long career in
education and service to this country in foreign affairs, and his
involvement in community matters is well known and long-standing.

He was a kind and gentle person with good person skills, and he was also
committed to the principles of democracy. The ID wishes to express its
heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of the late hon Haasbroek.
May his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Chair, the ACDP joins the House in extending its
condolences to the colleagues, family and loved ones of the late hon Sarel
Haasbroek. Sarel was widely commended for his consistently respectful and
polite manner and for his insights into the functioning and personnel of
the SA Post Office.

His stance on foreign affairs, particularly with regard to Africa, was
always characterised by a humane and caring attitude. It was his belief –
... that human rights issues transcend national boundaries. The history of
our country compels us to speak out loudly against human rights abuses.

The ACDP expresses its appreciation for the contribution the late hon Mr
Haasbroek made to this country. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Mevrou die Voorsitter, dit is gepas dat die Parlement ’n
gebruik het om tot stilstand te kom en hulde te bring wanneer daar van ons
lede en kollegas tot sterwe kom. Vandag is so ’n geleentheid.
Vandag gebruik ons die geleentheid om afskeid te neem van kollega Sarel
Haasbroek, wat op sy manier sy merk gemaak het in ons politiek en in ons
openbare lewe, ook in hierdie Parlement, maar wat nie die geleentheid gehad
het om ’n lang loopbaan in die politiek te hê of ’n lang bydrae te maak
nie.

In die tyd wat hy hier was, het ons hom gesien en leer ken as, soos die
kollegas tereg reeds gesê het, iemand wat op ’n waardige manier sy
standpunt gestel het en wat respek afgedwing het.

Namens die VF Plus vereenselwig ons ons graag met die voorstel wat deur die
Huis aanvaar word en dra ons ons simpatie en meelewing oor aan sy familie,
vriende en naasbestaandes. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Chairperson, it is fitting that this Parliament has a
custom of coming to a standstill and paying tribute when any of our members
and colleagues pass away. Today is such an occasion.

Today we are using this occasion to take leave of our colleague Sarel
Haasbroek, who in his way has made a mark on our politics and our public
life, also in this Parliament, but did not have the opportunity of having a
long political career or of making an extended contribution.

In his time here we saw him and came to know him, as some of his colleagues
have rightly mentioned, as a person who stated his views in a dignified
manner and who commanded respect.

On behalf of the FF Plus, we willingly associate ourselves with the motion
that has been accepted by the House and wish to convey our condolences to
and sympathise with his family, friends and next of kin. Thank you very
much.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Deputy Chair, my colleagues and I in Nadeco did not
know Mr Haasbroek very well, but by all accounts, including those that
we’ve listened to from previous speakers today, he was a decent and
virtuous human being who strove to be an effective and caring public
representative. For that Nadeco also expresses its regrets at his premature
passing and extends its sympathies to the Haasbroek family, his friends and
his political party in this difficult time. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, the UCDP supports the motion
of condolence for the late hon Sarel Haasbroek. The fact that I did not
know him well is indicative of his quiet demeanour. He was not
controversial, having learnt well in his earlier days as a diplomat to
speak out only when necessary.

Sarel left footprints in the service of the nation, because in his day he
served in the Public Service, did some teaching and served in the private
sector, and his last innings was as a public representative of substance.

It is unfortunate that his party and the country in general have been
deprived of the intellect of this man who had just reached a ripe age of
wisdom. He played a role in the building of his party from branch level,
and as a capable man was invariably elected to leadership positions. It is
regretted that he succumbed to cancer after a long battle. Our hearts go
out to all those close to him, particularly his party, on their loss.

Our consolation is that he has been called to a better place to stop his
suffering from the pain and agony of the dreadful cancer. May his soul rest
in peace.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Chair, the PAC wishes to express its condolences to
the family of the hon Sarel Haasbroek, and to his party the DA. He was
indeed a conscientious and gentle person. He treated people with respect
and was always courteous. We enjoyed his contributions in the Portfolio
Committee on Foreign Affairs.

One short sentence closes the biography of every person, as if to make a
mockery of the pretences of human pride: “Thus all the days of the years of
Methuselah were 969 years, and he died.” No matter what position we hold in
life, we are all subject to death. The most important thing is that we
should use our lives for the good of humanity. Mr Sarel Haasbroek did
precisely this with his own life. May he rest in eternal peace.

Indeed, it can be said that the majestic roads, which kings and presidents
pass over, the way the men of letters tread, and the path the warriors
traverse all lead to the same enormous house called death, but death is the
beginning of a better life. It is the eternal destiny of all mankind. The
PAC supports this motion. Thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the MF extends its sincere condolences on the
bereavement of the late hon Haasbroek, who has passed away at the very
young age of 59 years. Haasbroek, who was well educated and a dedicated
patriot to the DA’s cause, we are sure, will be greatly missed. Our
condolences are extended to the loving family, friends and the DA that he
has left behind.

It is always sad to have to come to the podium in respect and memory of
great architects of our democracy. Our community and citizenry, no matter
how diverse, will always unite to pay tribute to great people such as
Haasbroek. For each building block that Haasbroek has contributed to the DA
and our nation we thank, honour and applaud him. This nation survives on
diversity and it is our diverse opinions, strategies and needs that lend
greatly to efficient delivery.

To the DA we extend our sincere condolences on the loss of a dedicated and
admirable member. To the loved ones of the hon Haasbroek we’d like to say
that it is never easy losing someone so close, but we pray that God will
make it easy, lighten your hearts and inspire fond memories of the loving
and great Haasbroek. To the hon Haasbroek, we salute you and pray that you
will rest in peace. From God do we come, and unto God do we return. The MF
supports the motion. I thank you.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Chairperson, on behalf of Azapo we wish to
convey our deepest and heartfelt condolences to the hon S F Haasbroek’s
family and friends. May God give the family the strength and power to see
them through this period of mourning. I thank you.

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Chairperson, the UPSA rises in support of the motion of
condolence for the late hon Mr Haasbroek. Mr Haasbroek was a well-educated
MP and subsequently offered a tremendous amount of intellectual insight to
his party and Parliament. All who benefited from him will sadly miss his
wealth of knowledge.

The UPSA acknowledges Mr Haasbroek’s contribution as an academic and
diplomat. Mr Haasbroek was also a successful businessman for several years
before returning to the public sector as member of Parliament. Mr Haasbroek
made his mark in the community by serving on several community committees.
He was well known for his gentleman-like qualities.

The UPSA extends its sincere condolences to the Haasbroek family, friends
and DA colleagues. May his soul rest in peace.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD expresses its sincere condolences to the
family members, friends and loved ones of the late hon S F Haasbroek. For a
family, it is always sad when they must take leave of a loved one, a
father, husband, brother and provider.

Hon Haasbroek has been a valuable member of the foreign affairs committee
and communications committee. He has made valuable contributions on both
these committees. His place will be empty here in Parliament but we will
always remember him for the role he has played. We also want to express our
condolences to the DA, which has lost a valuable member. May the hon
Haasbroek rest in peace.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to, all members standing.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I would like to draw the attention of
the House to the changes regarding members’ statements as agreed to by the
House, when it adopted the first report of the Rules Committee. The number
of statements allowed has been increased from 14 to 15 and opportunities
for ministerial responses from a maximum of five to a maximum of six.


                           THE DEATH OF OPTEL ROOI


                            (Member’s Statement)

Me E NGALEKA (ANC): Voorsitter, elkeen is gelyk voor die reg en het die reg
tot gelyke beskerming en voordeel van die reg. Die Grondwet waarborg
hierdie reg aan elke Suid-Afrikaner, ongeag geslag, ras, godsdiens of
etniese herkoms. Dit is een van die regte waarvoor baie Suid-Afrikaners hul
lewens neergelê het. Dit is ’n reg wat ons hoog op prys stel.

Die moord op die spoorsnyer, Optel Rooi, lid van die Khomani-San wat
verlede jaar deur konstabel Sebastiaan van Wyk, lid van die SAPD
doodgeskiet is, het ’n skokgolf deur die ANC en die Suid-Afrikaanse
gemeenskap gestuur. Optel Rooi se dood het mense geruk, nie net omdat hy
gesterf het aan die hand van ’n lid van die polisie wat veronderstel is om
die gemeenskap te beskerm nie, maar ook omdat sy grondwetlike reg op lewe
misken is.

Die ANC loof die werk wat die SAPD se ondersoekspan gedoen het en wil graag
ons dank betuig aan die lede van die gemeenskap wat met inligting na vore
getree het. Ons wil ook ons hoop uitspreek dat die vonnisoplegging ’n einde
sal bring aan die pyn en lyding waaronder Optel Rooi se familie en die
gemeenskap die afgelope jaar gebuk gegaan het. Ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Ms E NGALEKA (ANC): Chairperson, everybody is equal before the law and has
the right to equal protection and the benefit of the law. The Constitution
guarantees this right to every South African, regardless of sex, race,
religion or ethnic origin. That is one of the rights for which many South
Africans lay down their lives. It is a right we greatly value.

The murder of the tracker Optel Rooi, member of the Khomani San, who was
shot and killed last year by constable Sebastiaan van Wyk, member of the
SAPS, sent a shockwave through the ANC and the South African community. The
death of Optel Rooi shocked people, not only because he died at the hands
of a member of the police force, which is supposed to protect the
community, but also because he was denied his constitutional right to life.

The ANC praises the work done by the SAPS crime investigation team, and we
also wish to convey our thanks to members of the community who came forward
with information. We also wish to express the hope that sentencing will
bring an end to the pain and suffering that has afflicted Optel Rooi’s
family and the community for the past year. I thank you.]


     NEED FOR DECISIVE ACTION TO CURB ALLEGED NIA INVOLVEMENT IN ILLEGAL
                                SURVEILLANCE



                            (Member’s Statement)


Adv P S SWART (DA): Chairperson, government needs to take decisive action
to ensure that the bitter rivalries that have developed over the succession
battle within the ANC do not threaten the proper functioning of our
intelligence agencies.

The public have been justifiably unsettled by recent revelations that
certain elements within the NIA have engaged in illegal surveillance and
that they are using state resources to settle political scores. In order to
prevent any further abuse of power the Minister for Intelligence Ronnie
Kasrils must give urgent attention to the political intelligence mandate of
the NIA which, as currently defined, is open to wide-scale abuse. Unless
this mandate is more strictly defined, a perverse situation may develop
where our intelligence agencies pose a serious threat to our constitutional
freedoms instead of being the guardians of such freedoms.

Furthermore, to allay fears that political leaders may be the targets of
intelligence agencies, an explicit assurance needs to be given that no
opposition leader has been or will in future be put under surveillance of
any sort. In the current heated political climate, the need for cool heads
to uphold the principles of the Constitution has never been greater.
[Applause.]


            KEY WEAKNESSES IN THE SOUTH AFRICAN EDUCATION SYSTEM



                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr T E VEZI (IFP): Madam Speaker, in a draft policy that aims to see the SA
Development Bank invest more in education, Graeme Bloch, an education
policy analyst with the Development Bank of Southern Africa, DBSA, has
highlighted a number of key concerns in education.

Among other things, Bloch has written that poor teacher support, a skills
backlog and unemployment are among the weaknesses in the South African
education system. He has also said that teachers have suffered the most
from the effects of policy overloads and the failure to ask crucial
microlevel questions about what could enhance classroom success.

According to Bloch, education in South Africa is in a serious crisis. If
even a few of the concerns that he has highlighted are true, then it is not
only our education system that is in trouble, but also the future of our
youth.

We in the IFP believe that concerns raised by Mr Bloch in the draft policy
should be viewed in a serious light. We therefore hope that the department
will note these concerns and engage with the necessary people so as to
ascertain whether there is any truth in the concerns raised. I thank you.

                    APPOINTMENT OF BEE COUNCIL IN TOURISM


                            (Members’ Statement)


Mr G G OLIPHANT (ANC): The ANC is of the firm view that broad-based black
economic empowerment is a moral, political, social and economic requirement
of this country’s collective future. Recently, the Minister of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism made an announcement regarding the
appointment of a black economic empowerment tourism council at the 4th
National Tourism Conference at Sun City last week.

The council will fall under the leadership of Thami Sokutu, who is the
former Director-General of the Department of Public Works and the current
executive director of African Bank. This council will lead black economic
empowerment implementation, monitoring and strategising for a three-year
term. It will ensure that all communities enjoy the benefit of South
African tourism successes.

The ANC commends the collective efforts of the government to transform this
critically important industry. I thank you. [Applause.]


    ALLEGED USE OF STATE RESOURCES IN ILLEGAL SURVEILLANCE AND PLEDGE FOR
                         SUPPORT OF PRESIDENT MBEKI


                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Chair, the recent reports about senior officials
of the National Intelligence Agency, including its head, being allegedly
involved in using state resources to illegally spy on members of the public
are shocking and disgusting, to say the least. What is even more serious is
the alleged involvement of the NIA boss in undermining the President of
South Africa by siding with his opponents.

A weekend newspaper asked a pertinent question: How was it possible that
the head of intelligence would be loyal to a fired deputy and not the
President of the country? The article in City Press continued, and I quote:

   It is unacceptable to use state resources to do this. It is even more
   serious when the head of intelligence seemingly conspires against the
   country’s President, garnering support for an ousted leader who is dogged
   by allegations of corruption.


The ACDP supports President Mbeki in his quest to deal with corruption in
government and calls on all South Africans to support him in his resolve to
have a clean government, which we all want to see.

While the ACDP does not endorse everything done by government, we
nevertheless believe that President Mbeki must be supported during this
challenging period of his presidency, which has resulted from his decision
to fire his former deputy. Our democracy will need stability for many years
to come as a prerequisite for winning the war against poverty and economic
emancipation for all our people. I thank you.

                    DUAL MEDIUM EDUCATION AT UNIVERSITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W D SPIES (VF Plus): Agb Voorsitter, gister het twee betekenisvolle
gebeurtenisse hul op Afrikaanse kampusse afgespeel. By die Universiteit van
Stellenbosch het meer as 3 500 studente en personeellede in ’n petisie aan
die owerhede gevra dat daar afgesien word van planne om sogenaamde
dubbelmediumonderrig by die Fakulteit: Geesteswetenskappe in te voer. Daar
bestaan geen twyfel nie dat dubbelmediumonderrig bloot ’n oorgang na
Engelse onderrig behels.

By die Universiteit van Pretoria het die VF Plus gister in die
studenteraadsverkiesing met ’n oorweldigende meerderheid gewen, en meer as
5 000, of 55%, van die stemme op hom verenig. Die stempersentasie in die
verkiesing was van die grootste in die geskiedenis, terwyl die DA se steun
verder agteruit gegaan het, en Sasco se wegbly-aksie ’n volslae mislukking
was.

Dié gebeure stuur ’n baie duidelike boodskap aan die bestuur van die
onderskeie universiteite asook aan die breër gemeenskap. Die Afrikaanse
minderheid is moeg om as tweedeklasburgers behandel te word, nie net op
kampusse waar Afrikaans meedoënloos uitgefaseer word nie, maar ook in hul
werkplekke waar hulle deur regstellende aksie benadeel word, en in hul
skole, dorpe en stede waar hul geskiedenis misken word en historiese name
in die naam van omvorming van die kaart afgevee word.

Die tyd het aangebreek vir ’n skikking tussen die land se meerderheid en sy
kulturele minderhede. Die toets vir die demokrasie is geleë in die vryheid
wat dit ook aan die land se minderhede bied. Tot dusver slaag ons nie die
toets nie. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr D W SPIES (FF Plus): Hon Chairperson, yesterday two significant events
took place on Afrikaans campuses. At the University of Stellenbosch more
than 3 500 students and staff members in a petition requested the
authorities to abandon plans to implement so-called dual-medium education
in the faculty of humanities. There is no doubt that dual-medium education
is merely a transition towards English education.

At the University of Pretoria yesterday, the FF Plus won with a resounding
majority in the student representative council elections by drawing more
than 5 000, or 55%, of the votes. The percentage vote in the election was
one of the largest in history, while the DA’s support declined further, and
Sasco’s stay-away action was a complete failure.

These events send a very clear message to the management of these
respective universities as well as to the broader community. The Afrikaans
minority is tired of being treated as second-class citizens, not only on
campuses where Afrikaans is ruthlessly being phased out, but also in the
workplace where they are being wronged by affirmative action, and in their
schools, towns and cities where their history is being disregarded and
historical names are being swept off the map in the name of transformation.

The time has arrived for an agreement between the country’s majority and
its cultural minorities. The test for the democracy lies in the freedom
that it also offers to the country’s minorities. Thus far we have failed
the test.]


                           ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE ANC


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D M RAMODIBE (ANC): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When the ANC- led
government came to power, it inherited an economy shaped by colonial
dispossession and apartheid, which had resulted in huge inequalities and
increasing poverty. Despite this legacy, we have made great achievements.
We have ensured sustainable growth - unparalleled in the last 40 years -
high levels of confidence, certainty and stability.

However, there are still challenges that face our country, like higher
levels of growth beyond the current three per cent growth that will
generate jobs for our people. To realise this objective, our government has
launched a programme called the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative.
This initiative aims at raising the trajectory of growth to average at
least 4,5% and higher in the next five years, and 6% and higher from 2010.
The strategy will focus investment on infrastructure, sector investment,
and address the challenges faced by small, medium and micro enterprises.

The ANC applauds the government for the initiative and urges all the role-
players in the economy to contribute to these national efforts. I thank
you.


                  ABUSE OF POSITION BY DEVELOPMENT OFFICIAL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr A H NEL (DA): Voorsitter, die beleid om ontwikkelingsbeamptes op
plaaslike vlak aan te stel om lewering te verbeter, is ’n baie edel
gedagte. Die ongeluk egter, en dit is uitgewys deur die DA by die
instelling van hierdie poste, is dat slegs ANC-bestuurslede en familielede
aangestel word. Hulle word dus ANC-organiseerders wat belastingbetalers se
geld betaal word.

Kom ek gee ’n voorbeeld: Mnr Gerrit Swartz, ANC-sekretaris van die Freedom
Branch ANC-tak en verkiesingskoördineerder vir die ANC op Brandvlei, is
aangestel as ontwikkelingsbeampte op Brandvlei in die Hantam-munisipaliteit
in die Noord-Kaap. Hierdie heer gebruik die munisipaliteit se kantoor, sy
afrolmasjien en tyd om ANC-kennisgewings te druk en te versprei, waarin
aanvalle op opposisiepartye gemaak word.

Ek het beëdigde verklarings dat hierdie persoon in sy amptelike
hoedanigheid gesê het: “Geen persoon sal ’n huis kry of krag as hulle vir
die DA stem nie. Almal moet ANC stem.” Dit is die gemeenskapsdiens wat
hierdie sogenaamde ontwikkelingsbeamptes lewer. Wat ’n skande! (Translation
of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr A H NEL (DA): Chairperson, the policy to appoint development officers
at local level in order to improve delivery, is a noble idea. However, the
unfortunate fact – and this was pointed out by the DA when these posts were
created – is that only ANC committee members and their relatives are being
appointed. They thus become ANC organisers paid with taxpayers’ money.

Let me give you an example: Mr Gerrit Swartz, ANC secretary of the Freedom
Branch ANC branch and election co-ordinator for the ANC at Brandvlei, has
been appointed development officer at Brandvlei in the Hantam municipality
in the Northern Cape. This gentleman uses the municipality’s office, its
duplicating machine and its time to print and distribute ANC material in
which opposition parties are attacked.

I have affidavits that this person said in his official capacity: “No
person will get a house or power if they vote for the DA. Everybody must
vote ANC.” That is the kind of community service these so-called
development officers render. What a disgrace!]

           CONDOLENCES TO THE BEREAVED SEDUME AND NDLOVU FAMILIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rre B E PULE (UCDP): Mmusakgotla, UCDP e romela ka kutlobotlhoko le
maswabi, matshediso go losika loo raSedume le Ndlovu kwa motsaneng wa
Letlhakaneng mo masepaleng wa Moses Kotane mo porofenseng ya Bokone
Bophirima. Go utlwagetse fa monna a thuntshitse mmagwe, mosadi, mmatsale le
ngwana mme a feleletsa ka go ithuntsha. Ke batho ba batlhano ba ba suleng.

UCDP e dira boikuelo mo go ba ba ntshang dilaesense tsa dithunya go dira
jalo ka kelotlhoko le setšhaba go begelela mapodisi ka dithunya tse go
bonalang di tsholwa botlhaswa. A go akgolwe botlhe ba ba tshwaetseng ka
dikgomotso tsa methale yotlhe go timola kutlobotlhoko ya segajaaja se,
bogolo masepala wa Moses Kotane kwa go bonetseng tirisano mmogo ya ANC le
UCDP go rekela baswi makase. Le ka moso. (Translation of Setswana member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr B E PULE (UCDP): Speaker, the UCDP sends its deepest condolences to the
Sedume and Ndlovu families of the small town of Letlhakaneng in the Moses
Kotane Municipality, in the North West province. There is an allegation
that a male person shot dead his mother, his wife, his mother-in-law, a
child and later shot and killed himself. Five people died.

The UCDP is making an appeal to the Firearm Licensing Board to issue
licences with caution. The community must also inform the police about the
abuse of firearms. We applaud all the people who have sent the condolences
to lessen the pain of this tragedy, more especially the Moses Kotane
Municipality where the ANC and the UCDP worked together to buy coffins for
the deceased. Thank you very much.]


           OPPOSITION TO THE APPOINTMENT OF MR GODI AS SCOPA CHAIR


                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: The ANC is dismayed by the hypocrisy
of the DA at the appointment of the hon member Godi as Chairperson of
Scopa. The scurrilous opposition by the DA is insulting, racist and
condescending. By casting aspersions on the capabilities of hon members
Godi and Maluleke, the DA is economical with the truth, and displays its
unmitigated contempt for Africans.

Whilst hon member Maluleke was with the DA, the latter pretended that it
respects the worth of hon Maluleke as a human being. When hon Maluleke
joined the ANC, suddenly the DA unmasks its true colours and casts
aspersions on the leadership qualities of the hon member.

The bankrupt criticism of the DA is contradicted by historical facts on
three consecutive occasions. The DA, in the past, deployed the same hon
Maluleke in the same position, which it now claims he has no capacity to
handle. The fact that the DA has not extended similar, gratuitous insults
on the deployment of the hon Greyling, reveals unmitigated racism and rank
opportunism.

The ANC, as the vanguard of democracy and the champion of nonracism and
nation-building, will not take advice from a party that seeks to restore
white “baasskap” in our country. [Time expired.][Applause.]


              INCREASING INCIDENTS OF ROBBERY ON TABLE MOUNTAIN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Chairperson, a tourist from England was
attacked and robbed while hiking on Signal Hill over the past weekend. The
Table Mountain range and its surrounding areas are important tourist
attractions for Cape Town and South Africa as a whole. It is therefore very
unfortunate that we seem to be reading and hearing about an increasing
number of incidents where visitors to these areas are attacked and robbed.

It would be a great shame if one of the most recognisable and popular
attractions in the country were to be a no-go area for tourists. Therefore
the IFP urges the relevant stakeholders to do their utmost to ensure that
crime is wiped out in these areas, so that their beauty and benefits can be
enjoyed by all, without worrying about safety. I thank you.
                              BIRD FLU EPIDEMIC

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): The Minority Front expresses its concern. Bird flu has
become a great concern for countries around the world, as the deadly flu
would take many casualties. With Aids being a great killer on our
continent, and other means to socioeconomic development and poverty
alleviation being high on our agenda, we kindly request cognisance to be
taken of this epidemic; that if it reaches South Africa, it will greatly
hamper our situation of progress.

We call for precautions to be taken with regard to the bird flu and all
poultry farms to be closely observed, as well as any other sectors working
with birds. Further, there are steps to be taken by the health department
to ensure a sufficient supply of vaccine to tackle the possible bird flu
epidemic.

As noted by Cees Bruggemans, a major epidemic could involve
12-18 months of global dislocation, and is thus comparable to the Hurricane
Katrina and Rita logistical nightmares. The virus has thus far killed 60
people in Asia, and is spreading far across Europe.

There is little chance that the virus could be brought into South Africa
through imports, but migrating birds such as terns are a concern. Thank
you.


              THE NETHERLANDS SECTORAL BUDGET SUPPORT PROGRAMME


                             (Member’s Statement)

Mr R S NTULI (ANC): Chairperson, hon members, our liberation struggle has
always been underpinned by international solidarity with all progressive
communities. The recent agreement signed by the Minister of Education,
Comrade Naledi Pandor, with the Netherlands ambassador on 18 October 2005,
underscores our commitment to understanding of the importance of collective
efforts to address the social ills that face humanity.

This agreement constitutes the second side of the Netherlands Sectoral
Budget Support Programme to the Department of Education. The Dutch
government is making available a grant of R213 million for the period
2005–09. This grant will be used to fund key priorities as defined by the
Minister, like the following: teacher development programmes and education
information management systems.

The ANC expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Dutch government
and the people of the Netherlands for their continuous solidarity with our
people. We urge other governments to involve themselves in efforts to
improve the lives of poor people in developing countries. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                 APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA BY ANC


                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Madam Chairperson, the DA is amazed
at the effrontery of the ANC in describing, in this House, how they have
appointed the Chairperson of Scopa. I was under the impression that Scopa
might meet tomorrow, and might then elect its chairperson. The ANC has just
announced that they have appointed the chairperson. It shows the contempt
in which they hold Scopa, the members of Scopa, the chairperson of Scopa,
and the members of this House.

The hon Chief Whip of the ANC referred to the DA as being racist because we
disapproved, publicly, of the appointment by them of Mr Themba Godi, as the
opposition person to chair Scopa. You can play that racist card as much as
you like, it is starting to be regarded as just cheap and low and nasty.

I want to tell you why the DA does not support Mr Godi for this
appointment. He is a very nice young man with a very pleasant smile, but he
has no economic skills, he has got no financial skills, he has got no
parliamentary experience on Scopa whatsoever. He hasn’t even served on that
committee; his party did not think that Scopa was important enough to serve
on it, and he is not fitted . . . [Interjections.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Chair, point of order: I don’t think this platform
should be used by the DA to attack Comrade Godi personally, as Mr Gibson is
doing now. I want to call the hon member Gibson to order, that he must
restrain himself from attacking the member of Parliament, hon Godi.

Mr M J Ellis: Madam Chair, on a point of order: That is not a point of
order, Madam Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Hon Ellis, may I please deal with
that? Hon Likotsi, what the hon Gibson said was perceived by you, perhaps,
to have been an insult to the hon Godi. However, those are perceptions, and
I cannot judge on that. So, please continue. Hon Gibson, are you continuing
with your statement?

Mr D H M GIBSON: Yes, Madam, if I may. The PAC did not think that Scopa was
important enough to have a member on it; they have been absent from there
for years. Now, suddenly, this young man is put in to be the . . . [Time
expired.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on a point of
order: The statement that the hon Mr Gibson has made just now is not true.
It is not correct, and he should know better. He knows that not all the
smaller parties are entitled to be a member of every committee in this
House. There is a process by which members come together and decide who to
deploy to what . . . [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Deputy Chief Whip, I cannot judge
the correctness of Mr Douglas Gibson’s allegations. However - please take
your seat, I am still busy - the ANC has another opportunity to make a
statement and I suggest you use that if you want to correct the perception.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we are talking
here about the established Rules and Procedures of the House, which all of
us know, pertaining to how smaller parties allocate their members to
committees. The PAC cannot be blamed for the fact that they have not had a
member on Scopa.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, may I address you on that
point of order? The hon member has accused me of telling untruths, and I am
afraid he is absolutely incorrect. There has been a vacancy on Scopa for
months, for an opposition member to fill, and no other opposition party was
prepared to do it, including the PAC.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chair, on a point of order: I think it is really not correct
that the hon Gibson should be afforded this opportunity to keep on
misleading the House. I think it was going to be fair enough if hon Andries
Nel was given an opportunity to speak and respond to issues that were
raised by hon Gibson. He was not given the time and for the second time
again Gibson is given a platform. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, members! Please, order!

Mr M J ELLIS: All the ANC is trying to do is tell you how to do your job,
Madam Chair, and I say that is absolutely wrong.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha):  Hon member Ellis, could you please
take your seat. Hon Chauke, I have given the hon Deputy Chief Whip the
opportunity for corrections to be made in debate by making a statement. If
he does not wish to take it, I think we can now proceed. Does the ANC not
have a further statement? Thank you.


                      INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT COUNCIL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J L FUBBS (ANC): Madam Chair, my statement will address the
International Investment Council. Our vision as the ANC is one of a
nonracial, nonsexist, democratic, prosperous, equitable, peaceful and
stable society. Within this context we pursue the goal of ensuring decent
work and living standards for all.

At the meeting over the past weekend, the International Investment Council
confirmed the resilience of the South African economy. It further concluded
that the targeted 6% growth rate is attainable sooner rather than later.

The ANC urges all the social partners to take advantage of this positive
mood to ensure that we move decisively to build an economy that grows and
benefits all. I thank you.


                STERN MEASURES AGAINST PERPETRATORS OF CRIME


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I am standing up to align
myself with the remarks made by the hon Ngaleka regarding the murder of
Optel Rooi. That matter is going to be finalised in court this Thursday and
we are hoping that the full might of the law will be exercised in this
regard to send a message to everybody who commits crime, particularly
serious and violent crime – including murder, irrespective of where they
come from. And this also includes those who have been enlisted as members
of the SA Police Service.

As government, we are not going to tolerate such crimes that are
perpetrated against our people. We are therefore happy that this matter has
been raised because it is a matter that must be of concern to all peace-
loving South Africans and law-abiding citizens of our country.

This is also similar to the matter that was raised by the hon member from
the IFP, who unfortunately is not in the House now. But I really do
appreciate the fact that there are many members of this House who do point
out some of these crimes that are committed against people.

To us it does not matter who the persons are be they tourists in South
Africa or our own citizens who are assaulted and murdered. We are going to
investigate each and every one of those cases so that, in the end, those
who are perpetrators of these vile deeds against law-abiding people are
brought to book. Thank you. [Applause.]


     CHALLENGES IN EDUCATION, MULTILINGUALISM, GUN VIOLENCE AND TOURISM


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Chairperson, unfortunately I was not able
to be present at the Human Rights Commission’s hearings, which took place
just over a week ago. But I have read some of the comments that were
alluded to by Mr Graeme Bloch. I think only a fool would believe that there
are no challenges and problems in the education sector, and only a liar
would claim that we could address these in a very short matter of time.

We are addressing all the concerns that members have referred to. In fact,
teacher development; improving reading, writing and numeracy skills of the
children of our country; and providing early childhood education, which
would ensure that we provide the foundation that allows our children to
learn appropriately, all form aspects of these responses that we must give.

But I vehemently deny and refute the notion that education is in a crisis
in South Africa. That is totally untrue. It might be the sort of hyperbole
that does excite imaginative minds, but it does not really reflect the
situation of many thousands of teachers who are hard-working, thousands of
schools that are functioning effectively and many children who are
succeeding to learn. The challenges are there. We will work hard and strive
to address them to improve the conditions of learning for all the children
of our country.

I had hoped that the FF Plus, while celebrating the victory of its student
wing at the University of Pretoria and referring to Afrikaans, would also
welcome the five vice chancellors meeting with the Minister of Education
recently in which it was agreed that we must look at how we promote
multilingualism on all campuses in South Africa and develop all the
languages of our country, not just English and Afrikaans.

I would expect all political parties to support the approach of the five
vice chancellors of institutions that are committed to promoting
multilingualism, and I am sure all university vice chancellors would join
us in this regard. We also welcome the court’s support . . .
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, you may well have the
chance for a further response but your two minutes have expired.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: All the Ministers asked me to respond on their
behalf, but I will sit down. Thank you. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): No, please, don’t sit down then if
they have all asked you. Please, continue. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Not too long? Am I troubling you, Mr Ellis? I
did think that one of the things that should have perhaps been ruled on –
and of course I cannot, with respect, tell the Chairperson how the Chair
should rule – is that we should not reflect on members’ skills or abilities
in their absence without due notice to them that we would be making such
references. Nevertheless matters might have changed since my time.

I wanted to speak to the matter of gun violence that is prevalent in many
parts of our country. I agree with the colleague from the UCDP that we do
need to do more to ensure a gun-free society in our country. I was
horrified to read today of a young pupil, a learner, who pointed a gun in
the face of one of our educators in one of our schools.

The prevalence of guns in our society is a troubling phenomenon, which
results from our history. Certainly, the Minister of Safety and Security
has taken extraordinary measures to address the matter of improving both
the licensing of firearms and the issuing of licences to responsible
holders of firearms. However, I believe we do need to address the
prevalence, particularly of family violence and the use of guns in domestic
situations.

Regarding the matter of tourism, clearly, we must protect all South
Africans as well as tourists in our country. We have taken steps through a
range of measures, including the work of the SA Police Service, municipal
services and community safety services to increase protection for tourists
at a range of tourist sites in the country.

Finally, I am excited about the agreement we signed with the Netherlands.
Again, it confirms the efforts that we are making to promote teacher
development and the improvement of education in our country. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, from the Chair, I take
cognisance of your experience, which is much greater than mine. However, I
also must take note of what I am advised by the Table, as did you. But in
the interest of fairness, of course, I may have made a mistake. I will look
at Hansard and come back to you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, are we able to respond to the Ministers?
[Interjections.] Are we able to respond to the Ministers, Madam Chair?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I am afraid that concludes the
business for the day, and the House is adjourned.

The House adjourned at 15:51.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                           MONDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


            i) Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2005]
               (National Assembly – sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its
               introduction published in Government Gazette No 27913 of 26
               August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as
         referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 18 October 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees

  1) Ms T V Tobias has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
     Committee on Defence with effect from 17 October 2005.

(2)   Ms L Jacobus has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
     Committee on Arts and Culture with effect from 17 October 2005.


                          TUESDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) Defence Special Account Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2005] – Act No 18
           of 2005 (assented to and signed by President on 4 October 2005).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of Trade
        and Industry for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2004-2005.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of Trade and Investment South
        Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     c) Report and Financial Statements of Support Program for Industrial
        Innovation (SPII) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
        Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2004-2005, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
        2004-2005.


     e) Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme 2005.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     a) Letter from the Minister of Trade and Industry dated 17 October
        2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
        65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
        the Department of Trade and Industry for 2004-2005:


      SUBJECT: TABLING OF THE DTI’S ANNUAL REPORT



      I write to apologise for the late tabling of the DTI Annual Report. I
      rejected the initial draft based on quality considerations and this
      has resulted in a delay. The report will however be tabled prior to
      the portfolio committee’s deliberations on the said report on 25
      October 2005.


      Kind regards


      Mr Mandisi Mpahlwa, MP
      Minister of Trade and Industry



                         WEDNESDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Reintroduction of Bills


    (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


      Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29 – 2005 (Reintroduced)] (National
         Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of
         its introduction published in Government Gazette No 27984 of 31
         August 2005.]


    Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and
    Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
    Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160,
    on 20 October 2005.



National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly

    Ms B T Ngcobo was nominated as a member of the National Assembly on 15
    September 2005. She made and subscribed the solemn affirmation in the
    Deputy Speaker’s office on 11 October 2005.

2.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

    1.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
             2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


    2.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry for
         consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
             Education and Training (Services SETA) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 78-2005].

    3.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 170-2005].


         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Biodiversity Institute for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005.


         (c)      Report and Financial Statements of The Greater St. Lucia
             Wetland Park for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


         (d)      Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    4.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development:


          a) Government Notice No R.741 published in Government Gazette No
             27813 dated 29 July 2005: Amendment of Regulations relating to
             Debt Collectors, 2003 in terms of the Debt Collectors Act,
             1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).

    5.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National Treasury
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 51-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
             Services (SARS) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             211-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Statistics South Africa for
             2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 166-2005].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
             Centre for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 176-
             2005].


          e) Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
             Deposits for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Collective
             Investment Schemes for the year ended 31 December 2003.

    6.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
             Education (CHE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


    7.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National
             Museum for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 160-
             2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
             Resources Agency for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             182-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
             Resources Agency for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             182-2005].


    8.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Science and Technology for consideration and report:


          a) Accession of South Africa’s Membership of the International
             Centre for Scientific and Technical Information (ICSTI),
             tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum Accession of South Africa’s Membership
             of the International Centre for Scientific and Technical
             Information (ICSTI).
    9.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
             Research Council (MRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 91-2002].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004,
             2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-2005.


    10.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Sport and Recreation for consideration and report. The Reports of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Sports
             Commission for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 65-
             2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Institute
             for Drug-Free Sport for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             161-2005].
    11.    The following paper is referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on
         Auditor-General for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements on the Office of the Auditor-
             General for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 193-
             2005].


    12.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
             (UTF) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 207-
             2005].


          b) Report on the National Freight Logistics Strategy – September
             2005.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search
             and Rescue (SASAR) organisation for 2003-2004.


    13.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
             Authority of South Africa (NPA) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 156-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
             Unit (SIU) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 181-
             2005].


    14.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour, the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and the
         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development for
         consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Police, Security,
             Legal, Justice and Correctional Services Sector Education and
             Training Authority (POSLEC SETA) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 101-2005].


    15.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:


         (a)      The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 20
             September 2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
             informing Members of the National Assembly of the employment
             of the South African National Defence Force in the Democratic
             Republic of Congo.


    16.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 5
         is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
             Provincial and Local Government for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             Vote 5 for 2004-2005 [RP 200-2005].


    17.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government and the Portfolio Committee on Arts
         and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
             Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious
             and Linguistic Communities (CRL Communities) 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 183-2005].


    18.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         26 is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
             Agriculture for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2004-2005
             [RP 165-2005].


    19.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:


         (a)      Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of South
             African Post Office Limited for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005.


         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic
             Media Institute of  South Africa (NEMISA) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 150-2005].


    20.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy for
         consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualification
             Authority (MQA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             98-2005].


         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector
             Education and Training Authority (ESETA) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 88-2005].


    21.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
         consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
              Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
              Training Authority (MAPPP SETA) for 2004-2005, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2004-2005 [RP 96-2005].


    22.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Transport for consideration
         and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:


         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education
             and Training Authority (TETA) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 103-2005].


    23.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Housing for consideration and report:


         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
             Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2004-2005.

    24.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy for consideration and report. The Reports of
         the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of
             Minerals and Energy for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 for
             2004-2005 [RP 44-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 55-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity
             Regulator (NER) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             184-2005].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
             Regulator (NNR) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             56-2005].


          e) Annual Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund (CEF)
             Group of Companies for 2004-2005, including the Reports of the
             Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 143-2005].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity
             Distribution Industry Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
             Energy Corporation (NECSA) for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005 [RP 168-2005].


    25.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy and the Portfolio Committee on Labour for
         consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
           Council (MHSC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
           141-2005].


                          THURSDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Health


         (i)     Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B
              35 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76) [Explanatory summary
              of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 28106 of 14 October 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         21 October 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

     (2)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


         (i)     Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal Bill [B 36 –
              2005] (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
              Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 28063 of 23 September 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial
         and Local Government of the National Assembly, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 21 October 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   South African Red Cross Society Bill, 2005, submitted by the
         Minister of Health on 20 October 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Health and the Select Committee on Social Services.


National Assembly

The Speaker
1.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department of
             Justice and Constitutional Development for 2004-2005, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             of Vote 24 for 2004-2005 [RP 190-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
             Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005 [RP 208-2005].

    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        (a)      Proclamation No R.47 published in Government Gazette No
             27986 dated 31 August 2005: Amendment of Regulations, in terms
             of the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act,
             1997 (Act No 103 of 1997).


    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
             Corporation (PIC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             147-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
             Development Programme Fund for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005 [RP 169-2005].


          c) The Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank
             on 24 August 2005.


          d) Report of the South African Reserve Bank on the eighty-fourth
             ordinary general meeting of shareholders for 2004.


    4.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
             Transport for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2004-2005.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
             Transport for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2004-2005.
             (c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
             Aviation Authority (CAA) for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 82-2005].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety
             Regulator (RSR) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Search and Rescue (SASAR) organisation for 2004-2005.


    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


          a) Letter from the Minister of Transport dated 30 September 2005
             to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
             65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
             of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
             Reports of Public Entities for 2004-2005.


    6.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
             Traditional Leaders (NHTL) for 2004-2005.

    7.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of
             Public Enterprises for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2004-
             2005.

    8.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Social Development for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
             Social Development for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 for 2004-
             2005 [RP 210-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
             Agency (NDA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 197-
             2005].

    9.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 – Department of
             Public Service and Administration for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
             Vote 10 for 2004-2005 [RP 193-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of South African Management
             Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2004-2005, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2004-2005 [RP 198-2005].


    10.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:


          a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Management
             of State Housing [RP 30-2005].


    11.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of
             Land Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for
             2004-2005 [RP 132-2005].

    12.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
             Communications for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 27 for 2004-
             2005 [RP 212-2005].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
             (USA) for 2003-2004, 2004-2005 and the Report and Financial
             Statements of the Universal Service Fund (USF) for 2004-2005,
             including the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements of the Universal Service Agency (USA) for 2003-2004,
             2004-2005 and the Universal Service Fund (USF) for 2004-2005
             [RP 196-2005].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
             (USA) on the Universal Agency Fund (USF) for 2003-2004,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 15-2005].


    13.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour for consideration and report. The Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    14.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publications
             Board for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    15.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs:

          a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Mozambique
             regarding the Waiver of Visa Requirements for Holders of
             Ordinary Passports, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

    16.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of
             Arts and Culture for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for
             2004-2005.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts
             Council of South Africa for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 180-2005].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre
             for the Arts for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
             Language Board (PanSALB) for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005 [RP 205-2005].


    17.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
             Science and Technology for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 for
             2004-2005.


    18.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Housing for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of
             Housing for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2004-2005
             [RP 142-1005].


    19.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Housing and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Housing dated 29 September
             2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
             section 55(d) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act
             No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
             Annual Report of the National Home Builders Registration
             Council for 2004-2005.


    20.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
             Service for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 139-
             2005].


    21.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
            Tourism dated 10 October 2005 to the Speaker of the National
            Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance
            Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay
            in the tabling of the Annual Report of Marine Living Resources
            Fund for 2004-2005.


    22.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Correctional Services for consideration and report. The Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 21 is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
             Correctional Services for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
             [RP 178-2005].


    23.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of
             Water Affairs and Forestry for 2004-2005, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 34
             for 2004-2005 [RP 130-2005].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research
             Commission (WRC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
             116-2005].
        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon
             Tunnel Authority (TCTA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-
             2005.


    24.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 16 is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
             Health for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 16 for 2004-2005
             [RP 136-2005].


    25.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Sport and Recreation for consideration and report. The Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of
             Sport and Recreation for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 for 2004-
             2005.


    26.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance:

          a) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Decentralised Development Programme,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Decentralised
             Development Programme.


          c) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Promotion of Rural Livelihoods in
             Eastern Cape Province Project, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          d) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Promotion of
             Rural Livelihoods in Eastern Cape Province Project.


          e) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Training and Support for Natural
             Resource Management (Transform) Project, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          f) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Training and
             Support for Natural Resource Management (Transform) Project.


          g)  Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Broadening Agricultural Services and
             Extension Delivery Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
             of the Constitution, 1996.


          h) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Broadening
             Agricultural Services and Extension Delivery Project.


          i) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Training System for Education, Training
             and Development Practitioners (ETDP SETA) Project, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          j) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Training
             System for Education, Training and Development Practitioners
             (ETDP SETA) Project.


          k) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Trade and Industrial Policy Secretariat
             (TIPS) Consultancy Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
             of the Constitution, 1996.


          l) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Trade and
             Industrial Policy Secretariat (TIPS) Consultancy Project.


          m) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning Assistance for the National Housing Finance
             Corporation (NHFC) Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
             of the Constitution, 1996.


          n) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning Assistance for
             the National Housing Finance Corporation (NHFC) Programme.


          o) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Municipal Finance Management Programme,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          p) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Municipal
             Finance Management Programme.


          q) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Provincial Administration Support
             Programme in the Eastern Cape, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          r) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Provincial
             Administration Support Programme in the Eastern Cape.


          s) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Vocational Education and training Fund
             Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
             1996.


          t) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Vocational
             Education and training Fund Project.


          u) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Urban Upgrading and Development
             Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          v) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Urban
             Upgrading and Development Programme.
          w) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Planning and Implementation Management
             Support Systems for Municipalities Programme, tabled in terms
             of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          x) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Planning and
             Implementation Management Support Systems for Municipalities
             Programme.


          y) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Economic and Development Policy Advisory
             Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          z) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Economic and
             Development Policy Advisory Programme.


         aa) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the HIV/AIDS Cross-Sectoral Fund Project,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         ab) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the HIV/AIDS
             Cross-Sectoral Fund Project.


         ac) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Advisory Support for the Consolidation
             of the Mpumalanga Provincial Administration Project, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         ad) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Advisory
             Support for the Consolidation of the Mpumalanga Provincial
             Administration Project.


         ae) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Basic Employment and Skills Training
             Programme in the Free State and Eastern Cape Provinces, tabled
             in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         af) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Basic
             Employment and Skills Training Programme in the Free State and
             Eastern Cape Provinces.


         ag) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway
             regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
             Administrations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


         ah) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Kingdom of Norway regarding Mutual Assistance between
             their Customs Administrations.


         ai) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Turkey regarding
             Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled
             in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         aj) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
             Republic of Turkey regarding Mutual Assistance between their
             Customs Administrations.


         ak) Government Notice No R.794 published in Government Gazette No
             26868 dated 12 August 2005: Determination of amounts for
             purposes of the Act, in terms of the Military Pensions Act,
             1976 (Act No 84 of 1976).


         al) Government Notice No R.860 published in Government Gazette No
             27976 dated 2 September 2005: Determination of limit on amount
             of remuneration for purposes of determination of contribution
             in terms of section 6, in terms of the Unemployment Insurance
             Act, 2002 (Act No 4 of 2002).

    27.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry:

          a) Trade and Economic Agreement between the Republic of South
             Africa and the Republic of Turkey, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade and Economic Agreement
             between the Republic of Turkey.



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Government Notice No R.431 published in Government Gazette No 27560
        dated 13 May 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the Standards Act,
        1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     b) Government Notice No R.518 published in Government Gazette No 27615
        dated 3 June 2005: Import Control in terms of the International
        Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


     c) Government Notice No R.567 published in Government Gazette No 27685
        dated 24 June 2005: Proposed introduction of a compulsory
        specification for replacement elastomeric cups and seals for
        hydraulic brake actuating cylinders for use in motor vehicles using
        non-petroleum base hydraulic brake fluid, in terms of the Standards
        Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     d) Government Notice No 641 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Lafarge Gypsum
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     e) Government Notice No 642 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Nampak Metal
        Packaging Limited – Bevcan, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962
        (Act No 58 of 1962).


     f) Government Notice No 643 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Pulp United (Pty)
        Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     g) Government Notice No 644 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Nampak Products
        Limited – Corrugated Flexographic Printing Project, in terms of the
        Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     h) Government Notice No 645 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Sud-Chemie SA
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     i) Government Notice No 646 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Trident Steel
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     j) Government Notice No 647 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: UCAR South Africa
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     k) Government Notice No 648 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Duys Engineering
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     l) Government Notice No 649 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Duys Engineering
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     m) Government Notice No 650 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: MOLT Fruit
        Processing (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No
        58 of 1962).

     n) Government Notice No 651 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Silicon Technology
        (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


     o) Government Notice No 652 published in Government Gazette No 27750
        dated 1 July 2005: Strategic Industrial Project: Pulp United (Pty)
        Ltd, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     p) Government Notice No 602 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Designs Act,
        1993 (Act No 195 of 1993).


     q) Government Notice No 603 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Trade Marks Act,
        1993 (Act No 194 of 1993).


     r) Government Notice No 604 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Patents Act,
        1978 (Act No 57 of 1978).


     s) Government Notice No 605 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment to Companies Administrative Regulations, in
        terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


     t) Government Notice No 606 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Registration of
        Copyright in Cinematograph Films Act, 1977 (Act No 62 of 1977).


     u) Government Notice No 607 published in Government Gazette No 27713
        dated 1 July 2005: Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
        Office – Amendment to Close Corporations Administrative Regulations
        - 1984, in terms of the Electronic and Communications and
        Transactions Act, 2002 (Act No 25 of 2002).


     v) Government Notice No 655 published in Government Gazette No 27735
        dated 8 July 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the Standards Act,
        1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     w) Government Notice No 1099 published in Government Gazette No 27735
        dated 8 July 2005: Notices of initiation of investigation into the
        alleged dumping of detonated fuses and delay detonators (commonly
        known as shock tubes), originating in or imported from the Peoples
        Republic of China, in terms of the International Trade
        Administration Commission of South Africa.


     x) Government Notice No 1100 published in Government Gazette No 27735
        dated 8 July 2005: Customs and Excise Tariff applications: List
        9/2005 in terms of the International Trade Administration
        Commission of South Africa.


     y) Government Notice No R.622 published in Government Gazette No 27762
        dated 8 July 2005: Amended Safeguard Regulations in terms of the
        International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


     z) Government Notice No 766 published in Government Gazette No 27846
        dated 5 August 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the Standards
        Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    aa) Government Notice No R.779 published in Government Gazette No 27847
        dated 5 August 2005: Amendment in terms of the International Trade
        Administration Commission of South Africa.


National Assembly


1.    The Speaker


     a) Letter from the Minister of Home Affairs dated 4 October 2005 to
        the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
        of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
        explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
        Film and Publication Board for 2003-2004:

        ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FILM AND PUBLICATION BOARD FOR THE YEAR
        2003/2004


        The above matter has reference.


        In terms of Section 14 of the Films and Publications Act, 1996 as
        amended, as the Minister of Home Affairs I am require to table a
        report on the activities of the Board and the Review Board, as well
        as an audited balance sheet and account within fourteen days of
        receipt thereof.


        The 2003/2004 Report was tabled in 2004, but subsequently withdrawn
        due to the fact that the Audit Committee report was not included as
        required by the Public Finance Management Act.


        I am now in a position to table the report together with the
        financial report and the Audit Committee report. I wish to
        apologise for the late tabling of this report


        Kind regards


        MS N N MAPISA-NQAKULA, MP
        MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS


COMMITTEE REPORTS


1.    First Report of National Assembly Rules Committee, 2005

    The Acting Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr G Q M Doidge,  presents
    the First Report of the Rules Committee,  dated  20  October  2005,  as
    follows:

        The Rules Committee  having  on  14  October  2005  considered  the
        composition  of  portfolio  committees  and  sequence  of  members’
        statements after floor-crossing, reports as follows:


    (1)     Composition of portfolio committees
        The Committee decided that as a general principle the number of
        members on portfolio committees be reduced from 17 to 13 members as
        follows: ANC 8, DA 2, IFP 1 and other parties 2.


        This decision requires a consequential  amendment  to  Rule  200(2)
        which determines that a portfolio committee must have no fewer than
        15 members.


        Recommendation
        It is therefore recommended that, in order to give  effect  to  the
        decision of the Rules Committee, Rule  200(2)  be  amended  by  the
        deletion of  the  number  in  bold  and  insertion  of  the  number
        underlined:


        Rule 200. (2) A portfolio committee must have no fewer than [15] 13
        and no more than 40 members.


    (2)     Sequence of parties for members’ statements
          a) The Committee decided that the number of statements allowed on
             a day on which members’ statements are taken be increased from
             a maximum of fourteen to a maximum of fifteen.
          b) The maximum of Ministers who may respond to members’ statements
             has been increased from five to six.
          c) A trial period is to be allowed for the new arrangement and the
             new order of parties will be as follows: ANC; DA; IFP; ANC;
             group 1 of smaller parties; group 2 of smaller parties; ANC;
             group 3 of smaller parties; group 4 of smaller parties; DA;
             ANC; IFP; ANC; DA; ANC.
          d) The grouping of smaller parties is to be decided by the smaller
             parties themselves.


    Recommendation
    It is recommended that this  temporary  arrangement  be  endorsed  and,
    accordingly, Rule 105(5) and (9) be suspended  until  the  end  of  the
    trial period.

    Report to be considered.


    APPROVED:




    ..……………………………….
    Date:…………………
    G Q M DOIDGE
    ACTING SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY



                           FRIDAY, 21 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly
The Speaker

1.    Appointment of Whips


    (1)     The following members have been appointed as whips in the
        National Assembly with effect from 14 October 2005:


      Mr C H F Greyling (ANC)
        Mr D K Maluleke (ANC).

    (2)     The following member has been appointed as whip in the National
        Assembly with effect from 17 October 2005:

        Ms J L Fubbs (ANC).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication
        Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 158-2004].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
     a) Additional Protocol to the Trade, Development and Cooperation
        Agreement (TDCA) between the Republic of South Africa and the
        European Community (EC) and its member states, tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Additional Protocol to the Trade,
        Development and Cooperation Agreement (TDCA) between the Republic
        of South Africa and the European Community (EC) and its member
        states.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Letter from the Minister of Defence dated 20 October 2005 to the
        Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of
        the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
        explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
        Department of Defence 2004-2005:

        TABLING IN PARLIAMENT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE ANNUAL REPORT FOR
        FY2004/05


        The DOD’s draft Annual Report FY2004/05 has undergone an internal
        approval process to ensure that the information provided is
        reliable, credible and conforms to the prescripts of National
        Treasury and Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA).
        The following timeframes were followed:


              29 July 2005. The draft Annual Report was presented to the
              Secretary for Defence.
              4 August 2005. The draft Annual Report was submitted to a
              special Defence Staff Council for approval.
              12 August 2005. The draft Annual Report was presented to
              myself for approval.


        With regard to the external approval process, the presentation to
        the Portfolio Committee on Defence (PCD) on 17 August 2005 was
        postponed by the PCD until 23 August 2005.


        On 23 August 2005 the presentation to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence (PCD) was postponed by the PCD with reference to substantial
        further editing to be done by the DOD due to the quality of the AR
        regarding grammar, punctuation, construct and language. The DOD
        should have by then be engaged in the printing phase, which was
        scheduled from 12 August to 23 August 2005.


        On 26 August 2005 the draft AR was handed over to the Acting
        Director Planning and Programming, to manage the process due to the
        fact that the DOD was now seriously behind the target dates as
        scheduled in Appendix E of DOD Planning Instruction 02/05:
        Preparation of the Annual Report for FY2004/05, the prescribed
        timeframes of the PFMA and that the document needed substantial
        further editing and corrections.


        On 9 September 2005, due to the outcomes of the paragraph below, a
        formal letter was submitted to my office that “Although the
        Department of Defence (DOD) is vigorously pursuing the target dates
        to complete the Annual Report in time, the possibility exists that
        the DOD will not be able to table its annual report for FY2004/05
        and the related financial statements on time due to the factors
        beyond its control” and that “It is envisaged that the earliest that
        the DOD Annual Report, including the Financial Statements, can be
        tabled is 30 September 2005”.


        The following process were then followed to ensure a quality
        document to Parliament:


              29 August to 9 September 2005. The document was extensively
              edited by D Language’s language practitioner, Ms M. Louw, the
              MOD GSB language practitioner, Mr E. Muller, Ms P. Grobler of
              Corporate Communication Division, Dr M.B. Khanyile (previous D
              Planning and Programming) and the Acting Director Planning and
              Programming, Col R.C. Brand.


              Simultaneously, as the editing of the chapters progressed, the
              chapters were handed over to Mr W. van der Westhuizen, who is
              the only qualified layout artist in the DOD, to capture the
              revised chapters into a publication format. This was done
              until 17 September 2005.


              19 to 28 September 2005. Letter AG/00611REG04/05 dated 1
              August 2005, that the final printer’s proof must be submitted
              to the relevant Audit Manager at the Auditor General’s Office
              before printing could commence, followed this on 19 September
              2005. The first iteration was received back from the AG office
              on 23 September 2005; and the second iteration and approval to
              continue on 28 September 2005. This led to the process as
              highlighted in the above paragraph to be repeated.


              29 September 2005 to 25 October 2005. The final layout of the
              AR was done at 1 Military Printing Regiment (1 MPR) by the
              Corporate Communication Division layout artist, and the
              printing of the DOD’s Annual Report commenced immediately
              thereafter. It is to be noted that unlike previous years where
              the printing was outsourced and could be delivered to
              parliament within five days, it was decided by the DOD to
              utilize its internal capacity, 1MPR, which needs at least
              fourteen days to complete the process.


      The first 500 completed Annual Reports will be couriered to Cape Town
      on 23 October 2005 and then delivered to Parliament.


      Your understanding in this regard will be highly appreciated.


      Yours respectfully,




      MR M. G. P. LEKOTA
      MINISTER OF DEFENCE


                           MONDAY, 24 OCTOBER 2005



TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
           Board for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for Gender
           Equality (CGE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP
           120-2005].


National Assembly

         1. The Speaker

    a) Request from the Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
       Development for the National Assembly, in terms of section 193(5) of
       the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), to recommend four
       candidates from the nominations submitted for appointment by the
       President to the Commission for Gender Equality.


                          TUESDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees


   1) Mr S D Montsitsi has been elected as Chairperson of the Joint
      Standing Committee on Defence with effect from 21 October 2005.


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
         Standing Committees, viz:


         Public Accounts:
         Appointed: Godi, Mr N T

   2. Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
      respect of election of a member of the Pan African Parliament


     1) The National Assembly has elected Mr P J Nefolovhodwe as  a  member
        of the Pan African Parliament on 13 October 2005 and  the  decision
        is transmitted for concurrence.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2005 [RP 201-2005].


        Referred to the Joint Budget Committee and the Portfolio Committee
        on Finance for consideration and report in accordance with their
        respective mandates.


     (b)    Adjustments Appropriation Bill, 2005 [B37-2005].


            Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for
        consideration and report.


     (c)    Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure 2005 [RP 202-2005],
        which includes:

             1.   Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;

             2.   Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments
             Estimates, 2005-2006;


             3.   Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;

             4.   Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;
             5.   Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local
                 Government", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             6.   Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Public Works", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             7.   Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Government Communications and
                 Information System", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             8.   Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             9.   Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Enterprises",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             10.  Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service and
                 Administration", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             11.  Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Public Service Commission",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             12.  Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "South African Management
                 Development Institute", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             13.  Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Statistics South Africa",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             14.  Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Arts and Culture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             15.  Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Education", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             16.  Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Health", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             17.  Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Labour", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             18.  Memorandum on Vote No 18 - " Social Development",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             19.  Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Sport and Recreation South
                 Africa", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             20.  Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Correctional Services",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             21.  Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Defence", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             22.  Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Independent Complaints
                 Directorate”, Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             23.  Memorandum on Vote No 23 - " Justice and Constitutional
                 Development ", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             24.  Memorandum on Vote No 24 - " Safety and Security",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             25.  Memorandum on Vote No 25 - " Agriculture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             26.  Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Communications", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             27.  Memorandum on Vote No 27 - " Environmental Affairs and
                 Tourism", Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             28.  Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Housing", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             29.  Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             30.  Memorandum on Vote No 30 - " Minerals and Energy",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;
             31.  Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             32.  Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2006;


             33.  Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2005-2006;


             34. Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2005-2005.

    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
    report.

2.    The Minister of Defence


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Department of
        Defence for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements of Vote 22 for 2004-2005 [RP 159-2005].

3.    The Minister of Labour


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund (UYF)
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.



COMMITTEE REPORTS


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Nursing Bill [B 26-
    2005] (National Assembly-sec 75), dated 18 October 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the subject of
        the Nursing Bill [B 26-2005] (National Assembly-sec  75),  referred
        to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75
        Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 26A-2005].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Report On
    Information and Update Workshop for Pan-African Parliament Standing
    Committee on Cooperation, International Relations and Conflict
    Resolution, 1 – 2 April 2005, dated 12 September 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs having considered the
        Report On Information and Update Workshop for Pan-African
        Parliament Standing Committee on Cooperation, International
        Relations and Conflict Resolution, 1 – 2 April 2005, referred to
        it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Report of
    the South African Delegation to the Third Ordinary Session of the Pan-
    African Parliament, 29 March 2005, held at Gallagher Estates, Midrand,
    dated 12 September 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs having considered the
        Report of the South African Delegation to the Third Ordinary
        Session of the Pan-African Parliament, 29 March 2005, held at
        Gallagher Estates, Midrand, referred to it, reports that it has
        concluded its deliberations thereon.


