---
title: 'National Assembly - 03 November 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-11-03
---

THURSDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.


                         DISABILITY 2005 CONFERENCE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby move:

   That the House –

     1) notes that the Disability 2005 Conference begins in Midrand today;

     2) commends their objective of ensuring that disabled South Africans
        are able to enjoy their rights to dignity, respect and self-
        respect;

     3) wishes them well in their endeavour; and

     4) calls on all South Africans to assist them in this cause.

Agreed to.


           DEATH OF MRS MARIETJIE VILJOEN, WIFE OF MARAIS VILJOEN


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr W D SPIES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

    That the House –

     1) expresses its condolences with the family and friends of the late
        Mrs Marietjie Viljoen, who passed away on 5 October 2005;


     2) notes that Mrs Viljoen was the wife of former State President of
        the Republic, Marais Viljoen, and that she was also an honorary
        member of PACT and the Afrikaans Language and Cultural Association
        (ATKV); and
     3) adds its voice to that of President Mbeki in stating that our
        thoughts are with her family and friends in this time of grief.


I thank you.

Agreed to.


                             THREAT OF AVIAN FLU


                             (Notice of Motion)

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice
that I shall move:

That the House debate the increasing threat of avian flu and its potential
impact on South Africa, with reference to reports that the Spanish flu
epidemic that killed more than 40 million people in 1918 and 1919 is
believed to have originated as a bird virus . . .

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mrs Dudley, you are giving notice of a debate?

Mrs C DUDLEY: Yes.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why didn’t you do it when we were taking notices?

Mrs C DUDLEY: Oh, sorry. I thought we were still on notices.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we’re long past that.

                             MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS


                            FIRE SAFETY EDUCATION


                            (Member’s Statements)

Mr T D H RAMPHELE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the fires that have claimed lives,
destroyed homes in the Western Cape and Gauteng and laid  waste to hectares
of farmland and forests in the Eastern Cape and other parts of the country,
have once again shown us what devastating consequences these disasters can
have on the lives of often our most vulnerable communities, our green
heritage and our biodiversity.

The ANC calls on communities to reduce the risk of fires by observing early
signs of fire dangers, and certain basic safety rules. We call on radio
stations and other media to include fire safety education in their
programmes.

The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry launched South Africa’s national
fire danger rating system in partnership with the SA Weather Services in
September this year to increase our capacity and knowledge of preventing
and managing veld fires. This system comprises an early warning system for
predicting conditions conducive to occurrences of veld fires. It also
entails the issuing of warnings when the fire danger rating is high or
extreme. Such warnings are issued through television, radio and local
newspapers. Our people are asked to take note and observe these broadcasts
in daily weather reports, and take precautionary measures of prevention.

The ANC applauds those members of our emergency services who often risk
their lives when called out to fight these devastating fires, and once
again calls on citizens to be extra cautious, especially during what is
called the ``fire weather period’’. Thank you. [Applause.]


                          CORRUPT MAYOR OF MANGAUNG


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M SWATHE (DA): Deputy Speaker, in Bloemfontein, the controversial
mayor of Mangaung, Mr Papi Mokoena, is back in his office this week, after
his voluntary leave came to an end. This was after he was arrested by the
Scorpions on charges of defrauding the municipality of R150 million, and
released on bail.

For the DA and the public, it is clear that the ANC is unwilling to take
action against a public representative who has been charged for such a
serious offence. If President Mbeki is adamant about rooting out corrupt
officials and improving service delivery at local government level, then he
should practise what he preaches. [Interjections.]

Removing a mayor from the provincial capital and largest municipality in
the Free State who faces serious criminal charges relating to abuse of his
power as a mayor would be a step in the right direction. Waiting for a
decision by a committee of council, months after the initial charges were
laid, sent a very clear message to the public: When it comes to corruption,
the ANC talks the talk, but it is unwilling to walk the walk. [Applause.]


                        COLLAPSE OF FARMS IN LIMPOPO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E J LUCAS (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s very troubling that,
according to reports, most of the farms bought by the Limpopo government
between 1997 and 2002 for R100 million under the Land Acquisition Grant
Programme have collapsed.

A National Council of Provinces and MEC delegation that visited several of
the farms found that most of the projects had failed due to a lack of
skills and funds. If, as alleged, so many of the farms have collapsed in
just the Limpopo province, the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs
should conduct a thorough investigation into the state of all farms
throughout South Africa that have been given back to the people and
communities under the department’s various programmes so as to ascertain
how many are operating successfully, and to provide assistance to those
that need it.

The ability to make a commercial success of these farms is of the  utmost
importance. If the beneficiaries as well as the surrounding communities are
to develop and prosper, these people should be equipped with the necessary
skills and given the assistance needed to ensure that at least they have a
chance to survive and, hopefully, also to prosper. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The ANC.

Mr T D LEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, could I address you on a point of order,
please?

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Have you crossed?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: A point of order?

Mr T D LEE: Could I address you on a point of order, please? While Mr
Swathe was making his statement, a member of the ANC from that side called
him a ``baas boy’’. I think that is very, very racist, and I think it is
unparliamentary.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, if that was said, it was unparliamentary.
[Interjections.] Do you know who the member is that made that remark?

Mr T D LEE: Deputy Speaker, I think I recognised the voice. It sounded like
Mr Danny Olifant’s voice. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have to rule on something like Mr Danny Olifant’s
voice. It’s a little bit difficult to do, but I could ask Mr Danny Olifant
whether it was he. Please, hon member, without going into explanations,
withdraw the comment.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Madam Deputy Speaker, I have a much more beautiful voice
than that. I never said that. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Can I withdraw it on behalf of the
caucus, Madam Deputy Speaker?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, no one seems to be owning up, but we cannot take
a withdrawal on the basis of a caucus. It has never happened before. The
ruling stands – I am not recognising you, sir. Please take your seat – that
if those words were uttered by someone, they are unparliamentary, and in
bad taste. We should never do that. Thank you for raising the point, sir.
[Interjections.]

No, then you don’t make it any easier by continuing to say these are
racists. We don’t know who said that, and our ruling is very clear that
whoever said that made an irresponsible and unparliamentary remark.




                  PROTESTS IN CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPALITIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S A MSHUDULU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the pending repeal and
finalisation of the cross-boundary municipalities by the Municipal
Demarcation Board and Parliament has raised tempers in the affected
communities.

It should be understood that, at this stage, nothing has been finalised in
this regard to warrant celebrations or protests, as has happened in
Khutsong near Carletonville.

The ANC calls on all communities to exercise restraint and remain calm to
allow institutions authorised to deal with these issues to do their work
without fear or favour. Protests are welcome; they are an important element
of democracy, but we unequivocally condemn the violence that accompanies
these protests.
We further call on the people of the affected communities to realise that
the destruction of council property or any other property can only serve to
disrupt service delivery and the possibility of improving the quality of
people’s lives as called for. Thank you. [Applause.]

                    SUSPENSION OF INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkskz S N SIGCAU (UDM): Sekela-Somlomo, umbutho i-UDM uxhalabile ziziganeko
zakutsha nje kwiSebe lezoBuntloli. Ukunqunyanyiswa kwamagosa amathathu
aphezulu kweli sebe kuzisa uloyiko eburhulumenteni.

Kwasekuqaleni masimncome uMphathiswa ngokuwuphatha ngobunono lo mcimbi
akufumanisa ngokuthe kwehla. Sinethemba lokuba ngokwenjenje uthumele
umyalelo kuwo onke amagosa ezobuntloli nakumalungu aseburhulumenteni
ukwenzela ukuba azi ukuba izenzo zobugwenxa azizi kunyanyezelwa kweli sebe.

Siyathemba ukuba uphando lwale nyewe luya kuhlolisisa imeko enobuzaza
engadalwa kukusetyenziswa gwenxa kwamandla okuphatha. Eli lixesha
leenkokeli ezinobulumko neziqinileyo, neziya kuqinisekisa ukuba urhulumente
akayi kuba lixhoba labo bafuna ukufezekisa iminqweno yabo yezopolitiko.
Ndiyabulela, Sekela-Somlomo. (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement
follows.)

[Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Deputy Speaker, the UDM is concerned about
recent events in the Department of Intelligence. The suspension of three
senior officials in this department has caused fears to arise with regard
to governance.

From the outset, let us commend the Minister for his careful handling of
this issue when he found out what had happened. We hope that by doing this
he sends a message to all intelligence officials and members of the
government, so that they understand that untoward actions will not be
tolerated in this department.

We hope that the investigation of this matter will demonstrate the negative
effects which maladministration may bring about. Now is the time for wise
and strong leaders, who will ensure that the government is not a victim of
those who want to pursue their own political motives. I thank you, Deputy
Speaker.]


                            PROBLEMS AT THE CCMA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V C GORE (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, recent strikes by employees of the
CCMA underline a darker truth and problems at the institution whose mandate
is to protect the rights and interests of all workers in South Africa.

It appears that the CCMA is beginning to fail its workers. Mismanagement by
the governing body of the employees was recently illustrated by the
awarding of 12 months’ compensation to an unfairly dismissed employee and
the payment of settlements, compensation and litigation fees totalling
millions of rands to another employee. This is against the backdrop of the
CCMA continually complaining of lack of resources.

Another example of the way that the CCMA is failing the interests of the
workers is the preliminary result of an independent study into the
settlement rates of disputed resolutions, which indicated that the reported
figures of 60% are a lot higher than that figure.

The appointment and retention of “yes-men” and “yes-women”, and praise
singers of the Minister of Labour, and in many cases the employment of
clearly underqualified personnel, such as the current provincial head in
Cape Town, who does not have the necessary qualifications, clearly
undermine the mandate and operations of this organisation.

The ID calls on the Minister of Labour to step in and intervene in the
affairs of the CCMA, and ensure that the interests and rights of the
workers, both within and outside of the organisation, are protected and
promoted.

                          VIOLENCE AMONGST CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me M R MORUTOA (ANC): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, ons kinders is almal
kosbaar. [Madam Deputy Speaker, all of our children are precious.]

Ke rata go boeletsa ke re, bana ba rona ba botlhokwa thata thata. [I want
to repeat that and say, our children are very important.]

Dit is die boodskap wat die ANC aan die ouers van die twee seuns wat by die
hartseer voorval in Paballelo, Upington, betrokke was, wil oordra.

’n Elfjarige seun het gister in die hof verskyn omdat hy klaarblyklik ’n
sewejarige seun aangerand het met ’n stuk draad. Die Sewejarige seun het
aan sy wonde beswyk. Ons moedig die gemeenskap aan om ons kinders te
beskerm en om hulle goeie gemeenskapwaardes te leer.

Ons doen ’n beroep op die gemeenskap om ’n voorbeeld te stel vir ons
kinders sodat hulle kan sien dat daar ander maniere is om hulle probleme op
te los. Die ANC-regering het al talle stappe gedoen om ons kinders te
beskerm en wetgewing in plek gesit wat spesifiek toegepas kan word.

Ons doen ook ’n beroep op alle maatskaplike werkers en onderwysers om selfs
meer opleidingsprogramme te inisieer sodat kinders die kans gebied kan word
om uit die bose kringloop van geweld te ontsnap. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[That is the message the ANC wishes to convey to the parents of the two
boys involved in the sad incident in Paballelo, Upington.

An 11-year-old boy appeared in court yesterday because he apparently
assaulted a seven-year-old boy with a piece of wire. The seven-year-old
succumbed to his injuries. We encourage the community to protect our
children and to teach them good community values.

We call on the community to lead by example, so that our children can see
that there are other ways of solving their problems. The ANC government has
already introduced many measures to protect our children, as well as
putting in place legislation that can be specifically implemented.

We also call on all social workers and teachers to initiate even more
training programmes, so that children may be afforded an opportunity of
escaping the vicious cycle of violence. I thank you. [Applause.]]

                  GROWTH IN SOUTH AFRICAN ECONOMY WELCOMED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the UCDP welcomes the
news that the South African economy is expected to grow at about 6%. Any
normal South African would be proud of this great achievement. However, it
would be naïve not to ask or enquire: “Why only now?” The answer would be:
“Yes, now, because apartheid was a stumbling block.”

For instance, fewer people were placed in power to determine the destiny of
the majority. Obsession with the skin colour of individuals was the order
of the day. But with the advent of democracy, the floodgates of economic
growth were suddenly open.

The UCDP has always advocated the creation of wealth for the benefit of all
South Africans and the encouragement of small entrepreneurship, not only
for earning a living, but also for participation and sharing profits.

The UCDP has in the past trained individuals in various skills through the
manpower centres, which ensured that as they left the learning centres,
these individuals were ready to perform the job they had been trained for.

We welcome all moves to enhance the economy, and not only to alleviate
poverty, but also to strive to eradicate it. I thank you.


                       SPENDING OF PROVINCIAL BUDGETS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MDAKA (UIF): Madam Deputy Speaker, the UIF is concerned about the
revelations contained in the provincial budget report released by the
National Treasury, that our provinces have spent just 40% of their . . .

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members! Please, we would like to
hear the member of the UIF. [Laughter.]

Ms N M MDAKA (UIF): . . . combined capital budgets for the fiscal year as
at the end of September. This shows that our provincial governments still
have a long way to go with regard to the development of necessary capacity
to spend their allocated budgets, which should also take into consideration
the quality of spending and efficiency.

The UIF believes that amid grinding poverty and lack of sustainable
development in many of our provinces, which affects local government
capacity to provide services effectively, the provincial governments should
do more to ensure that budgets allocated to them are properly spent in
order to better the lives of our people, more especially you.
[Interjections.]




                    LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE EASTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B FARROW (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, despite being one of South
Africa’s poorest provinces, the Eastern Cape government saw fit to spend
R3,4 billion on consultants over the past two years. This can only be as a
result of a lack of skills and capacity within its own government
departments and, in fact, can be seen as running a parallel Public Service
to prop up its inefficient and incompetent managers.

The recent report that the Elundini municipal manager was appointed with an
invalid Standard 8 certificate and a criminal record is indicative of the
quality of appointments being made by the ANC panellists that did the
interviewing and selection process.

It can also be adjudged by virtue of the fact that no annual statements
have been submitted by that municipality since 1997-98. How an
inexperienced manager can be made responsible for an annual budget of
R111,6 million and be paid R367 000 a year makes the mind boggle.

A province that cannot find sufficient funds to maintain its roads, with
annual shortfalls in excess of R1,5 billion per annum, but can find ways
and means to pave a road to the rural home of the CEO of SAA for his
wedding, makes one wonder where the provincial government’s priorities lie.
This especially when requests for maintaining or upgrading the province’s
main economic road network in the rural areas have fallen on deaf ears for
many, many ears.

Corruption continues unabated in the Eastern Cape. Not a day goes by
without reports of mismanagement and misappropriation. The Nelson Mandela
Metro cannot go untarnished, inter alia, with the recent findings of a
forensic audit in respect of housing projects that contain many complaints
and allegations of the flawed process that was used, resulting in the
metro’s name not being submitted for accreditation, and this despite the
housing waiting list of 78 000.

A recent last-minute cancellation of the housing indaba in the Eastern Cape
cost the local government and housing department a whopping R212 945.
Recent protests all over the province highlight the fact that the ANC has
not delivered on its promises. The tide is turning. The voters are now
saying: “Enough is enough.” [Applause.]




                              MOBILE LIBRARIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B MTHEMBU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Education has
stated that one of the doors of education that still needs to be opened is
reaching untapped potential, and that the handle of this door is beyond the
reach of thousands of rural children.

The Caterpillar library can play an important role in improving literacy
amongst people in rural areas who have never had the opportunity to set
foot in a library. June Baatjes, library advisor of the West Coast and
Winelands Education Management District Centre, has initiated the launch of
a mobile library, the Caterpillar, which will ensure that thousands of
children in rural and farm schools will soon have access to reading
material.

The first Caterpillar, a 1,6m affordable library on wheels, has been
delivered to Tonko Bosman, a small farm school in Stellenbosch. While
annual running costs for bus mobile libraries in rural areas totalled up to
R50 000, the Caterpillar cost just under R2 000.

The ANC commends initiatives such as the Caterpillar project, which will
assist in opening the doors of learning in rural areas. [Applause.]

                  FRAUD INVOLVING STOLEN IDENTITY DOCUMENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs I MARS (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, according to reports, identity
document fraudsters have stolen more than R83 million from banks alone,
while fraudulent claims based on stolen or fake IDs cost the life insurance
industry R200 million in R2003 alone.

This is not a problem only within South Africa, but is a worldwide
phenomenon, which is becoming one of the fastest-growing criminal
activities in the world and amounts to billions of dollars. We therefore
urge all South Africans to be very careful and apply the necessary
safeguards where their identity documents are concerned.

The various organisations and institutions, as well as governmental
departments, should also be very careful and take the necessary precautions
to ensure that people’s identity documents are protected, and not used for
unlawful purposes. This will include weeding out any employees who may be
involved in corruption and contributing to the increasing theft of identity
documents. Thank you.


                POOR SERVICE AT CAPE TOWN HOME AFFAIRS OFFICE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N D NGCENGWANE (ANC): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The ANC welcomes the
response by the Department of Home Affairs to take action against an
official who allegedly made degrading remarks to a member of the public
seeking assistance at the regional office in Cape Town.

The suspension of the official and subsequent investigation into the
allegations by the Department of Home Affairs sends a clear signal to those
who do not practise the principles of Batho Pele in their daily interaction
with members of the public. They will face the consequences of their
actions.

The ANC calls on all members of the public to report incidents of poor
service to the relevant authorities, the local parliamentary constituency
offices or even the Cabinet Minister concerned. I thank you.


                 COMMISSION OF INQUIRY: FOOD-FOR-OIL SCANDAL


                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, the President
cannot delay appointing a judicial commission of inquiry into the
involvement of South African companies and individuals in the oil-for-food
scandal. Over half a dozen countries have began probes or launched criminal
proceedings regarding their own companies and citizens that are mentioned
in the report of the UN Independent Inquiry Committee. These include
Australia, Germany, Jordan, New Zealand, Russia, Switzerland and Thailand.

Justice Minister Mabandla’s request to her deputy to study the report is
inadequate. It also fails to meet the minimum standard set by South
Africa’s international partners.

By failing to follow that example, President Mbeki risks standing alone. He
may reinforce the impression that some politicians in South Africa are held
to account while others are not. The President must heed the call of UN
Secretary General Annan to conduct a full and open investigation. This will
ensure that we are seen to lead the fight for justice, transparency and
human rights and do not stand alongside the pariah nations of the world.




                    CONGRATULATIONS TO MR TIMAMBA CHAUKE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B NTULI (ANC): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The doors of learning
and culture shall be open to all, so says the Freedom Charter. Mr Timamba
Chauke, an 84-year-old resident of Soweto has given new meaning to the
expression, you are never too old to learn. Mr Timamba Chauke, a retired
salesman, sat for his Algebra exams on Monday at the Wits University Matric
Centre in Braamfontein, Johannesburg. This is an extraordinary achievement.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, let me take the point of order.

Mr T D LEE:  Chairperson, may I address you on a point of order please.
Yesterday, the exact same motion was accepted by this House and it is being
repeated as a statement today.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It’s not the same. [Interjections.] It can be the same;
it doesn’t matter. [Interjections.] It can be the same statement even if it
was given yesterday – except that your angle of approach is from a
different perspective that the doors of learning shall be open to all.
[Interjections.]

Mr S B NTULI: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This is an extraordinary
achievement. The ANC would like to commend Mr Chauke for his dedication.
His positive attitude in believing that there is no knowledge that cannot
be conquered by perseverance sets an example to all pupils.

Mr Chauke’s accomplishment should encourage all South Africans, especially
the youth, to embrace the concept of lifelong learning as a means of
establishing a culture of learning in South Africa. We must strengthen and
encourage organisations to broaden their initiatives to make adult literacy
more accessible to a greater number of people.

We wish Mr Chauke success for the remaining papers that he still has to
write and he must remember his own words when he said: “I believe in
persistence. Even if I were to fail this time, I would regard it as a
mistake that could be corrected.” I thank you. [Applause.]




                            MINISTERS’ RESPONSES





                 FIRE WARNINGS; COLLAPSE OF FARMS IN LIMPOPO


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, Deputy
Speaker. I would like to respond to only two of the statements that have
been made by hon members. Indeed, one would agree with hon Ramphele on the
statement about fires and warning the public, and I am sure the Ministry of
Water Affairs and Forestry would work together with the disaster management
committee to ensure that those who have been affected can actually get the
necessary assistance. But I think the warning to the public indeed is
timely to ensure that as citizens we also take responsibility in ensuring
that we can at least prepare ourselves and be able to act when such fires
occur.

I would also like to thank the hon member from the IFP who raised the issue
of the farms in Limpopo, which I think has been a topical matter in the
media since Tuesday. I agree, hon member, that indeed we’ll have to have a
capacity within the Department of Land Affairs to monitor what is happening
to those farms that have been given to beneficiaries as a result of the
land reform programme.

I also think it’s important for us as hon members in this House to
appreciate that during the first ten years, some of the things that we
might have done with good intentions in terms of the implementation of our
programme, might not actually have had the desired effect when implemented.
And we’ve been alive to that reality. We’ve gone back to some of those
projects to see how we could make them sustainable.

However, we have also learned that one of the things that we need to instil
in our people, particularly when they work in a collective form, is how we
build the institutions that can relate to members of the community to
define how the sharing of responsibility can occur on a timely basis when
they work together.

As you know, when you have to deal with a group of people, decision-making
processes and consultation can be a challenge. So, those are some of the
issues we need to deal with. The issue of training is also very central to
how we could deal with these matters going forward.

I just want to say that there might be some setbacks but there are also
positive aspects. In certain localities, some of our established commercial
farmers, without even being asked by government, came to the rescue of the
new beneficiaries, which I think is a good spirit that we must encourage,
because the success of these emerging farmers would actually contribute to
food security and economic growth for the entire country. Thank you very
much, hon members.




                            PROBLEMS AT THE CCMA


                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Akukho nto ityhulu ekubeni abasebenzi be-CCMA
bathande ukujongana ngezikhondo zamehlo nabo babaphetheyo. I-CCMA iphethwe
yibhodi, bhodi leyo eyenziwa yimibutho yabasebenzi noosomashishini. Ngoko
xa abasebenzi bethe abaneliseka, Mnu Gore, akukho nto igwenxa ekulandeleni
ilungelo labo elikrolonqiweyo kuMgaqo-Siseko welizwe loMzantsi Afrika.

Andisayi kugxuphuleka ke mna kwimpixano kwakunye nongquzulwano phakathi
kwabasebenzi nabaqeshi. Mabangquzulane. Into endinokuyenza mna kuphela
kukuty’ efileyo. (Translation of Xhosa Minister’s response follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: There is nothing wrong when employees of the CCMA
do not see eye to eye with their management. The CCMA has a board which
comprises labour organisations and business people. So, if employees do not
get the satisfaction they had hoped for, Mr Gore, the Constitution of South
Africa guides them as to the action they could take.

I would not like to interfere in the disagreement and conflict between
employees and employers. Let them fight. What I will do is just watch.]




                             GROWTH RATE TARGET


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.
I just want to comment on the remarks of the UCDP and say that, indeed, one
welcomes the statement of confidence that they have in the ability of this
country to reach 6% growth.

I just want to add that I think that when a number of other voices are
expressing confidence in our ability to get there they are not just saying
that this is something which is going to happen automatically. What they
are doing is expressing confidence in the programme which has been
developed by government, that is indeed intended to raise the growth rate
and to do this in ways which will address developmental challenges.

What is necessary if we are to achieve these objectives is not simply to
sit back and wait for it to happen but to put in a lot of hard work to
address a number of very serious constraints, many of them emerging from
the heritage of apartheid. So, what we have is a programme which is seeking
to push forward the public infrastructure development programme which is
addressing a whole range of backlogs and shortcomings in our infrastructure
skills development programme and industrial and sectoral strategies.

I trust that when members of Parliament express confidence in our ability
to achieve growth this also means that they would support the measures
which are to be put in place to achieve that growth and that they would
also work in their constituencies to ensure that these programmes are in
fact delivered on the ground. Thank you very much.




                  UNNECESSARY COMMISSIONS CALLED FOR BY DA


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very
much, Madam Deputy Speaker. I would just like to respond to the statement
by the DA on the food-for-oil matter and say that as a government we will
not be pushed into appointing unnecessary commissions of inquiry. As a
country and a government we’ve clearly stated that the Minister of Justice
will study the UN document.

We don’t have any fears that we would be declared a pariah nation because
we have a proud history. Our track record in foreign affairs is very clear.
We have no reason to step back and we will await the outcome of that study
before we take any further steps. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seemingly, we have three more slots for Ministers but
they are not interested in taking that now. We then move on – Deputy
Minister, Hangana; are you raising your hand or what.




                     PROTESTS AT LOCAL GOVERNMENT LEVEL


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Deputy Speaker, I
want to say that I came in at the tail end of what was said by the hon
member from the DA, but what I heard was the fact that there are so many
protests at local government level and a failure to deliver services.

Now, I want to respond to the protests that are taking place at local
level. You know, in the past protests in this country were met with an iron
fist. There was no democracy at all. Even when people wanted to have a
peaceful protest they were not allowed to air their grievances. But, this
just shows and proves how vibrant our democracy is in that people are
allowed to protest, and they are not locked up in dark rooms. People are
now allowed to go out and protest.

However, what we condemn very strongly is the fact that people destroy
private property and buildings belonging to government.
That we condemn strongly, but when they want to air their grievances let
them do so. It’s their democratic right for which they suffered and fought
in this country.

As regards service delivery, it’s amazing that it should actually come from
the benches of the DA, because whilst they were here in this province they
failed and we are now dealing with the rubbish that they left behind for us
to deal with. You have not even proved – not one of the municipalities . .
.

Mr W P DOMAN:  Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order, is it in order
for the hon Deputy Minister to respond to a statement from an ANC member,
the hon Mshudulu, and not on the DA statement that dealt with corruption in
Mangaung Municipality. So, the hon Deputy Minister responded to the wrong
statement and attributed it to the DA.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were rising on something different,
because the Deputy Minister has a right to respond to any of the 14
statements.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Absolutely!


                       ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)
The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Deputy Speaker, colleagues, hon members of
the House, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, when the Telecommunications
Act was passed a few years ago it outlined 17 objectives, and when it was
amended two or three years ago, two more objectives were added. We have
been following with keen interest the progress we were making in achieving
these objectives in the context of government’s managed liberalisation.

Two and a half years ago, when rapid changes in technological advancement
were occurring, we did what is unusual in government and that is to release
a rough draft of the Bill to deal with the convergence of information and
communications technologies to the industry, and we widely canvassed the
views of foreign experts, industry and portfolio committee members.
Conflicting interests played themselves out until we were able to receive a
draft we could present to Cabinet only 18 months later.

This Bill has been thoroughly negotiated with the industry, within
government, Cabinet and the parliamentary processes. Such intense political
negotiation, long as it is, has become a characteristic of South African
democracy in its attempt to be inclusive and participatory in a consensus-
building climate. In this regard, we pride ourselves on being champions of
the multistakeholder approach of building an inclusive information society
that is currently the major hallmark of the World Summit on the Information
Society.

This Bill builds on lessons learned over the years and the new confidence
gained in order to chart a new, but bold, way forward. The Bill refines the
legal and regulatory framework in order to allow us to drive the
convergence technologies and services that have historically been developed
and regulated separately.

This Bill also provides for a dramatic increase in the number, types and
quality of licences, thus enabling South Africans from all walks of life to
have a vast range of services at their disposal. This will increase
competition in the sector, thus reducing the cost to communicate and making
ICTs more affordable and accessible.

The Electronic Communications Bill will improve the competitiveness of
telecommunications, IT, broadcasting and the postal sector, locally and
internationally, thus contributing to the global competitiveness of our
economy. This improved competitiveness will not only lower the cost to
communicate, but should address challenges of the marginalised second
economy in order to achieve the goals of the accelerated share and shared
growth initiative for South Africa that the Deputy President has been
tasked by the President to champion.
The Bill sets out a new licensing framework separating the licensing of
services from that of infrastructure. It sets interconnection and facility
leasing principles, and will enable the rapid growth of this sector. The
Bill provides for the development of the national frequency spectrum plan,
which will allow for better management and planning for the future use of
the spectrum.

There is no doubt that this Bill will contribute to socioeconomic
development and move us more rapidly towards achieving universal access,
and bring about the inclusion of the second economy. The Bill creates
opportunities for the growth of the sector, especially with regard to small
and medium enterprises. In this regard, the environment created for an
increase in woman-owned ICT or ICT-related businesses needs to be fully
taken advantage of. In a way many companies should find rural areas sexy
areas for their expansion, and entrepreneurs will find these profitable for
business and investment.

The first decade of our liberation created a policy environment conducive
to a better life for all. Let us make this decade a decade of delivery.
This Bill will give us the tools to do so.

I wish to thank the chairperson and members of the portfolio committee, who
had to work late into the night – sometimes, into the early hours of the
morning – to pilot this Bill through timeously. Without that hard work and
scrupulous attention this would not have been possible. Many thanks also go
to my DG, Lyndall Shope-Mafole, who is not very well, but who worked very
hard, together with her team-mate, Mashile Matlala. My special thanks also
go to our former DDG, Phakamile Pongwana, who led this process until its
introduction to Parliament, as well as Joe Mjwara who took over the baton
from him before also going to join the industry.

We also thank former staff member Edmund Baloyi, who started working at
Icasa only this week. We trust that you will agree with us that this move
is testimony to our commitment to strengthening the capacity of the
regulator.

Finally, I wish to express my appreciation for the able support of my
deputy, Roy Padayachie, in championing this Bill so enthusiastically. Thank
you very much, Roy. [Applause.]

Deputy Speaker, today marks a historic day for our country. It opens yet
another chapter of unending opportunities provided by our young democracy
in pursuit of a better life for all, using modern technologies. I wish to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to all members of the
committee for their unanimous passing of this Bill, if it is passed today.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M K LEKGORO: Deputy Speaker, when I prepared my input some days ago the
Bill was, to the best of my knowledge, still termed the “Convergence Bill”.
That is why I took the liberty to say in my introduction that I should
explain a bit to members about convergence; that convergence is just the
jargon used to describe the move away from an old technology that required
a specific technology to deliver a specific service. For example, the
public switched telephone network technology could deliver only one
service, that is telephoning, and you required the dedicated hardware
network for that.

Again, for radio it is a transmission and reception technology designed and
bundled for sound broadcasting only. Data network technology is only
dedicated to delivering data to one’s personal computer; your TV only
offered you sound and vision. Now technology allows that a common network
can carry many services, for example, your telephone network can now carry
voice, video, pictures, TV, radio, etc. In simple terms it is now possible
to receive any communication service on a device of your choice.

The developed world has made some strides in this regard and all evidence
points to the fact that for this technological development to be relevant
to a country and its people we have to deploy broadband Internet. The
Internet is simply your personal computer in your office connected to a
modem, and that modem connects you to the Worldwide Web network, in which
you can tap into almost any information you can imagine. Broadband is the
capacity and speed with which a network allows you to enter and receive
information from that worldwide network.

With this kind of innovation a country may be able to accelerate access to
information for its citizens. In our case, it is hoped that the previously
disadvantaged communities who, by the design of apartheid, were destined to
be ignorant forever, could now ride this wave and join the rest of
humanity. What is not said in any Bill or Act of this nature is that it is
expensive for the end-consumer to enjoy these services, and that for some
time into the distant future this will be a fruit that is enjoyed by few in
society, and a far cry from the poor rural and township centres.

The fact of the matter is that technological innovation and development in
this regard are driven by business interests and, as a result, profit is
the motive. Naturally, business is not going to forego its profit in favour
of rolling out infrastructure and services to the poor who cannot, in turn,
pay for such services. Of course, it is not the role of business to do so.

We made a call to government that they should appreciate the added burden
that comes with these technological advancements. Here is the technology
available; the poor need it more than anyone else. If they access these
technologies they are an informed people - from those far-flung areas, with
a finger on a keyboard, they become part of society and the world. Yet,
they will not be able to read and operate the keyboard; they will not be
able to afford to purchase the device; they will not be able to afford to
pay for the services.

South Korea and Malaysia stand out as good examples of how far a government
must be prepared to deploy resources in order for the poor to enjoy these
much-needed services. Minister, we are mindful of the fact that it has to
be done within the means our country has, but all we are saying is that
there must be a deliberate decision by government to save. From every
fiscal year we will put aside so much for so long, until these services are
enjoyed by all. The issue of how far policy interferes in regulation-making
is often a matter that is debated as self-interest as opposed to what is
suitable for the country.

This is a matter on which we are unfortunately not going to be able to find
one another for some time to come. It is because the opposition argues this
matter from a public choice theory that advocates that government cannot do
anything right; leave everything to the markets.

It is no secret that we think the opposite in the ruling party: that
government must play a role; it must manage our economic liberalisation,
and it must intervene where it sees market failures. Coming from these two
diverse outlooks it is not surprising that we in the ANC see the Minister’s
role in policy-making to the extent that it is enshrined in the Bill, while
opposition sees it as policy-making interfering in regulatory terrain.

To the extent that we believe it is desirable for the country, we believe
we have balanced the role of the executive in licensing and radio frequency
spectrum. One of the intentions of this Bill was to further consolidate an
environment in which various players can compete and erode the monopoly
held by a few.

To remove the old restriction of connecting between a few, the Bill imposes
an obligation on those licensed to interconnect on request and further
imposes an obligation on communication network service licensees to, on
request, list communication facilities to those licensed. This allows new
players an entry point and an opportunity to grow and later compete.

Further, in this endeavour we have laid the foundation in the Bill that
access to international communication facilities, including submarine
cables and satellite, should not be the exclusive domain of any one player.
All this put together will create conditions that allow competition.

Broadcasting is a barometer with which we sought to measure how far
independence of the regulator is reflected in the Bill. We reflected on
section 85 of the Constitution, from which the executive derives its power
of formulating and implementing policy; and section 92, which instructs
that national legislation must establish an independent authority – in our
case, Icasa.

We are satisfied in the ANC that the provisions we opted for in this Bill
allow Icasa to regulate broadcasting in the public interest and ensure
fairness and diversity of views represented in South African society, as is
required by clause 192 of the Constitution. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Chair, this Bill is a big deal in its redrafted form. I
think that it is fair to say that it is presented to the House by the DA,
as much as the ANC, and our support therefore goes without saying. By the
time that the parliamentary committee had redrafted and renamed it, a month
ago, it had been reconceptualised to capture the potential of the
communications revolution for South Africa.

It now rests on a real vision of interoperable and interconnected
electronic networks over which existing and yet to be invented
communication services from voice to video to data can be seamlessly
carried. There will at long last be ubiquitous broadband for all when our
pent-up capacity and entrepreneurship are released, not only for consumers,
but also for social purposes; or there can be that broadband as soon as
Telkom is tamed under this law.

It is unbelievable that Telkom is denying Internet solutions access to the
SAIX network as we speak, and cutting off ADSL connections. You could say
that the Telecommunications Act, soon to be repealed, was written for
Telkom, whereas this law is written for South Africa.

When our government embarked on liberalisation, it chose to concentrate on
infrastructure-based competition, and it’s now almost tragic to look at the
time scales in the old law. Telkom’s exclusivity, as we know, was meant to
end in May 2002, the SNO’s special rights were supposed to have petered out
last year and a services-based operator, riding on their two networks, was
supposed to have been allowed to be introduced this past year, together
with a possible TNO. And all of this, hon Minister, was public switched;
it’s unbelievable to think of it now, isn’t it. They were all going to be
public switched services.

Infrastructure-based competition is one policy approach, another is to
promote services competition actively by regulating your existing networks
for access, and where appropriate use bottlenecks. Then there is a third
way, which is a hybrid, under which competition and core infrastructure are
promoted, but also access to facilities by service-based players.

We really only began to break out of the old mould and into the hybrid mode
when the hon Minister last September activated those few little sections in
the old law which allowed some service and infrastructure competition,
amongst other very modest things, voice-over IP for value-added networks
and self provision. But this last one was no sooner gazetted than it was
verbally revoked.

Now all of that is behind us. Government does retain the right to dictate
the timing for some networks, but only the big ones of national and
provincial scope - not that we know, hon Minister, what the next generation
networks will look like and whether they will need protection at all.

But the effect of this provision, which we don’t approve of, is, however,
counter-balanced. It is counter-balanced by the services-based competition
that can proliferate now that Telkom will be obliged to lease all its
facilities, including the local loops and the submarine cables - that is
the umbilical cord - and it must do so on nondiscriminatory terms and under
conditions which can include price controls.

At the heart of this redrafted Bill sits a chapter, which strengthens the
hand of the regulator in imposing ex ante procompetitive remedies on
players who have been declared to have significant market power. This will
only occur after markets have been defined and then analysed on the basis
of economic principles.

We thought hard about this, but we are convinced that ex post competition
measures are not enough in this field. For one thing, they come too late;
they come after the fact when smaller players have been destroyed, as
indeed many value-added network services were destroyed here.

But now it will be a whole new world for the VANS. We have explicitly
removed all prohibitions. They can build infrastructure of any size below
district or local municipality scope simply by registering for a class
licence. That makes them electronic network service licensees. They can
offer any service under the class licence for communication services. They
will have the right to interconnect with other networks, and this is where
the proliferation of competition is going to come from.

The little town of Knysna has led the way and has pushed the envelope. It
simply put out a tender and Uninet has now built a wireless network for
Knysna. The other place the infrastructure competition is going to come
from is the metros. In fact, as we speak, BMI technology is hosting a big
conference on digital cities in Johannesburg.

Tshwane has been building a fibre backbone, and it will now be able to
openly resell capacity to a commercial operator, and here is the
encouraging thing, both on the Knysna and the Pretoria model, that means
prices can come down over and above the drop in costs that will result from
wholesale price controls imposed on Telkom in the new regime.

My one regret is that the Bill still rides roughshod over the rights and
rights of way of municipalities, and in some cases their inhabitants.
Cities and towns should be able to demand compensation for access.
Alternatively they should be able to select the operators to whom they
offer facilities in return for just the sort of tailor-made service that
they want their ratepayers to enjoy.

It will be possible to remedy this defect, however, in local government
law. At the end of the day it’s only competition that can achieve the
bridging of the digital divide, and we will now have it. Thank you.

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson, colleagues, a few days ago I was invited to a
Halloween party and I was asked to wear something scary, as befitted the
occasion, so I went as a Telkom account.

Let’s face it, since the advent of so-called managed liberalisation, our
Telkom bills have become scary. I pinned my scary Telkom accounts to my
party clothes and all the revellers, including Count Dracula and assorted
witches and ghouls, admitted that there is nothing more scary than opening
one’s post box and with trembling hands grasping one’s Telkom account.

What happened to the much-vaunted benefits to consumers of privatisation
when with much fanfare the Telecommunications Act of 1996 came into force?
What went wrong? I have only three minutes and the answer to that would
take three hours, but now we have before us the Convergence Bill, as
stated, now renamed the Electronic Communications Bill. Mercifully this
Bill puts paid to the old Telecommunications Act once and for all.

To continue the Halloween theme, is this Bill a trick or a treat? Is it a
trick to lull us into a false sense of complacency that things will get
better or a treat that will finally open the Pandora’s box of all the
delights the digital age can bring to us all? Will we hear cries of
jubilation from our ICT broadcasting signal distribution and postal service
sectors when the President signs this Bill into law?

For years now the IFP has raised its concerns with regard to much of the
legislation that has emanated from the Department of Communications. Now
this is a so-called red letter day, because the IFP fully supports this
Bill and does in fact think that on the whole it could well turn out to be
a treat for consumers and various industry sectors in general.

The committee has worked extraordinarily hard on this highly complex
legislation and the chairman and members have effected far-reaching and
important amendments for which they are to be commended. The proof of the
pudding is, of course, in the eating. Often the head chef can have all the
right ingredients set out in the recipe book delivered straight to the
shelf of his or her kitchen. In this analogy the head chef is situated in
the kitchen, which is our regulator, Icasa, and the recipe and ingredients
are of course this Bill.

The recipe can be right; the ingredients can be of good quality too, but
the oven temperature can be too hot or too cool to bake the creation to
perfection. The chef may miscalculate the quantity of ingredients and when
precisely to add what to what. The kitchen equipment may malfunction. Its
power supply, in this case money, and lots of it, is going to be required
by Icasa. This money may be intermittent and that too could cause problems.


Only time will tell, and in the meantime let’s live in hope for tasty
sectoral treats coming our way - as this legislation intends to provide.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Speaker, hon members, I’m sure
that you all must be wondering whether it is really happening in the way
that you are seeing it and hearing it today. [Interjections.] Let me give
the assurance to my colleague, the Minister of Labour, that the ANC
certainly leads on this matter.

The importance and relevance of the Electronic Communications Bill cannot
and should not be underestimated. It is without a doubt one of the most
groundbreaking pieces of legislation that sets the tone for our development
as a people and as a nation. The world today is a much smaller place with
the advent of satellite and information technology and the global
telecommunications boom.

South Africa, in the past, has been able to regulate these various
developments very ably through the legislative framework that was in
existence in the Telecommunications Act, Act 103 of 2000. However, rapid
technological advances have caused that piece of legislation to be slightly
out of touch with current developments in the world today.

In the current context in telecommunications, reform and change are
governed by our policy of managed liberalisation and the need to accelerate
competition in this particular sector. In so doing we may play our role in
advancing the target of our accelerated, shared growth strategy to make
this sector more competitive. To reduce the prices that operate in this
sector, we may reduce the costs of doing business, and in fact reduce the
costs of communications for ordinary consumers in this country.

The Bill, as you have heard, sets out the legislative platform for new
types of licences that will be issued. These licences will enable companies
to be classified as class or infrastructure providers and those whose focus
will be on the provision of services. It will enable the vertical
integration of companies that will enable one service provider that would
be active in the markets of voice, data and broadcasting all at once.

Technological innovations have now made it possible for the transmission of
various electronic impulses via a common transportation medium, enabling
the use of one super highway for different vehicles.

This Bill envisages an era when a computer will be more than just a tool
for the transmission of data, but also one through which broadcasting could
indeed take place, so too with the television. It envisages that the day
will arrive when you will be able to utilise your television as a receiver
of data and also voice. Imagine receiving a video e-mail on your television
as a message from a friend as you would today so easily receive an e-mail
message.

It also envisages a day when cellphones will transmit voice, data and
broadcasting signals, when you will be able to watch Bafana Bafana win the
2010 World Cup on your cellular phones. These are the changes that this
Bill envisages.

In essence, it is there to promote convergence in the broadcasting, signal
distribution and telecommunications sector. The Bill establishes the legal
framework for these innovative developments.

As indicated by the Minister, amongst the other desirable outcomes of this
Bill is that it will demonstrate a more efficient management of the
allocation of the radio frequency spectrum. It will stimulate greater
competition by bringing on board more players. It will envisage a more
dynamic and stronger role for the telecommunications and broadcasting
regulator, Icasa, and it will strengthen the capacity of the Universal
Service Agency of SA.

In closing, one of the most amazing features of the Bill is the substantive
consensus that all parties have indicated for this. What remains for us is
to open our minds to the new possibilities, to embrace the change and to
make the future possible. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr V C GORE: Madam Deputy Chair, the success or failure of the Electronic
Communications Bill will be determined by how much the second economy of
South Africa is going to be influenced by this far-reaching piece of
legislation. In other words, how well will modern communication services,
such as television, radio, telephony and Internet be provided to the 75% of
South Africans who do not have access to residential fixed lines, and the
more than 99% of our population who do not have access to broadband.
There is no doubt that this piece of legislation is a most welcome one, in
that it completely rewrites the framework for the industry in line with
technological developments and processes such as convergence. Where the
Bill encourages competition, particularly in the access layer of
communication services, unfortunately it does not sufficiently do so where
it is really required. That is in the core network.

As a result of this there will unfortunately not be the substantial drop,
that is so widely expected, and the resultant delivery of services to our
second economy. If we are going to roll out fibre and wireless to rural and
poor areas, alternative core networks, such as Telkom, need to be built.
With the high cost of networks, in the region of R50 billion, very few
investors will be able to afford this, and it will therefore be up to the
Minister of Finance to create economic incentives to achieve this.

One of the first issues that needs to be resolved is the future of under-
serviced areas licensees, USALs. The protection and obvious advantage of
these licence holders held down by the Telecommunications Act have been all
but wiped out in the new Bill. It is highly unlikely that the USALs will be
able to compete in an open competitive environment, and they will therefore
require substantially higher subsidisation than the current R5 million per
annum that they receive from the USF.

It is imperative that the government clarifies the future of USALs and
determines whether there will be universal service operators or equal
competitors. Thank you, Madam.

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Hon Chairperson, Minister and Deputy Minister, hon
members, members of the industry in the gallery, my humble greetings to
you. After analysing the history of technology in the late 1940s and
comparing it to the patterns of development in the Industrial Revolution,
Manuel Castells concluded that information technology evolves in, I quote,
“a distinctively different pattern than previous technologies”. He
described that pattern as an informational mode of development.

This model is flexible and pervasive, integrated and reflexive rather than
additive evolution. Hence we are talking today about convergence of
technologies. This advance has led to timeless time and spaceless space.
The space flows and dissolves time by disordering the sequence of events
and making them simultaneous. In short, due to this technological
revolution, everything can happen at any time and very rapidly.

However, in a country such as ours, with two economies, the digital divide
is one of the distinguishing features of our two economies – one of which
has experienced this informational mode of development and has access to
broadband telephony and one that has not; one that can afford the cost of
telephony and one that cannot; and one that has access to information and
one that has none. The underdevelopment of our second economy is not able
to dissolve time, is not able to disorder the sequence of events and does
not observe events simultaneously as do those that populate the first
economy.

All these technological developments as well as socioeconomic challenges
impose an obligation on us as policy-makers and lawmakers – an obligation
to make laws that are in tandem with the development of technologies; an
obligation to make laws that enable our people to have access to ICT, and
that ensure ICT services are made affordable to them; and an obligation to
make laws that enable our people to use ICTs in sustainable agricultural
development, on-line work, on-line service delivery, on-line learning and
to fight poverty.

We need policies that will provide hope for the poor segment of our
population, policies that link them to the other segments of the country
and the world. This Bill has to take us in that direction and it must
situate the majority of our people on the information highway.

One of the issues that confronts our ICT sector is the lack of effective
competition, which, in our view, will lead to lower prices and increased
quality of service. In terms of this legislation, we have attempted to
achieve some of these things and have taken positions that will help us in
enhancing competition and reducing the cost of telephony.


An Italian writer – you love him, you hate him or, if you prefer, you even
fear him – Niccolo Machiavelli, had this to say, and I quote:

   There is nothing more difficult to take in hand, more perilous to
   conduct, or more uncertain in its success, than to take the lead in the
   introduction of a new order of things.

However, as the ANC, we are determined to have a competitive ICT industry,
an industry that provides accessible and affordable services.

One of the barriers to entry has been the reluctance or lack of willingness
on the part of incumbent operators and telecommunication carriers with
large numbers of subscriptions to allow new operators to interconnect. In
terms of chapter 7 of this legislation, such operators have an obligation
to interconnect in a nondiscriminatory manner and in terms that are not
unfavourable to the new operators.

In a situation where the authority determines that a particular market
segment has ineffective competition, the authority is allowed to establish
wholesale interconnection rates to be charged because if this does not
happen, the tendency is to escalate the costs and those costs are passed on
to the consumer who has to endure excessive costs of telecommunication.

One of the instruments allowed in terms of this legislation is carrier
preselection. What this means is that a consumer who is already committed
to a network of one provider can automatically access services provided by
another operator through using the same phone. This, combined with number
portability, which means you can use what used to be a number for a
particular operator and enter into a service agreement with another
operator without losing that number, will be quite useful in the
competitive restructuring of our telecommunications market.

One important area, which is key to the cost of telephony and competition,
is the issue of communication facility leasing to ensure efficient use of
communications networks and services. In terms of chapter 8 of this Bill,
operators are obliged to lease facilities and the regulator is given more
powers to enforce facility leasing. The authority is given the
responsibility to determine essential facilities, which could be accessed
through wholesale tariffs, and the savings generated will be passed on to
the consumer.

To ensure greater competition, both the Ministry and the authority are now
unbundling the local loop and they are also empowered to declare aspects of
the submarine cable an essential facility. There is no operator who is
going to create undue barriers to access and usage of such communication
facilities, because they belong to the country.

Given our growth targets of 6% and higher, the high cost of telephony will
continue to have negative consequences for business, foreign investment and
employment. For instance, we have lost an opportunity to create more than
500 000 jobs through the establishment of call centres precisely because of
our high cost of telecommunication. Paying your monthly telephone and
cellphone bill is like paying for a bond. Our telephone and cellphone
tariffs must come down.

Access to broadband is a key component in reducing prices in other
telecommunication market segments. New wireless technology has to be
encouraged and rolled out to close the digital divide, and for new
competition in the market. Municipalities should start playing a more
active role in lowering the cost of telephony and closing the digital
divide by deploying broadband and wireless technologies to provide services
to our people. They should not be obsessed with compensation, as one member
has advised. Our people cannot remain on the margins of this information
mode of development.

This Bill provides us with the basis to develop a technological Marshall
Plan. Let’s do it. Our people need this plan and need it most.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP supports the innovative concepts
relating to the convergence of technology as contained in this Bill, and we
will support it. We would, however, like to single out a particular issue
that was raised during the portfolio committee hearings, and that is the
issue concerning access to pornography via cellphones. This is of extreme
concern as a large proportion of children from all communities in South
Africa have access to mobile technology.

The ACDP was gratified to hear that the group chief executive officer for
Vodacom had indicated his readiness to take various measures to address
this problem. We call on the portfolio committee to take cognisance of the
recommendations of the recent conference against child pornography in this
regard.

Whilst it is true that the amendments to the Films and Publications Act
will begin to address the availability of pornography on the Internet, it
must still be borne in mind that most cellphones provide easy access to the
Internet. Parents must be alerted to the danger of children being exposed
to pornography in this way.

We need, as members of Parliament, to continue to fight against children
having access to pornography through cellphones. I thank you. [Time
expired.]

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Madam Chairperson, members of the executive, hon members,
director-general from the Department of Communications and your team,
captains of the industry, ladies and gentlemen, under the previous
apartheid system, most policies and legislation were promulgated with the
sole objective of denying the majority of South Africans, black people in
particular – including women - access to and control of South Africa’s
economic productive resources. Skills development was also based purely on
race and gender considerations.

A decade after the demise of this apartheid system and in spite of the
promulgation of a broad range of policies and legislative instruments
introduced by the new democratic government, aimed at redressing the
imbalances of the past, information, communication and technology, ICT,
continue to be largely inaccessible to the majority of the people,
especially in the rural areas.

The advantage of this convergence Bill is that it increases the ability of
innovative technology to reach out and solve previously difficult problems
in the underprivileged segments of our society, and this presents us with
great hope and a challenge. Our hope is that this technology can transform
the lives of our people as it improves the speed with which government
delivers to the public and generally empowers communities to interact with
one another and the world at large.

However, our challenge is to identify technology that has the greatest
potential and to facilitate the development of methods, systems and
regulations, which will effectively channel these inventions into the homes
of the disadvantaged at a price that is affordable to the majority of our
people. We have acknowledged that ICT continues to be largely inaccessible
to the majority of our people. Therefore clause 80(1) of this Bill further
allows the continued existence of the Universal Service Agency, which will
henceforth be called the Universal Service and Access Agency of South
Africa.

In terms of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the scope of the Universal
Service Agency was limited solely to telecommunication services. This Bill
now broadens the scope of the Universal Service Agency to include
communication network services, communication services and broadcasting
services, whilst universal service will include communication services and
broadcasting services.

One of the SABC obligations is to work towards expanding the terrestrial
reach of its radio and television services throughout the country. However,
due to financial constraints, till today, we are told approximately 2
million people still do not have access to the SABC television footprint
and radio.

During the public hearings, some organisations, including the DA, raised
concerns about the contribution of the broadcasters to the Universal
Service Fund. They argued that that might result in a double contribution
because they were contributing to the Media Development and Diversity
Agency, MDDA. However, their concerns are adequately addressed by clause
89(3) of this Bill.

Last year, when we went to KwaZulu-Natal as a portfolio committee, we
discovered that most of the telecentre operations were unsustainable due to
financial constraints. We are happy to highlight that this Bill, indeed,
also deals with that matter adequately so that they will be able to be
sustainable.

The 51st national conference of the ANC on human resource development
resolved that we need to support government’s focus on development of
information, communication and technology skills, and to ensure that ICT
roll-out touches all public schools in the country with visible speed. We
are happy to indicate that clause 73 of this Bill addresses specifically
that, because schools will be able to access Internet services at the rate
of 50% discount. [Applause.]

This is the most balanced Bill and it creates a conducive environment for
the industry to develop. At the same time, it also advocates that
consumers’ rights be upheld. It is our belief that, amongst other rights,
the service providers should provide accurate information to customers or
subscribers, including whatever limitations may exist in terms of coverage
– particularly regarding cellphones, where the majority of our people will
buy cellphones only to realise once they reach the places where they stay
that there is no network.

The service providers should stop the practice of blocking a handset. We
believe that every consumer or subscriber should be at liberty to choose
the gadgets that they want to utilise. In terms of clause 71(1) of this
Bill, a consumer advisory panel will be established to advise the authority
on matters relating to consumer issues within the Republic of South Africa.

In conclusion, it is our belief, as the ANC, that this Bill will go a long
way in curing the imbalances of the past created by the apartheid system in
the ICT sector. The ANC support this Bill. I thank you.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, this Bill is aimed at making new provisions
for regulation of electronic communication services, broadcasting services
and granting of new licences in the country. The PAC supports the Bill as
it will assist in regulating the industry.

Broadcasting is an effective way of educating and informing the nation on
daily matters that affect people’s lives. The step taken by the Ministry
and this House to accept licensing of local radio broadcasters in the
country has improved communication between the different stakeholders and
the communities.

In the past dispensation electronic media was used to promote the then
ruling party, a trap this government is seen as fast moving towards.
Electronic media should become independent, with less interference by the
state to protect its independence. We are involved in a competition as all
political parties sitting here and wish to see our electronic media being
used to level the playing fields for our different messages to reach the
communities. A media gag should not be institutionalised through strict
regulations that may keep other parties off the field. I thank you. [Time
expired.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, over the decades technology has brought about
so many changes and developments that continue to simplify life, but some
are able to keep up with these developments and some are not.

A few decades ago one would have regarded a cellphone as impossible. And,
yes, today computer literacy and cellphone equipment are a necessity. What
is even more amazing is that the apparatus previously individually used are
now being made into one. This is the convergence we are talking about. For
instance, today we have combined the fax, printer, copier and telephone,
which previously stood as four separate units.

The MF supports such convergence, which clearly means a cost reduction in
communications for both the private and public sector. The MF acknowledges
the challenges that convergence may have for the sector. We certainly do
not want any hindrance to the freedom of expression in our democracy,
noting the licensing changes.

The electronic communications market appears to have some barriers as well.
With every development comes challenges, and the MF is confident . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON(Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr R B BHOOLA: The MF supports the Bill.

Mnr R D PIETERSE: Voorsitter . . . [Tussenwerpsels.] Voorsitter, wanneer ek
aan hierdie debat deelneem, dink ek aan ’n spesiale vriend van my wat aan
die begin hiervan deelgeneem het, maar ongelukkig nie die pad kon voltooi
nie; ’n vriend wat ek doodseker is nou glimlag wanneer hy die eindresultaat
van hierdie voorgestelde wetgewing sien, my vriend Sarel Haasbroek.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr R D PIETERSE: Chairperson . . . [Interjections.] Chairperson, when I
participate in this debate, I think of a special friend of mine who
participated in the beginning, but could unfortunately not stay the course;
a friend who I am quite sure is now smiling as he sees the end result of
this proposed legislation, my friend Sarel Haasbroek.]

The Freedom Charter says that the people shall share in the wealth of the
country. It goes further and says that the mineral wealth beneath the soil,
the banks and the monopoly industries shall be transferred to the ownership
of the people as a whole. Minister, we have a serious problem with the
monopoly in this ICC sector, and this needs serious and urgent attention.

Agb lede, eienaarskap in hierdie sektor, telekommunikasie sowel as die
uitsaaiwese, het nie vreeslik verander nie. Dis ’n geval waar die geld van
die een hand na die ander versit word en nie noodwendig uit die dominante
hand na die mense toe gaan nie. Hoeveel, agb Minister, vroue in die
algemeen, en swart vroue spesifiek, hoeveel swart jeug en hoeveel mense met
gestremdhede sit in posisies van eienaarskap of in posisies van mag? Daar
is só min, ek kan net sowel sê daar is niemand nie. Vir die voorheen
benadeelde groep is byna niks gedoen nie, en mens kan hulle ook die huidige
benadeeldes noem. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Hon members, ownership in this sector, telecommunications as well as
broadcasting, has not changed very much. It’s a matter of money changing
hands, and not necessarily going from the dominant hand to the people. Hon
Minister, how many women in general, and black women in particular, how
many black youths and how many people with disabilities are in positions of
ownership or in positions of power? There are so few, I could just as well
say that there is no one. For the previously disadvantaged group next to
nothing has been done, and one could also call them the presently
disadvantaged.]

Further challenges are encountered with the selling and reselling of
businesses and services. The spreading of false information, that the
executive and even the Minister, directly, are threatening the independence
of the regulator unfortunately continues, hon members. Nothing can be
further from the truth than these utterances.

The Minister, and nobody else, represents us at the international level on
the International Telecommunications Union, the ITU, and receives the
frequency spectrum allotted to South Africa. She then has to ensure that,
amongst other things, the security and the emergency services are given a
portion of that spectrum allotment to ensure that they provide services to
all South Africans. The Minister then leaves the rest of the allotment to
Icasa, which then uses it in an independent manner, that is to control,
plan, administer and manage licensing and use of the radio frequency
spectrum. In the process of executing its mandate, the regulator keeps in
mind the international standards and requirements of the ITU, as agreed by
South Africa, as well as other criteria set by itself and/or the Minister.

The Minister plays a crucial role - and members, you must remember that the
Minister is the accounting officer - in the whole process. Although the
Minister represents the country at the international level, as well as on
the ITU, she also represents the international fora in South Africa to
ensure that agreements that are reached are properly and successfully
implemented.

So Icasa must develop a national radio frequency plan, setting out, amongst
other things, specific frequency bands and taking into account the radio
frequency spectrum band allocated by the Minister to security forces and
gives it to the Minister for approval. So Icasa develops a plan, taking
into account all its responsibilities, which the Minister then approves.
Such a plan must be completed within 12 months of the passing of this Bill,
and then the Act comes into force.

So the Minister represents us internationally on the ITU, amongst other
institutions. Icasa makes sure that everybody that applies is allocated a
licence and checks whether they meet the criteria. Then they assign certain
and specific radio frequencies according to the national radio plan. This
is a very clear, very specific and achievable plan. However, there are
those that want to spread untruths about the involvement of the Minister or
the executive.

Minister, licensing is the exclusive domain of the regulator. They will
give due consideration, in the prescribed manner, to all licence
applications, be it class licences, licences for communication network
services, broadcasting services or even communication services. I need to
stress the fact that the regulator is independent and will execute its
tasks and its mandate independently, free from interference.

Hon members, our policy is managed liberalisation in this sector, and the
Minister must ensure that all work, including that of the regulator, is
done within this policy framework. The Minister is the accounting officer,
like I said. She - and she alone - has to take responsibility.

Vroeër hierdie jaar het die Internetdiensverskaffers en die
toegevoegdewaardenetwerke – dis nou die mense in die rekenaar- en
Internetbedryf - byna histeries geraak toe die Minister klaarheid gegee het
omtrent selfvoorsiening in die telekommunikasiesektor. Wanneer ons praat
van eienaarskap en wie waar besigheid doen, staan laasgenoemde twee, die
Internetdiensverskaffers en die toegevoegdewaardenetwerke, nie eens in die
tou nie.

Hoeveel van hulle is in die hande van vroue, van swart vroue, van die jeug,
van die swart jeug, van mense met gestremdhede, die voorheen benadeeldes?
Hoeveel van hierdie ondernemings is in die arm gebiede? Hoeveel van hulle
is in die townships, in die arm stedelike gebiede of in die swart gebiede
op die arm plattelandse dorpe?

Daarom moet ons hierdie geleenthede aangryp wanneer ons verder bevry om
seker te maak dat dié ondernemings juis na die townships, die platteland en
die arm gebiede toe gaan, want dit raak net onmoontlik om toegang te hê tot
sulke geriewe wanneer dit nie naby ’n mens is nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ons het grotendeels ’n situasie waarin ’n swart persoon agter die toonbank
staan, hy ook die sogenaamde bestuurder is en die mense hoop om te sê
transformasie het plaasgevind. Navorsing toon natuurlik dat meer as 85% van
die Internetdiensverskaffers en die toegevoegdewaardenetwerke nog in die
hande van die wittes en natuurlik wit mans is. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit gebeur
net wanneer ’n mens homself wil reguleer. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Earlier this year the Internet service providers and the value-added
networks – that is to say the people in the computer and Internet industry
– almost became hysterical when the Minister gave clarity regarding self-
provision in the telecommunications sector. When we speak of ownership and
who does business where; the last two – the Internet service providers and
the value-added networks - are not even in the queue.

How many of them are in the hands of women, of black women, of the youth,
of the black youth, of people with disabilities, the previously
disadvantaged? How many of these enterprises are in poor areas? How many of
them are in the townships, in the poor urban areas or in the black areas in
poor rural towns?

Therefore we must seize these opportunities when we liberalise further, to
ensure that these enterprises do go to the townships, the rural areas and
the poor areas, because it is becoming impossible to gain access to such
facilities when they are not close by. [Interjections.]

We mostly have a situation where a black person is standing behind the
counter, he is also the so-called manager, and people hope to say that
transformation has taken place. Of course, research indicates that more
than 85% of the Internet service providers and value-added networks are
still in the hands of whites and, of course, white men. [Interjections.]
That happens only when one wants to regulate oneself.]

Minister, as you further liberalise this sector, please make sure in the
process that the question of ownership is addressed seriously. Let us make
sure that the previously disadvantaged see, feel and experience a positive
change. Let women in particular, in great numbers, become the owners and
the shareholders in this ICT sector.

Let us empower the youth, particularly the rural youth. Let us make sure
that people with disabilities are heard and given their fair share of
ownership. Let us make sure that we do not lose sight of what has been
achieved.

Ter afsluiting, wil ek net uit die Vryheidsmanifes herhaal dat die mense
moet deel in die rykdom van die land. Die ANC steun hierdie wetsontwerp.
[In conclusion, I just want to quote from the Freedom Charter that the
people shall share in the wealth of the country. The ANC supports this
Bill.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Chair, today I’m not so sure. I
wanted to say something, but hey, ngavelelwa! [surprise!] even Dene Smuts
is agreeing with this Bill today. I don’t know to what we owe this, whether
I owe it to the absence of Andile or the presence of Linda. But she is very
right, this Bill is indeed a big deal.

I would like to say to the hon Madam Suzanne Vos, the Bill is not a trick
but a treat and enjoy it because this is what this Bill is going to do. It
is going to change South Africa. It must bring in the youth, because all of
you are here except the youth. They are not adapted in these many little
things and it is intended for them to be able to come into this industry. I
heard the hon Pieterse saying: “We have concerns about ‘die platteland’ and
the rural areas.” It will be our work to say we have now opened the door.
Let them come in and let them do for South Africa what we perhaps are
reluctant to learn and so on. It is time for the youth to come in and
really take this country on a higher growth path. We certainly intend to
make sure that . . .

Mnr A MLANGENI: Voorsitter, kan die Minister asseblief Afrikaans praat? Ek
kan nie Engels verstaan nie. Praat asseblief Afrikaans. Ek weet sy kan
Afrikaans praat! Dankie! [Gelag.]

Die MINISTER VAN KOMMUNIKASIE: Wel, ek kan vir die agb lid vertel hierdie
wetsontwerp is ’n wetsontwerp wat die deure gaan oopmaak vir die jongmense.
Ek en jy is te stadig met hierdie goed. Ons verstaan dit nie baie gou nie.
Dit neem ons baie lank. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A MLANGENI: Chairperson, could the Minister please speak Afrikaans? I
cannot understand English. Please speak Afrikaans. I know she can speak
Afrikaans! Thank you! [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Well, I can tell the hon member that this
is a Bill that will open doors for the youth. You and I are too slow with
these things. We do not grasp it very quickly. It takes us a very long
time.]

Dene Smuts wants to know why it took me so long to get here.

Nou verstaan ek hoekom ek so lank geneem het om hier te kom, maar ons het
die pad reggemaak. Daar is niks soos handevat nie. Agtien maande lank het
ons almal gewerk; die bedryf aan die een kant, die parlementêre komitee aan
die ander kant en almal aan hierdie kant, maar dit wys. Vandag sien ons hoe
ons, as ons ons werk doen, regtig daar kan kom waarheen ons wil gaan.
Hierdie is ’n wetsontwerp wat ons platteland en die stede in ons land
bymekaar gaan bring. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit sal die kinders, die jongmense
en die oumense almal bymekaarbring. Dit gaan ons tale en alles op daardie
Internet sit sodat ons ons geskiedenis kan skryf soos óns dit wil skryf,
nie soos ander mense dit wil skryf nie. Dit is nou die tyd. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Now I understand why it took me so long to get here, but we have paved the
way. There is nothing like co-operation. For 18 months all of us worked;
the industry on the one hand, the parliamentary committee on the other, and
everyone on this side, but it shows. Today we see how, if we do our work,
we really can get to where we would like to be. This is a Bill that will
unite our rural areas and cities in our country. [Interjections.] It will
unite the children, the youth and the elderly. It will put our languages
and everything on that Internet so that we can write our history the way we
want to write it, not the way other people want to write it. Now is the
time.]

Ke nako ya rona jaanong. [Now it’s our time.]

Let us make it our time. And I am glad that members support this Bill. I
really thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.




     INDEPENDENT COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF SOUTH AFRICA AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Chairperson, it is not usual that one
has to present two Bills in close succession. But these Bills are
inextricably linked. This one is inextricably linked to the previous Bill.
It speaks to what the President has termed the challenge of the second
decade of our democracy: improving the capacity of the state to deliver, a
challenge which in our sector also translates into addressing Icasa’s
capacity to deliver.

The role of Icasa has a direct bearing on the government’s strategic
priorities of achieving higher rates of investment in the economy,
improving the competitiveness of our economy and the broadening of
participation in the economy with special attention to the poor. Our
monitoring and evaluation of our progress in this regard can only be
possible if Icasa is better enabled to perform its task. This task is made
wider by the inclusion of the postal regulator in Icasa, because the postal
sector, especially the Post Office, is increasingly delivering electronic
services to the nation.

The South African Post Office, as it becomes increasingly more connected
electronically, will be the largest ICT infrastructure that the majority of
South Africans can access and will therefore play a significant role in the
delivery of information and other government services such as social grants
and application forms. This new role and international trends make it
necessary for postal services to be regulated together with the rest of the
ICT sector.

In the new Bill functions of the authority are better outlined. The roles
and responsibilities as well as the performance mechanisms are better
clarified, thus improving the monitoring of performance of councillors both
individually and collectively. The role of the chairperson has been
expanded to give better leadership to the council and management, thus
providing clear lines of accountability.

The Icasa Amendment Bill provides for a change in the appointment procedure
of the councillors. Although this Bill does not meet the intent of Cabinet
to separate the role of the executive and that of the legislature, the
changes in the appointment of the council allow for a better process that
is clearer. It also facilitates more focus on the requirements of the
regulator.

The funding of Icasa has been a sore point for many of us for some time.
The method of funding the regulator from licence fees, which was preferred
by both Icasa and industry, presented us with difficulties. It created
conditions of vulnerability for the regulator since it would be funded
directly by the industry that it is supervising.

However, recognising the increased responsibilities that the Electronic
Communications Bill places on Icasa and the additional resources, both
financial and human, required to carry out its work, the Bill provides for
a mechanism to better address this challenge through consultation with the
Minister of Finance. In recognition of the importance of the work of Icasa
and a Cabinet Lekgotla decision to strengthen the sector regulators, the
increase of Icasa’s funding is already receiving favourable consideration.

We wish to thank the councillors for their hard work, and trust that this
Bill will make it easier for them to play their part more meaningfully in
taking our country to greater heights. To our industry, which has been very
active throughout this process, we extend our appreciation, particularly
given the short time in which they have had to respond to the issues
related to this Bill.

The portfolio committee and its chairperson, hon Lekgoro, deserve our
special thanks for the rigorous, professional and enthusiastic analysis as
well as the attention paid to the detail of both the Convergence Bill and
the Icasa Amendment Bill. And I would like to thank the many, many people
who worked through the night to be able to get this Bill ready for us to be
able to debate it today. I thank you, Madam Chair. [Applause.]

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Madam Chairperson, hon members, Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa was
established in terms of the ICASA Act of 2000, following the merger of the
Independent Broadcasting Authority – the IBA – and the South African
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority – SATRA. Its objective was to
regulate broadcasting and telecommunications in the public interest and to
ensure a fair diversity of views broadly representing South African
society.

Today, we are debating an amending Bill that is an enriched product of
public participation and extensive debate within the portfolio committee
process. We wish to take this opportunity to thank everyone and all
stakeholders who have contributed towards the finalisation of this Bill and
the Convergence Bill, now called the Electronic Communications Bill.

In the past five years, ICASA was able to continue the fundamental
transformation of the broadcasting sector from an apartheid, monopolistic
state machinery to a prosperous, competitive and increasingly black-owned
and controlled sector. Let us take this opportunity to thank the founding
chairperson of ICASA, Mr Mandla Langa, and his team for their enormous
contribution and to welcome the new chairperson, Mr Paris Mashile, and his
team to take forward the baton of transformation in this vibrant sector.

The Department of Communications is an important centre for policy-making
and policy-review in the postal, telecommunications and broadcasting sector
in the country. Its strategic role and contribution towards the growth of
the sector cannot be over-emphasised.

The support and continued presence of the Director-General of the
Department of Communications, Ms Lyndall Shope-Mafole, and her team during
the portfolio committee meetings over the last four months need to be
commended. They were real pillars of strength to the committee.

We are pleased to report that the independent role of ICASA will be greatly
enhanced and further strengthened by improved funding provisions
appropriated by Parliament and a new provision for additional funding to be
approved by Cabinet. In addition, the Bill provides for the establishment
of the Complaints and Compliance Committee with an inspectorate to deal
with issues of non-compliance much more effectively and to contribute
towards the improvement of efficiency of the authority in general.

Where necessary, the authority will be able to employ the services of as
many experts as may be needed within the country. In the event that
services of non-citizens are needed, the Bill provides that approval of the
Minister must be sought, which, we think, will not be unreasonably denied.
After all, the sovereignty of state is the jurisdiction and prerogative of
government.

Following the passing of this Bill, the postal regulator will be
incorporated into the authority with staff conditions not less favourable
than what they enjoyed before their envisaged transfer. The number of
councillors will also be increased from the current seven to nine
councillors. All prospective councillors will be expected to enter into a
performance agreement and be subjected to an evaluation by a panel to be
constituted for that purpose every year.

Finally, a selection panel of capable persons will be appointed to process
interviews of prospective councillors and make recommendations accordingly.
My colleagues will elaborate further on these matters. Suffice it to say
that some of the prospective interviewees have complained that a process
that was conducted by Parliament in an open manner was a bit insensitive,
because we were asking very difficult questions that they had to answer in
public, hence this other method. This is much more a method of interview
processing rather than a principle.

The growth of the ICT sector depends on infrastructure development coupled
with progressive policy, legislation and regulation as well as political
commitment. I can confirm that the ANC government has all these
requirements in place.

South Africa is at a critical phase of migration from an Analog to a
Digital era and we cannot squander this golden opportunity. We are expected
to double our efforts in the ICT sector in order to improve service
delivery in particular and to bridge the digital divide in our society.
With the Convergence Bill, now the Electronic Communications Bill,
concluded we can only expect exciting prospects ahead.

I also want to take this opportunity to acknowledge and recognise the role
of the chairperson of the portfolio committee who has steered this ship so
masterfully for the past four months to where we are today. ``Captain’’
Lekgoro, our fearful trip is done. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Chair, the form in which this Bill was tabled constituted
an undisguised takeover of the regulator by the executive. It was that
simple. The NA was unceremoniously stripped of its powers of selection for
and removal from office. The hon Minister took these unto herself. And just
to make the executive intent quite clear, the ``I’’ was taken out of Icasa.
Independence became electronic. [Laughter.]
The DA sounded the alarm as soon as the Bill was published: this is
unconstitutional and unacceptable. The DA tabled a counter proposal, which
introduced a panel of experts, not into the Ministerial mechanism, but into
the parliamentary process. The DA drove the compromise that has restored
the independent status of the regulator.

It is because the ANC MPs – my colleagues in the committee – applied their
own minds against departmental arguments and against State Law advice, that
this was possible, and that the NA will still determine the choice of Icasa
councillors and their ultimate removal, even though the hon Minister now
has a role in both processes, which we dislike.

We will support this Bill because it does meet the legal tests for the
independence of that body and because we drove the compromise that saves
the selection processes from outright government interference and in
acknowledgement of the role that MPs played. I acknowledge my ANC
colleagues.

The Minister has a conflict of interest as a major shareholder of the two
big telecommunications authorities and the sole shareholder of the dominant
broadcaster. It is this close relationship that really caused all the
trouble in telecommunications, and arguably at the SABC, through the board
over these past few years. We therefore now make a further proposal to the
Cabinet.

We suggest that the Cabinet should now specifically transfer the
shareholder management function from the Department of Communications to
the Department of Public Enterprises, where it belongs, because it leaves
the Department of Communications with the enormous job of policy-making.
This was clear from the attempts by the department during the legislative
process to overturn the declared positions of all MPs - something I have
not seen in more than 15 years in Parliament – when MPs had clearly
expressed themselves in favour of redrafting the Bill to achieve a
different departmental goal.

Now, that experience tells me that the instincts for control, certainly
from the side of the department, are unabated, notwithstanding the
improvements that their compromise has wrought. The contrast is that that
instinct is still there. Some of the observers nicknamed Icasa ``Ivy’s
Communications Authority of South Africa’’, hon Minister. And I don’t like
to hear that.

I will repeat here what I said to a senior official in the committee: you
cannot run the regulator and you do not write the law. The MPs write the
law. This House votes the law. And that is what we have done. But to me it
sounded like a warning signal: that the department tried to overturn the
express views of the ANC as well as the DA MPs on the removal of the
provision, for example, on the change to the name of the regulator.

I am very happy to record that Parliament has asserted its rights and
powers against those attempts and like my colleague, hon Godfrey Oliphant,
I pay respects to a very wise chairman. I am very happy to record that we
have met the tests developed by the courts for independent bodies,
including the Chapter 9 institutions. I suggest that the burden on the
Ministry will be lifted if the shareholder function is transferred to the
Department of Enterprises.

I will pay the executive one acknowledgement: it signalled its own
readiness to compromise when I expressed agreement with its central
argument, that we were not getting the best regulators under the present
selection process. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson and colleagues, when this Bill was first tabled the
IFP did not like it one little bit and, as you have heard, neither did the
DA – and the same applied to many others. We were not alone. Icasa didn’t
like it either, and neither did the industry heavyweights. Submissions that
highlighted serious concerns arrived by the lorry load.

To start off with, the first draft, as you have heard, took away the title
‘independent’ from the name of the regulator. What were we to think about
that? It placed the function of selecting Icasa councillors with the
executive.

Parliament, in this regard, as you have heard, was stripped of its current
role of advertising for, short listing and interviewing candidates to be
approved by this House. What were we to think about that? It was all too
ghastly, and to make matters worse the Bill was integral to the Convergence
Bill, as it was then known.

Today, yet again Minister, is a good news day, because Icasa retains its
name and, we hope, the independence it should have. Of course, time will
tell. You have heard the warnings from the hon Dene Smuts with regard to
our concerns about you being a shareholder and a player at the same time.

The committee, the department and its new director-general, Icasa and
industry players in general have worked hard and substantial changes have
been effected to this Bill that we in the IFP can now live with and
support.

Obviously we cannot say much in two minutes, but we do not think that the
Bill is perfect and we can only hope that the objective of the Bill to
strengthen the regulator is effected quickly and constructively so as to
enable Icasa to get on with its stated job of changing the communications
landscape in our country.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson and hon members, the
Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment Bill has
certainly arisen out of the Electronic Communications Bill. Because of the
wide-ranging implications of the latter, the Bill amends some definitions
and inserts new definitions while determining, in far greater detail, the
functions of the regulator.

As you have heard, it consolidates certain powers and duties of that body
and provides for inquiries. It amends the procedure for the appointment and
removal of councillors and regulates the financing of the institution. It
further provides for the establishment of a formal complaints organ, the
appointment of inspectors, the creation of new offences and penalties, the
incorporation of the postal regulator and all matters connected thereto.

This Bill highlights the importance of and the need for an independent and
proactive regulator and will ensure equity in the communications and ICT
fields. As with all of our work, it will also promote the wellbeing of the
marginalised and disadvantaged and ensure independence from political,
commercial and civil interference in the decision-making processes of the
regulator.

Provision is made in section 192 of Chapter 9 of the Constitution that
national legislation must establish an independent authority to regulate
broadcasting in the public interest, and to ensure fairness and a diversity
of views broadly representing South African society. The proposed
legislation, crafted as it is, gives expression to this particular
principle.

However, I must say that in the arguments that have emerged in the debates
around this particular issue, there is a great tendency, particularly
amongst opposition members, to confuse the provisions of Chapter 9 of the
Constitution. There is a tendency to equate the broadcasting authority with
the kind of independence that is envisaged in the designated institutions
in Chapter 9. This, in my opinion, leads to the kind of confusion that
gives rise to the charge that the legislation or the proposed draft intends
to undermine the independence of the regulatory authority.

There is no doubt in my mind that this calls for greater constitutional
integrity and possibly for some kind of proper indication of the actual
authority of the broadcasting authority that is envisaged in Chapter 9.

There is also the need for patriotic fervour in all aspects of our life and
this Bill charges the regulator with the task of instilling and deepening
this sense of patriotism. From the children in the rural areas that will
soon have access to Internet technology or even telephones for that matter
to the chief executive officers of national and multi-national companies, a
new sense of understanding, excitement and hope must course through their
veins as a direct result of the work carried out by all of us in this
particular sector.

As indicated earlier, the Electronic Communications Bill is designed to
form an essential link between the first and second economies. The
Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment Bill,
however, is the one largely responsible for implementing this strategy and
ensuring there is sufficient scope for and development as well as having
socio-economic benefits for all our people and not just a few in this
country.

The key here is to ensure that we have an effective programme to establish
digital inclusion in this country. For far too long large numbers of our
people have been cut off from accessing modern technologies. The Bill
envisages that the regulator will play its role to bring about tangible
benefits and results built for the grassroots as well as for people in
boardrooms.

It is indeed pleasing, despite some of the comments that have been made,
that this Bill enjoys the support of all the members of the political
parties in this House, who realise the critical role that the regulator has
to play in the developments unfolding in the telecommunications sector.

I want to take this opportunity to express appreciation for the collective
manner in which the leadership in the department has exercised its
responsibilities in crafting and bringing this Bill to Parliament. It has
worked very diligently to advance both this Bill and the Electronic
Communications Bill. In particular I would like to express my appreciation
for the leadership and guidance of the Minister, Madam Ivy Matsepe-
Casaburri, with whom I enjoyed a long-standing comradeship in the days when
we were activists in the education field.

I would also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation for
the diligent work undertaken by members of the portfolio committee who on
more than two occasions during the deliberations burnt the midnight oil. I
am sure South Africa is proud of your efforts. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Chairperson, the regulation of the broadcasting sector is
clearly and unambiguously enshrined in our wonderful Constitution. Over the
years, these clauses in the Constitution have come under attack from
various sources and have been successfully defended.

This current Bill has once again indicated the importance of Parliament and
particularly the portfolio committee in protecting the independence of
regulation of the authority. Although the compromise reached is not ideal
in establishing arm’s-length appointments of councillors to the council of
Icasa, it does avoid a constitutional challenge in the future.

Apart from this issue, the ID is extremely optimistic about the other
clauses in the Bill and how it will be able to realise the great potential
that exists within the convergent environments of telecommunications and
broadcasting. In addition, we are extremely encouraged by the inclusion of
the regulation of postal services within Icasa and hope that this will
eliminate confusion and uncertainty that has existed in the sector for many
years.

However, the ID would like to caution that the success or failure of any
regulator, and in particular in the case of Icasa, depends on available
resources which are allocated to it. The ICT and postal services are
extremely complicated with many influences, both from government and
industry stakeholders. It is essential that if the regulator is to succeed
it must play an integral part in developing and nurturing these industries.


Attention needs to be given to available financing, capacity and human
resources. Without sufficient capacity and resources, and with over-
bureaucratisation, Icasa would develop into a lame duck and would be unable
to service the industry with grave consequences for our economy as well.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP shared concerns that the Bill, as it
was then drafted, took the power of selecting Icasa councillors out of the
hands of Parliament and placed it in the hands of the executive. This,
undoubtedly, would have compromised the independence of Icasa and would
have allowed the Minister to pick and choose candidates most favourable to
the government. Clearly, this would have been unconstitutional. We are
therefore pleased that a compromise arrangement has been agreed on and
commend the majority party and the official opposition and other parties in
this regard.
The current procedure for selecting councillors will remain, with the
National Assembly making recommendations to the Minister. Should she
disagree with the recommendation she would be constrained to refer the
matter back to Parliament. This procedure, we believe, will ensure that the
Bill passes constitutional muster. Additional funding will also assist in
ensuring the independence of the regulator. The ACDP will support this
Bill.

Mrs L E YENGENI: Hon Chair, this year is the 50th anniversary of a very
important product in the creation of a cross-section of the people of South
Africa, the Freedom Charter. The first clause of the Freedom Charter
pronounces eloquently that ``the people shall govern’’.

This is exactly what we have done in this Bill. The selection and
appointment of Icasa councillors will be a product of a cross-section of
the South African population. How is it going to be done?

The council will consist of a chairperson and eight councillors. The
National Assembly will appoint an independent and impartial panel, as
reflected in this Bill. The names and terms of reference of these people on
this panel shall be published by the Minister by notice in the Gazette.

How is the panel going to operate? The public must be invited to nominate
candidates for appointment to the council in a newspaper circulating
nationally, within a period prescribed in the Bill. The panel should submit
a list of suitable candidates, at least one and a half times the number of
councillors to be appointed.

The Minister will recommend and motivate for his or her choice of
candidates from a list to serve in the council. If the National Assembly is
not satisfied with his or her recommended candidates, it will ask the
Minister, or rather, it will request the Minister, to reconsider his or her
decision. It will only be after the National Assembly has approved his or
her recommendation that he or she will be able to appoint the chair and
councillors.

The task of that panel will come to an end, and it will be dissolved when
the publishing of names has been done. When the chairperson of the council
is absent, they should appoint an acting chair in writing, but in a
situation where the chair could not appoint one, they may elect an acting
chair, as prescribed by law.

The preamble of the Freedom Charter declares, and I quote:

   South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white, and no
   government can justly claim authority unless it is based on the will of
   the people.

This quote is in line with what we are attempting to achieve through this
Bill by introducing the performance management system. This system seeks to
ensure that councillors are performing their operations in line with the
mandate of the politicians to assist government to create jobs and
alleviate poverty through the granting of licences in favour of
historically disadvantaged people, but also and more importantly, to ensure
that everything is done in an accountable manner.

Icasa’s independence starts and ends with the running of its daily
operations. It is accountable to Parliament. It is crucial for Parliament
and the committee to ensure that Icasa carries out its mandate timeously
and correctly. That does not do away with its independence.

How is this system going to work? The Minister will establish it. This will
be for the purpose of monitoring and evaluating both councillors and the
chairperson.

There should be key performance indicators to measure performance. There
should be a procedure to measure and review performance at least once a
year. After the appointment of a councillor, a performance agreement must
be concluded between the chairperson and the Minister and between the
councillors and the chairperson.

The Minister shall constitute a panel to evaluate the chair and the chair
will do likewise to evaluate the councillors. A councillor may at any time
tender his or her written resignation to the Minister, at least three
months in advance. The ANC supports the Bill.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the PAC supports the amending Bill as tabled
before us.

South Africa has a developing democracy that must be deepened and
strengthened to serve the citizens of this country in excellence.
Broadcasting and electronic communication are a tool by which this country
may command the respect of other countries in Africa and globally. It is
through communication that this country may be marketed to improve its
image and for quick economic growth.

The amendment to the Act will assist in giving clear directives of powers
and functions of the communications authority. It will further assist in
appointing credible persons as councillors in the authority.

Icasa, as the representative of the people on communication, must devise
strategies to make our communication system competitive in the industry
when compared to other countries in the world. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Communication is what keeps all relationships going. It is
the backbone to getting a message or sending a message, be it private,
public, business, government or personal. The success of all relations
relies on a good communication system. We all know the havoc that can be
played and caused by miscommunication.

The MF supports the efficient and effective management of Icasa to ensure
efficient cross-communication, both domestically and internationally, be it
postal, over the airwaves, telephonically and so on. The MF seeks a well-
established system that will deliver superbly on the communication needs of
the South African people.

In terms of the amending Bill, the MF notes the collection of provisions
that appears to be very conclusive in ensuring sustainable communication in
South Africa. We are pleased that the Bill gives a more detailed provision
of the functions of the authority.

We accept the substitution of the authority as the postal regulator, and
support the monitoring role it will have over the sector. The MF finds the
establishment of the complaint and compliance committee as valuable
information to ensure sustainable communication. [Time expired.] We support
the Bill.

Mr K M KHUMALO: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members, Ministers, Deputy
Ministers, the industry, today is a very important day for all of us
because these two Bills are quite critical, as we move into the wireless,
broadband, Wi-fi, Wi-Max, so that our society moves more quickly.

The power of ICASA as a regulator responsible for issuing licences to
radio, television, broadcasting, telecommunication network services and
everybody else, is not to be questioned. It is very clear that as the ANC
government, we have supported that, we have created that, and we have made
sure that it will operate in a fair and transparent manner. It is also to
ensure that the consumer is protected at all times in terms of pricing and
also to manage and monitor the spectrum.

The amending Bill seeks to strengthen and empower ICASA, so that it can
achieve its mandate. It can promote universal access and also service to
all people. Some of you might be aware that those who are using mobile
network operator cellphones in some of our rural areas or villages, need to
go to a hilltop or mountain or climb a tree to get a network. That must
come to an end. ICASA must have inspectors that will be able to go down
there and talk to network operators, talk to everybody, to say universal
access and service must be for all people.

Secondly, in terms of broadcasting, it is important for the inspectors who
will be appointed to make sure that people do not have to move about in
their dining rooms or living rooms, looking for a signal in the house. So
that whilst we do this, we achieve universal access and service, and
everybody will be served properly so that when we arrive in 2010 and any
other period, everybody will be covered.

As regards illegal connections and illegal operation of television and
radios, the inspectors will have to deal with those types of issues as they
are established. The Bill also proposes the establishment of a Complaints
and Compliance Committee. The Complaints and Compliance Committee will deal
with all complaints that are received from the general public. In 2003-
2004, according to the ICASA annual report, they received between 15 and 20
reports on a monthly basis.

Out of all those reports that they received, most dealt with issues of
blasphemy, defamation, hate speech, pornography, advertising and
mismanagement. The Complaints and Compliance Committee, as proposed by the
Bill, will then address those types of issues so that the basic human
principles of everybody are protected in this Bill.

As government and Parliament we have a responsibility to secure basic human
rights and uphold high moral standards. We also have a duty to protect our
children from pornography, as was indicated by one member who said that the
current applications used in cellphone gadgets allow people to load a lot
of bad pornographic messages onto a cellphone. As the law and ICASA, we
need to be empowered. ICASA needs to be empowered to make sure that they
protect our children from these types of influences.

The Complaints and Compliance Committee, as proposed by ICASA, will refer
some of the problems that they receive to the Broadcasting Complaints
Commission of South Africa. During that period of 2003-2004, as ICASA dealt
with those types of problems, most of them were dealt with in terms of
broadcasting and what we call asymmetrical satellite IDSN. Those are the
issues that we are dealing with in terms of how we approach these issues.

Those are the two problems that are related to pricing and also in terms of
systems. These experts were supposed to be appointed by ICASA. We are
saying that, in terms of the Bill, ICASA will have an opportunity to
appoint experts that will help them to roll out infrastructure and all the
services that are needed in the country in order to make sure that the two
issues that we are dealing with, in terms of service and access, are
covered.

I just want to indicate to this House that the South African government and
ICASA, as a regulator, realise that as regards important global standards
and norms that are required by many of the regulators in terms of the
International Telecommunications Union, there are three issues that are
important in terms of how we deal with matters pertaining to moving with
technology. One of them is the issue of universal access. Everybody, from
the four corners of this country, must be covered by all the network
operators, and by every one of the broadcasters.

The second is the issue of closing the digital divide, the rural areas and
the urban areas, making sure that ICT rolls out so that service delivery
goes well for everyone. The last point is the issue of access in terms of
affordability - whether our people are able to afford the prices, whether
they are too high. It is very important for us to adhere to these important
standards.

Fundamental to the proposals on the amending Bill is the issue of penalties
and offences. We are saying that those who are operating illegally and
those who do not want to move according to the terms and conditions of
their licences, must be penalised, and they must be heavily fined. Some of
them will have to face imprisonment, especially those who contravene the
Constitution of this country.

Those are the provisions that are covered in terms of penalties and
offences. The penalties and offences will empower ICASA to deal adequately
with issues of non-compliance, misconduct and contravention of licence
conditions. This will help them to make sure that when we start to roll out
these services they reach everybody.

It is also important to note that there is this issue that relates to
whether the Bill does not take the independence of ICASA into
consideration. I just want to say that this is not true. Even if we come
with a different method it would not affect the issue of the powers of
ICASA.

Section 192 of the Constitution makes it very clear that any independent
institution must adhere to particular standards. One of them is security of
tenure. It is now five years for ICASA councillors. Secondly, there is the
issue of financial independence. ICASA’s finances . . . [Time
expired.][Applause.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Once again, Chairperson, I would like to
thank the members for their support for this Bill, but this is an
indication, again, of what people who have worked together, can achieve. I
would like to say to those who had their misgivings about the intentions of
the executive, namely that this was intended as an undisguised takeover,
that nothing could be further from the truth.

In reality, what we wanted to do as an executive - and not only this
particular department and this particular organisation called ICASA - was
to say that we need to look at ourselves, every department, to see how we
can ensure that we have a separation of the functions of the legislative,
the judiciary and the executive.
I am quite prepared to go and raise the shareholder issue with Cabinet. We
have been looking at ways that we can actually make sure that where we have
shareholders, for example, they could be in one place, and so on. The
question was: How would the very organisations that have to work under us
with three or four bosses manage? It is not something that we had not
thought about.

Certainly, the independence of ICASA is something that we have always said
was important to us, because those decisions have to be made separately
from the executive. Therefore, the intention was certainly not to take
rights away. But a great deal of what has been said about where the
independence is to be entrenched is really a focus on the broadcasting
content, not the technologies as such. It is the content that was really
being preserved, particularly by the Constitution.

The question now is: With the kind of technologies that we have, to what
extent, really, does this section of the Constitution protect us? The last
speaker was talking about racism, blasphemy, sexism and pornography in our
broadcasting. How do we protect against that? I think we ought to, because
these are matters that really do affect this House and do affect our people
outside.

How do we achieve that through this particular Bill?

The appointment of councillors in an office is not necessarily going to
protect that. That was our concern, as to how we should go about doing
this.

We agree with hon Gore about trying to make sure that the resources for
ICASA are there, and we will do what we can in this regard. I think we are
in agreement with the parliamentary committee and Parliament that we need
to ensure that this organisation has the
resources to be able to do this work. We certainly will put our shoulders
to the wheel to do that.

Accountability has been inserted into the Bill, particularly because we
felt that within ICASA members should be able to monitor themselves, be
accountable and also be accountable to this House. The process of doing
this should be clearly defined.

Regarding all the other matters that members raised, I would like to say
that we have noted them. I would also like to say thank you for the support
for this Bill. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
Bill read a second time.


         CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE


Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Hon Chair, hon members, the Constitutional Review
Committee was established in terms of Rule 97 of the Joint Rules of
Parliament in accordance with the constitutional imperative, as contained
in section 45(c) of the Constitution.

The inclusion of this instruction during the final drafting of the
Constitution was apparently motivated by two important factors, namely:
Firstly, there was a certain apprehension that because of the dateline set
for the adoption of the Constitution, some crucial provisions might have
been overlooked or might warrant redrafting. Accordingly, the Joint
Constitutional Review Committee, in its original format, was large, with a
strong representation from the executive. The committee, however, soon
found that the drafters of the present Constitution had largely succeeded
in their task and that very few amendments were required. This diminished
the necessity for a continual internal scrutiny and evaluation process,
which was a compelling reason for the scaling down of the committee to its
present size of 23 members.

Secondly, the drafters of our present Constitution, in their wisdom, also
identified the necessity of maintaining our Constitution as a living
document within our democracy of the people. Although the Constitution
should not be amended without sound reason, it is also not cast in stone
and should be a subject that continues public debate.

As a consequence, and in accordance with Joint Rule 102, the Constitutional
Review Committee embarks upon an annual process of reviewing the
Constitution. During the month of May each year, advertisements are placed,
inviting comments and inputs from the public at large. Both the printed and
electronic media are utilised for this purpose. This year, a total of 17
submissions was received, which addressed 21 identifiable issues. The
substance of the submissions, the issues raised and the view of the
committee will be addressed by other members participating in this
afternoon’s debate.

Allow me, however, to make a few cursory remarks on some of the
submissions. Without attempting to place a damper on those individuals or
organisations who went to the trouble of making submissions, it does seem
that we have the so-called hardy annuals. Amongst these are those who
favour the reintroduction of the death penalty, the abolition of the right
to abortion, the abolition of property rights, the animal rights issue,
etc. The Royal Bafokeng obviously feels strongly about the traditional
system and their perception of true democracy. They have raised their views
at various forums.

These issues are all extremely emotional, and as a committee, we respect
the fact that individuals, groups and organisations have strong feelings
regarding this. The converse must also be recognised, namely that extremely
strong and emotional views exist amongst those supporting the status quo.
Fundamental principles of policy are often at stake. Many of these issues
impact on the very core of the Bill of Rights in Chapter 2 of the
Constitution.

It would seem that, in many instances, the submitters have also not
anticipated the consequential implications of the amendment to the
Constitution which they are requesting. Some of the issues which were
addressed were also perceived by the committee to be adequately protected
by the Constitution or could preferably be encapsulated in normal
legislation.

I wish to express the committee’s appreciation to all who made submissions
during the 2005 review period. The committee found all the submissions to
be thought-provoking and, in many instances, they gave rise to interesting
debates.

The intensity of the discussions can also be attributed to the legal
opinion which was obtained from the Parliamentary legal services office
headed by Dr Palmer. When approached to assist the committee with the
necessary legal expertise, Dr Palmer did not hesitate to make his legal
team available to evaluate and disseminate the respective submissions. The
time and effort spent, as well as the quality of the various opinions, are
much appreciated. Allow me also to address a special word of thanks to
Advocate Gordon, who assisted with the drafting of the final report.

The committee also experienced the contribution by Professor Julien
Hoffman, regarding the issue of amending section 192 of the Constitution to
provide for the inclusion of telecommunications and that the Broadcasting
Authority be included in section 181, as extremely stimulating.

Maybe it is significant that the Electronic Communications Bill was debated
in this honourable Chamber this afternoon. It’s obvious that the rapid
advances in technology are creating different imperatives to which our
Constitution will have to be sensitive. We appreciate his input.

Submissions received during the current period of review indicate interests
covering a wide spectrum of our people. These ranged from contributions by
traditional entities, academics, professional persons in the legal,
religious and medical fraternity, retired individuals and learners from
secondary schools. This seems to indicate an ongoing interest in and
discussion of the constitutional issues within our community. The question,
however, remains as to how this type of discussion can be maintained and re-
invigorated.

Die leerders en leerkragte van die Hoërskool Hendrik Verwoerd het vir ’n
navolgenswaardige voorbeeld gesorg met hulle bydrae voor die komitee.
Miskien kan meer skole, soos ek glo met hulle die geval was, dit ’n
klasprojek maak. Jaarliks kan sekere gedeeltes van die Grondwet
geïdentifiseer en bestudeer word. Dit kan verder lei tot ’n stimulerende
debat in die klas of selfs in die skool se debatsvereniging. Daarná kan
daar, soos hier, met voorstelle na die komitee gekom word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The learners and educators of Hendrik Verwoerd High School set an example
worth following with their contribution before the committee. Maybe more
schools can, as I am sure was the situation in their case, make this a
class project. Every year certain sections of the Constitution can be
identified and discussed. This could furthermore lead to a stimulating
debate in class or even in the school’s debating society. Afterwards, as
was done here, suggestions can be made to the committee.]

The challenge of this committee is to stimulate public debate and engender
public participation within financial, time and logistical constraints. As
a committee, we intend to address these issues during the ensuing year.

In conclusion, I would also like to thank the members of the committee, who
attended our meetings regularly, for their constructive inputs. Joint
committees experience particular constraints owing to the respective
programmes of the National Assembly and National Council of Provinces. For
the effective functioning of joint committees, this aspect needs serious
consideration.

May we, as the freely elected public representatives, be ever mindful that
we adopted our Constitution to heal the divisions of the past and establish
a society based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human
rights. May the foundations for a democratic and open society in which
government is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally
protected by law, improve the quality of lives of all citizens and free the
potential of each person and build a united and democratic South Africa
able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of
nations.

It’s an honour for me to support the adoption of the 2005 Constitutional
Review Report as tabled. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, in all the years that I have been on the
Constitutional Review Committee I think that this year’s review exercise
has been the most comprehensive and thorough process I have experienced. Of
particular interest were the detailed and interesting legal opinions
furnished by Parliament’s legal services office, led by Dr Palmer, on each
of the issues raised by members of the public who made submissions. You
could say that this year the public really got their money’s worth, and I
would like to commend our chair, the hon Manie Schoeman, and the legal
advisers on this tremendous effort.

The 17 submissions received also included, as the chairperson said, some
hardy annuals such as requests for reinstating the death penalty,
limitations on the right to an abortion, and the question of including
animal rights in our Bill of Human Rights. As usual, also, there were
requests for additional powers for traditional leaders and submissions for
and against property rights.
However, submissions also included some interesting new items, which I will
refer to shortly. One or two of the submissions were most undesirable, such
as one that proposed the suspension of the independence of our judiciary.
Many others could be catered for, or actually have been catered for, by
changes to legislation rather than the Constitution, and the proposers of
these changes will be notified as such. One thing this year has in common,
though, with previous years is that we as a committee do not in this report
recommend any changes to the Constitution.

However, two proposed constitutional changes need some further attention.
The first issue is whether or not protection of animals requires further
intervention. Our Bill of Rights, as I said, is a Bill of Human Rights.
However, in terms of section 24 of the Bill of Rights, everyone has the
right to have the environment protected for the benefit of future and
present generations through reasonable legislative and other measures that,
inter alia, promote conservation.

Now, the committee does not support the inclusion of positive rights for
animals in our Bill of Rights. However, the question was raised in the
committee as to whether this section 24, together with existing
legislation, affords sufficient protection to our wildlife and other
animals. And, in a very useful and interesting legal opinion from Adv
Gordon and a briefing document giving a comparative overview of
constitutional and legislative protection for animals, internationally
compiled with the assistance of Mr Tom Schumann of the parliamentary
library, the committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that some
constitutions internationally have begun to include provisions which
expressly provide for the protection of animals. For example, in 1992 the
Swiss included in their constitution an express obligation on the federal
government to preserve fish, game and birds, and to pass legislation
regulating the keeping and use of animals. And, in 2002, the German
constitution was amended to specifically bring protection of animals within
the ambit of the constitution.

It’s for this reason that the committee has recommended that the
submissions we received on protection of animal rights should be referred
to the portfolio committee and select committee dealing with the
environment for comment on whether our existing legislation is adequate to
protect our animals, including our wildlife. The DA believes that it’s
important that we do this reassessment.

The other interesting new aspect in the submissions was whether it was
necessary to amend section 192 of the Constitution to make provision for
the inclusion of a specific reference to telecommunications, particularly
in view of the new Convergence Bill that covers the merging of broadcasting
and telecommunications, which we have been debating in this House today.
Section 192 deals with the establishment of an independent authority to
regulate broadcasting in the public interest, but is silent about
telecommunications. Of course, 10 years ago when these provisions of our
Constitution were being drafted, there was no such situation or convergence
between broadcasting and telecommunications.

After hearing some expert evidence and after extensive debate in the
committee, I believe, wisely, we concluded that we needed further input
from experts in government and Parliament, namely the department and the
Portfolio Committee on Communications. Our recommendation is that they be
requested to make further presentations to our committee. The DA has
pleasure in supporting this report. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, hon members, the IFP would like to commence by
congratulating the chairperson of the Constitutional Review Committee on
his excellent chairing of this committee over the past year.

The committee is a strange committee in that its precise mandate,
especially in relation to other committees processing constitutional
amendments and in relation to the executive, which proposes amendments to
Parliament, is a little ambiguous. This has historically resulted in the
expression of concerns regarding the utility of the committee and whether
it serves any real purpose.

We are pleased to acknowledge that the Constitutional Review Committee has
indeed adopted a professional approach towards its work and has, as a
consequence, produced a report that reflects this approach. We are
particularly pleased that certain matters have been referred to the
relevant line-function departments for consideration, and we look forward
to engaging with them on the appropriateness or otherwise of the
submissions.

The report would therefore, under normal circumstances, receive our
unqualified support and, indeed, we are in agreement with the vast majority
of its contents and recommendations. However, there is one area in which,
in our view, the committee’s recommendations do not accord with the views
of the IFP. This is in respect of the desirability of amending the
Constitution to better accommodate concerns regarding the institution of
traditional leadership.

In particular, we believe the submission of the Royal Bafokeng nation
warrants greater consideration than is reflected in the committee’s report.
It may well be true, as is indicated in the report, that any constitutional
recognition of the validity of the argument in favour of changes to Chapter
12, “would require a drastic deviation from current policies”. Indeed, this
is so, and we would welcome such a deviation.

As is well known, the IFP has been consistent since the days of Codesa
right through the drafting of both the interim and the final Constitutions,
as well as in the negotiations between the Coalition of Traditional Leaders
and the Presidency in 1999 and 2000, on the need to amend Chapter 12 of the
Constitution. To the IFP, this remains a highly desirable goal, and for
this reason we cannot support the adoption of the Constitutional Review
Committee report by the House.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, hon members, by its very nature the ANC is a
democratic organisation. Since 1994 when it took over power the ANC has
ensured that this democratic character is infused into the governance of
this country, hence one of the founding provisions in the 1996 Constitution
adopted, as we all know, under ANC rule, states that the Republic of South
Africa is a democratic state.

The Constitution which governs governance in this country is itself a
product of a long process of participatory democracy. During the period of
constitution-making, the general public was afforded an opportunity to make
inputs into what later was to be described as one of the most progressive
constitutions in the world.

The constitution-making in 1995, under the directive of the Constitutional
Assembly, was characterised by extensive involvement and broad
participation of the general public throughout the country. Public
assemblies, or imbizos, which were very popular and well attended, afforded
ordinary citizens the opportunity to express themselves openly on issues
they wanted the Constitution to address.
Indeed, at that time the people spoke, feeding into the deliberations of
the Constitution that was simultaneously taking place in Parliament.

For purposes of dealing with the Constitution, Parliament constituted
itself into the Constitutional Assembly, the procedures of which were
guided by strict democratic principles, for example, every single member of
the National Assembly and the then Senate was allocated to at least one
committee. Each committee dealt with a specific theme, which themes were
later to constitute the chapters of the Constitution, as we know them
today.

I participated, for example, in theme committee four, which dealt with the
Bill of Rights. There could not have been a better structuring to enable
every member, regardless of party affiliation, to exercise his or her
democratic right to shape the supreme law of the country. Theme committees
received and considered submissions made by all sectors of society,
including all kinds of NGOs, CBOs, religious, cultural and political
groups, business organisations, trade unions, professionals, women and
youth organisations, individuals, etc.

All these people literally descended on Parliament to make sure that their
views were heard and recorded. The end product of this hive of democratic
activity was what we today know as South Africa’s first democratic
Constitution, adopted in 1996. No wonder all South Africans identify with
it. It is, indeed, a proudly South African product.

As if this was not enough, section 45(1)(c) was included. The chairperson
has already alluded to this point, not because the Constitution was thought
to be inadequate, or fraught with unconstitutional sections or clauses, but
the annual review by a joint committee would provide a mechanism to allow
society to periodically check and ensure that the democratic path the
country has chosen to follow remains clear and free of any obstacles.

This is what the report of the committee today is about. The chairperson of
the committee has already explained the process followed in ensuring that
each submission received thorough consideration by the committee, also
making use of professional legal advice. Throughout our proceedings, the
committee was conscious of the fact that it was dealing with the supreme
law of the country, while at the same time recognising the importance of
public participation and ensuring that the people do indeed govern.

The fact that for all these 17 submissions that were made the committee
found that no amendments to the Constitution were necessary does not mean
that the concerns of the public were ignored, but what it indicates is
that, basing ourselves on the 17 submissions made, the Constitution of
South Africa has passed the test with flying colours so far.

I say so, because we found that either the section submitted for amendment
already contains provisions to address the concerns, or, in some cases,
legislation addressing the concerns submitted is already in place. Take,
for example, the case that was quoted here by the hon Camerer, which
proposes that the Constitution be amended to include protection of animal
rights, and that government be obliged to take reasonable steps to ensure
protection of the environment and animals. The committee noted that
although the Bill of Rights deals with human rights only, and does not
include animal rights, section 24(b) could take care of this concern
through legislation, rather than an amendment.

Another example is the submission that section 27(1)(a) be amended to
exclude abortions, except only in certain cases, like rape or where the
foetus is badly deformed. The committee is convinced that this would
contradict the Bill of Rights, and impact negatively on the fundamental
rights of women. We all know that our Constitution is nonsexist in
character, and does not discriminate against certain groups of women.

It was also submitted that section 28 of the Constitution, dealing with
children’s rights, be amended to include, among other concerns, that a
child should not be subjected to any cultural, ethnic, social or religious
practices or acts, but the committee noted that in spite of the fact that
section 28(1) details the rights of the child adequately, section 28(2)
embodies any other rights of the child which may not have been listed in
section 28(1). It states:

   A child’s best interests are of paramount importance in every matter
   concerning the child.

So, section 28 also passes the test.

For some submissions, such as the need for the provision of old age homes,
the committee felt that these do not warrant constitutional amendments, but
that they may be referred to the relevant departments, in this case the
Department of Social Development.

In conclusion, the committee is committed to ensuring that the public takes
an even greater interest in the annual review of the Constitution, and
believes that this can be achieved, among other activities, through
awareness programmes. However, we are aware that this may have implications
for the committee’s budget, but we do hope that Parliament will not
hesitate to oblige and assist the committee, so that we are able to empower
the people of this country to continue to govern. Indeed, the people do
continue to govern, as is stated in the Freedom Charter: The people shall
govern. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP, earlier this year, commended the
Minister of Home Affairs for appealing to the Constitutional Co urt against
the ruling of the Supreme Court of Appeal on the issue of same-sex
marriages. The government was joined by various religious groups, including
the Marriage Alliance, which consists of some 70 denominations representing
some 18 million citizens.

The ACDP, earlier this year, challenged the Minister by stating that if
government was serious in its opposition to same-sex marriages, it should
consider amending the national Constitution in order to constitutionally
protect marriage as being between a man and a woman. The Marriage Alliance
made several proposals to the Constitutional Review Committee, the most
important of which relates to the inclusion of a definition of marriage as
being between a male and a female.

Whilst we appreciate that the Constitutional Court has still to decide on
the matter, if the Supreme Court of Appeal’s decision is anything to go by,
there is a strong possibility that the Constitutional Court will uphold
same-sex marriages. A constitutional amendment entrenched in the definition
of marriage would have ended the debate once and for all, and would have
given substance to the government’s intervention in the Constitutional
Court.

The decision not to amend the Constitution flies in the face of the
government intervention through the court. It is significant that the
state’s legal adviser, whilst not agreeing to the proposed amendment,
conceded in his opinion that the motivation by the Marriage Alliance, and I
quote, “ . . . does have significant value as a research basis for a policy
decision on whether the definition of marriage should be changed ...”.

In view of the overwhelming support for the protection of marriage as well
as the government’s intervention, we cannot understand why the Marriage
Alliance’s proposals were not accepted. Surely, the voice of some 18
million citizens should not be ignored.

We are also on record as being opposed to abortion. It is disgraceful that
the committee is prepared to consider the protection of animal rights
whilst not wishing to protect unborn babies from abortion. The ACDP can,
consequently, not support the report as tabled. I thank you.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairman, section 45(1) of our Constitution dictates to
Parliament that it should establish a joint committee to review the
Constitution at least annually. In its report of 28 October this year, the
Constitutional Review Committee reported that it had placed advertisements
in the media calling for submissions from the public concerning proposed
changes to the Constitution. Only 17 submissions were received nationally
from members of the public.

The PAC feels that this committee should improve on its consultation
strategy, as it appears that the message was not well received by the
public. Our country has the highest rate of illiteracy and it is therefore
incumbent on whoever advertised that information to align it with this
situation.

In principle, the PAC wishes to accept the committee’s report for
consideration by this House. Regarding substantive issues on the
submissions of the public, we wish to propose to the committee that, where
necessary, persons who make submissions should be called in to elaborate
further on their case.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon members, we appeal to
you to lower the level of noise.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF supports the input and acknowledges the
tasks that have been done well by the review committee regarding the
subject. We are confident that all avenues explored in coming to the best
decision on issues regarding the principles and basis of our democracy
intended, as a guide, to achieve the best solution for our system.

In terms of the amendment concerning property, the MF agrees with the
committee’s suggestion not to amend section 25, and to allow property tax
to be amended through normal legislation. As for sections 211 and 212,
regarding traditional leaders, we are also satisfied and find no need for
amendment. Similarly, there is no need for amendments to the equality and
limitation clauses, and the definition of marriage can be made in normal
legislation. The position that there is no need for amendment regarding
prisoners and accused is also supported.

What needs to be realised is that though the Constitution governs as
supreme and contains the values and fundamentals of our democracy, it also
has power over legislation and policies that govern our people, based on
the fundamental principle of this democracy. The MF is therefore of the
opinion that the committee is quite correct in its submission that many of
our amendments can be made in normal legislation. What has to be
maintained, however, is that all such amendments must be in compliance with
the values and principles of the Constitution so that they are
constitutional, and that no ambiguities or contradictory provisions may be
made.

The MF supports the recommendations made by the committee and finds it’s
fundamental to maintain the structure of the Constitution . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge) Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you very much, Chairperson.

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, due to time constraints, I will comment only on the
four submissions that propose that section 39 of the Constitution should
contain additional interpretation guidelines. This submission cuts through
the essence of our established practice of allowing judges to have almost a
free hand when interpreting legislation.

After thoroughly studying the submission and the commission’s report, the
UPSA is not convinced that the committee has adequately considered the
specific wording used in the submission. I specifically refer to the word
“guidelines” as used in the submission and the committee’s use of the word
“principles”.

It is clear that the committee did not consider the huge lexicological
difference between the two words. The submission requested “guidelines” and
not, as put by the committee, “rigid principles”. This mistake by the
committee emphasises the problem of legal interpretation. The UPSA is of
the opinion that general guidelines would eradicate any uncertainty as to
what the intention of the legislature was regarding this particular
section. Also, we believe that such guidelines would bring about greater
consistency in the area of judgments of the courts and therefore greater
legal certainty. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, I believe that future debates on the report of
the constitutional committee should be more substantive and more in-depth,
because I think one or two-minute debates will not do justice to the
reports.

My time doesn’t allow me to respond to 17 issues, but let me respond to
only one. With reference to point 6 on the subject of marriage, the
committee reported that, and I quote, “separate submissions were received
for the inclusion of a definition of marriage in the Constitution”.

The FD can understand why the average South African is concerned about the
definition of marriage. It is because the traditional and common law
definition of marriage, and I quote, “the union of one man and one woman,
to the exclusion of others” is under attack.

Our Parliament and Constitutional Review Committee might not be willing
today to bring clarity to the definition of marriage, but sooner or later
we and all other parliaments will have to bring finality to this debate.
The Canadian parliament had this to say on the definition of marriage, and
I quote, “parliament is also clear on the definition of marriage as being
the union of one man and one woman”. Recently, an overwhelming majority of
Canadian MPs passed the following motion, and I quote:


   That in the opinion of this House it is necessary, in light of public
   debate around recent court decisions, to state that marriage is and
   should remain the union of one man and one woman to the exclusion of all
   others; and that parliament will take all necessary steps within the
   jurisdiction of the parliament of Canada to preserve the definition of
   marriage in Canada.

The FD believes that it could bring legal certainty to have the definition
of marriage entrenched in our Constitution. There have been several
unsuccessful legal challenges in our courts to amend the traditional
definition of marriage. If marriage is defined in our Constitution like it
is defined in the Canadian model, it would bring the clarity needed by our
courts. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr T M MASUTHA: Hon Chairperson, hon members, today we are engaged in a
debate to consider a report that is more significant than it appears. A
discussion on our Constitution, indeed, is a significant one, as the
Constitution is the supreme law of our country upon which all other laws
are hinged.

Even though, as has already been stated by most of my colleagues, the
recommendations of this report that is before us, by and large, do not
support the submissions made or received from members of the public, it is
important, however, to highlight that the matters to which those
submissions speak are matters of significance. Therefore the committee did
not, in any way, take lightly the substance of what was contained in those
submissions.

However, it is equally important for us to bear in mind that the
Constitution is a document that should not be reviewed as a matter of first
resort, but that only in extreme situations where the only option would be
to revisit or review the Constitution should we entertain amendments to the
Constitution.

The principles enshrined in our Constitution create a fundamental framework
which does not only give structure and context to the Constitution itself,
but is definitive of the kind of state and nature of democratic
dispensation upon which our society is premised.

It is pleasing that although many of the submissions pertain to fundamental
rights contained in the Bill of Rights, amongst other areas of importance
in the Constitution, they fundamentally do not seek to propose a
comprehensive overhaul of the Constitution as such. This is significant in
that it affirms the assertion that our Constitution is indeed one of the
most solid amongst many that exist in the world. Indeed, our Constitution
serves as an example of the kind of democratic state and democratic
dispensation that is the envy of many other democracies in the world.

However, it is important to refer to some of the specific issues that have
been raised in the submissions. Allow me to focus especially on the area of
socioeconomic rights and specifically the area of social development,
perhaps, because, as a Whip of that committee, I have an inclination
towards issues in that sphere. One of the proposals relates to section 28
of the Constitution, namely the clause dealing with children’s rights. The
proposal is that additional rights be provided to enhance the protection
that is afforded children in that clause.

Let me start by saying that children, as a category and a group amongst the
most vulnerable in our society, constitute the only category that enjoys
special attention in the Bill of Rights in that a clause is dedicated
exclusively to their rights. It is therefore important to realise that the
rights of children in the Bill of Rights have been elevated in a special
way to give recognition to the significance of placing greater emphasis on
the principle of putting children first. We believe that the clause is
comprehensive enough to address the many issues that were proposed for
inclusion in the constitutional amendments that were put forward.

In particular, there is an overarching right that states that in all
matters affecting children, their best interests take precedence. We think
that that principle serves as a catchall, which will ensure that if there
is any doubt on any specific matter affecting children, their rights will
always take precedence.

On the other hand, regarding the question of the rights of older persons to
be admitted to old age homes or the creation of old age homes for them, the
committee felt, correctly so, that currently there is legislation before
Parliament, namely the Older Persons Bill, which seeks to deal
comprehensively not only with the provision of accommodation for older
persons but all other matters pertaining to older persons, including the
protection of older persons from abuse, be it in the family or home
situation or in institutions commonly known as old age homes. It further
goes on to provide for a range of services for older persons that are
designed to ensure that they enjoy a fulfilling life in their twilight
years.

There are other matters to which colleagues have already alluded that need
not be repeated. The question of animal rights, however, is a matter which
I want to amplify further by alluding to the fact that, as members may well
be aware, currently, in common law, animals are included in the law
governing the protection of property. So, in a way, currently in our law,
there are certain rights that can be extended to animals under property
law.

Further, in terms of our Constitution and the Bill of Rights, as colleagues
have already mentioned, we have the provisions that deal with environmental
rights which we believe, as a committee, provide a comprehensive framework
within which animal rights can be protected. Unless compelling arguments
are put forward that these provisions or measures are not adequate to
safeguard animals in our society, we do not think that, at this stage, it
is necessary to review the Constitution, specifically to introduce a new
category which in any case would not go with the flow of the existing
framework of the Bill of Rights which deals with human rights.

We feel that the equality clause in the Bill of Rights is quite
comprehensive. Looking at the various constitutional judgments that have
already provided substance and form to those particular rights, sufficient
content and structure have been given to that right. And we believe that,
by and large, those decisions have amplified the right and that there is no
need for us to do anything further, beyond what the courts have done.
However, if there are compelling situations and practical examples in which
gaps have been identified, regarding the adequacy of protection, certainly,
in future, the committee will consider those.

I think that, by and large, my colleagues have dealt with most of the
issues in the report. So I do not wish to waste the time of hon members on
such a long day as today. I think that I will rest my case there. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the report be adopted.
Motion agreed to (Inkatha Freedom Party, African Christian Democratic
Party, United Party of South Africa and Federation of Democrats
dissenting).

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:23.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Transport


         On request of the Minister the following Bill was introduced by the
         Select Committee on Public Services in the National Council of
         Provinces:


          i) National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill [B 38 –
             2005] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76) [Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             28186 of 31 October 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Select Committee on Public
         Services of the National Council of Provinces, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 4 November 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    Bills passed by National Assembly on 3 November 2005 and transmitted
    for concurrence:


       i) Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment
          Bill [B 32B – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
          Public Enterprises.


      ii) Electronic Communications Bill [B 9B – 2005] (National Assembly –
          sec 75) (introduced as Convergence Bill [B 9 – 2005]).


          The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
          Public Enterprises.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Veterinary
         Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development on the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33-2005]
      (National Assembly – sec 74), dated 02 November 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
        having considered the subject matter of the Constitution Twelfth
        Amendment Bill [B 33-2005] (National Assembly – sec 74), referred
        to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 74
        Bill, endorses the classification of the Bill and reports the Bill
        with amendments [B 33A-2005].


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on Additional
      Protocol to the Trade, Development and Cooperation Agreement (TDCA)
      between the Republic of South Africa and the European Community (EC)
      and its member states, dated 2 November 2005:

        The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
        the request for approval by Parliament of the Additional Protocol
        to the Trade, Development and Cooperation Agreement (TDCA) between
        the Republic of South Africa and the European Community (EC) and
        its member states, referred to it, recommends that the House, in
        terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
        Protocol.


Request to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry on
      Oversight Visit to KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga, 31 July – 5 August
      2005, Northern Cape and Eastern Cape, 14 – 19 August 2005:

1.    Acknowledgements


      The Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry  would  like  to
      acknowledge the officials from the KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, Northern
      and Eastern Cape Provinces for their support, openness  and  knowledge
      base during this oversight visit.  This support assisted  the  Members
      of  Parliament  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  Affairs  and
      Forestry, in systematically and in a structured  manner  to  undertake
      the important function of oversight as defined in the Constitution  of
      the Republic of South Africa.

The Honourable Members of Parliament representing  the  Portfolio  Committee
of Water Affairs and Forestry on its Oversight Visit included:

KwaZulu-Natal:   Ms C C September (Chairperson) (ANC), Ms  P  Bhengu  (ANC),
Ms M M Gumede (ANC), Mr J Kati (ANC), Mr V Mabuyakhulu (ANC), Mr B G  Mosala
(ANC) and Mr P H K Ditshetelo (UCDP).

Mpumalanga:  Mr J D Arendse (Leader of  Delegation)  (ANC),  Ms  E  Lishivha
(ANC), Ms S M Maine (ANC), Ms M N S Manana (ANC), Mr D K Maluleke  (DA),  Mr
M W Sibuyana (IFP) and Ms S N Sigcau (UDM).

Northern Cape:  Ms C C September (Chairperson) (ANC), Ms M M  Gumede  (ANC),
Ms E Lishivha (ANC), Mr V Mabuyakhulu (ANC), Mr I D Mogase  (ANC),  Mr  B  G
Mosala (ANC), Mr D K Maluleke (DA), and Mr S Simmons (NNP).

Eastern Cape:  Ms M N S Manana (Leader  of  Delegation)  (ANC),  Mr  J  Kati
(ANC), Mr P Mathebe (ANC), Mr M W Sibuyana (IFP), and Ms S N Sigcau (UDM).

   2. Municipalities Visited

 1. The following municipalities in the following provinces were visited:

   1. KwaZulu-Natal
    • Ilembe District Municipality
    • Umkhanyakhude District Municipality
    • Big Five False Bay Local Municipality
    • Umhlabuyalingana Local Municipality
    • Zululand District Municipality
    • Umzinvati District Municipality

   2. Mpumalanga
    • Mbombela Local Municipality
    • Nkomazi Local Municipality
    • Gert Sibande District Municipality
    • J S Moroka Local Municipality
    • Emakhazeni Local Municipality
   3. Northern Cape
     • Frances Baard District Municipality
     • Kgalagadi District Municipality
     • Tsantsabane Local Municipality
     • Sol Plaatjie Local Municipality
     • Khara Hais Local Municipality
     • Kai Garib Local Municipality

   4. Eastern Cape
    • Ngqushwa Local Municipality
    • Chris Hani District Municipality
    • Lukanji Local Municipality
    • Or Tambo District Municipality
    • Engcobo Local Municipality

1.    Introduction

In executing its mandate to  its  commitment  to  effective  oversight,  the
Portfolio Committee  on  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  undertook  oversight
visits, in August 2005, to gauge the level of  integrated  service  delivery
to areas designated as presidential nodes  in  the  KwaZulu-Natal,  Northern
Cape, Mpumalanga and Eastern Cape Provinces.

The specific objectives of the oversight visit were the following:

    • To note the shifts in service delivery since the Department  of  Water
      Affairs and Forestry evolved from an implementor  to  a  regulator  of
      water,  sanitation  and  forestry  issues.   The  shifting  roles  and
      functions for the delivery of basic services  to  local  and  district
      municipalities,   more   recently,   reflect   a   greater   financial
      responsibility to municipalities with the granting  of  the  equitable
      shares, Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) and conditional grants.
    •  To  assess  the  manner  in  which  local,  district,  water  service
      authorities and providers  address  core  issues  such  as  the  water
      supply, water resources management, water and sanitation  backlogs  in
      respective areas.
    • To  ascertain  the  extent  to  which  national  government  policies,
      legislation and standards of  the  Department  of  Water  Affairs  and
      Forestry are being implemented through the devolution of functions  to
      local and district municipalities, to assist with development in  some
      of the most deprived areas.  In this instance, the oversight role  was
      to focus extensively on the delivery of basic services, such as  water
      and sanitation in keeping with the targets of 2008 and 2010.
    • To note the manner in which the principle  of  cooperative  governance
      within the 3 spheres of government, work toward devising programmes to
      attend to the most critical development needs, geographically defined,
      to prioritise and focus the redistribution of resources from the  top,
      to where they are most needed.
    • To examine the extent to which provinces tasked with  the  development
      of Provincial Growth and Development  Strategies/Plans  and  municipal
      Integrated Development Plans (IDPs), implement the  proposals  in  the
      IDPs.  This, as well as  ascertaining  the  level  of  Water  Services
      Development  Plans  (WSDPs),  must  be  based   on   action   by   the
      municipalities as well as provincial and national departments, develop
      strategies to  provide  an  interpretation  and  response  to  service
      delivery in respective provinces.
    • To investigate water and sanitation services delivery, water resources
      management and sustainable forests management.
2.    Functions of Water and Sanitation

The functions  of  water  and  sanitation  are  particularly  important  for
several reasons.  Firstly, these are major revenue-generating functions  for
many municipalities.  Secondly, they  are  highly  complex  functions  since
they  combine  infrastructure  design  and   provision,   natural   resource
management,  operations  and  maintenance,  credit  control  and   community
awareness  issues  (for  example,  health,   hygiene,   and   infrastructure
maintenance).  Making effective policy decisions for  water  and  sanitation
is a challenging task for any municipality.

The Department of Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  proposed  that  the  ‘Water
Services  Authority’  (WSA)  function  be  distinguished  from  the   ‘Water
Services Provider’ function.  The former refers to  policy-making,  guidance
and oversight.  The latter refers to the  actual  operations  of  water  and
sanitation systems.  In many parts of the country,  District  Municipalities
have been designed as Water Service Authorities, with  Local  Municipalities
(or non-state agencies) functioning as Water Service Providers.[1]

3.    General Findings

The general findings, of these visits reflected the following:

    • Generally, the IDPs  are  a  municipality-owned  and  driven  process.
      However, in some  instances,  the  IDPs  have  not  been  sufficiently
      strategic as the conditions  such  as  insufficient  skills,  lack  of
      control over resources of provincial  and  national  departments  pose
      certain constraints to service delivery.
    • Many IDPs are rather generic, and insufficiently focused on the unique
      advantages of a particular location.
    • In some instances, the national directive of  providing  6KL  of  free
      basic water to the communities was not adhered to.
    • Municipalities often complained about limited funding  and  asked  for
      increased funds to fulfil the mandate of attaining the 2008  and  2010
      targets.
    •    Intersectoral    collaboration    and    partnerships     regarding
      responsibilities and resources in many places are split  amongst  many
      role-players and therefore the benefits of service  delivery  are  not
      seen within the communities.
    • In particular, in some areas, the delegation noted no access to  clean
      and safe sanitation.
    • Varying programmes within the sanitation rollout pose  disparities  in
      service delivery.
    • Certain municipalities have been able to go beyond 6  free  kilolitres
      of water and offer up to 10 free kilolitres of water.
    • Maintenance and operations plans are mostly absent.
    • In some instances, integrated plans  between  education,  housing  and
      health remain a challenge in the provision of water and sanitation.
    • There is insufficient research undertaken to provide appropriate water
      and sanitation options to specific communities.
    • Services, mainly sanitation  does  not  take  into  consideration  the
      impact of women and the physically challenged.

Despite the political will to devolve the management of water  resources  to
the local level, numerous challenges are forcing the state to play the  role
of initiator, facilitator, referee and regulator, in the meantime.  Some  of
the reviewed challenges in this shift encompass the following:

    • In spite of some progress, there continues to be serious  backlogs  in
      service provision in many Municipalities. Most Municipalities are  not
      even service providers of water.  In other Municipalities,  there  are
      still problems with the installation of functioning water meters; thus
      casting serious doubts about claims that free basic services are being
      provided.
    • In some instances, it is unclear how indigent  policies  or  registers
      are administered or how often these are updated.  Many  Municipalities
      continue  to  encounter  difficulties  in  updating   their   indigent
      registers; often the onus is left on individual community  members  to
      come to Municipalities to provide the necessary information when their
      status or circumstances have changed. There  is  no  profiling  within
      Municipalities, of what constitute indigents, to determine the  socio-
      economic status of communities to  better  inform  decision-making  or
      needs analysis to provide better and quality services to those who are
      in need.
    • Metropolitan areas display relatively  well-developed  infrastructure,
      for water and sanitation service  delivery,  as  most  properties  are
      metered  and  have  water  borne  sanitation.  However,  outside   the
      metropolitan areas,  and  particularly  in  informal  settlements  and
      farms, households continue to use the Ventilated Pit  Latrines  (VIPs)
      and a number still use the bucket system. Most are  not  metered.   In
      many  instances,  families  are  faced  with  having   no   sanitation
      facilities at all.
    • In his 2005 State of the Nation Address, the  President,  stated  that
      the capacity within Municipalities and Local Government  needs  to  be
      developed for them to deliver appropriate services to  the  people  of
      South Africa.   Capacity is a pre-condition for a  proper  functioning
      local government and in order for Municipalities  to  discharge  their
      constitutional and legislative mandates  of  quality  and  sustainable
      service delivery. Capacity is more than  training.  Capacity  includes
      institutional  capacity,  management  capacity,  skills   development,
      financial capacity, etc. Although there continues to be some  form  of
      capacity   building   programmes   and    assistance    received    by
      Municipalities, this is not necessarily focused or  targeted  to  meet
      the  specific  needs  of  Municipalities.  Many   Municipalities   are
      experiencing difficulties related to capacity or  lack  thereof.  Some
      Municipalities are encountering capacity problems  relating  to  human
      resources, project management and financial management, in particular.


    • In spite of  claims  by  many  Municipalities  that  their  Integrated
      Development Plans (IDPs)  are  linked  to  their  budgets,  there  are
      reports that refute this and shows that in many Municipalities,  there
      is, in fact, a lack of funds to implement  IDP  projects.  It  appears
      that Municipalities sometimes use funds to maintain infrastructure and
      not to implement IDP projects, for instance. This  also  highlights  a
      need  for  greater  alignment  of  IDPs  with  Provincial  Growth  and
      Development  Strategies,  which  will  streamline  funding  and  allow
      greater co-ordination of projects.
    • In many instances, the lack of skills for specific tasks poses a  huge
      challenge.

Meetings and site visits undertaken by the Portfolio Committee

4.    KwaZulu-Natal

4.1   Department of Water Affairs and Forestry

A provincial overview by the officials of the Department  of  Water  Affairs
on the status of water and sanitation provision reflected the following:

    • The Province’s 14 Water Services Authorities  (WSAs)  are  responsible
      for ensuring access to sustainable services.
    • The local government sources of National funds for water services  are
      the  Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG)   and   equitable   share
      allocations.  The Water Services component of the  MIG  allocation  is
      based on a 52% guideline,  and  the  water  and  sanitation  split  is
      estimated at 73% and 27% respectively (73% and 27% of 52%).

In providing detailed statistical information on service  provision  to  the
number of people  in  KwaZulu-Natal,  Table  1  below  provides  demographic
information for the Province, and Table 2 details the population  that  does
not have access to a basic level of  service.   In  both  tables,  the  DWAF
figure is based on the 2001 census information  and  updated  to  take  into
account services delivered through  MIG,  Department  of  Housing  and  DWAF
funded programmes.   The  Water  Services  Authorities  provided  the  Local
Government figure during an information  reconciliation  process  undertaken
in December 2004.

Table 1:  Total number of people and households in KZN
|WSA Name       |Total          |Total Households|Total         |Total         |
|               |Population     |(DWAF)          |Population    |Households    |
|               |(DWAF)         |                |(LG)          |(LG)          |
|Ugu DM         |               |                |              |              |
|               |758,534        |170,188         |669,853       |143,437       |
|Umgungundlovu  |               |                |              |              |
|DM             |399,134        |96,436          |414,740       |100,665       |
|Uthukela DM    |               |                |              |              |
|               |718,326        |154,741         |656,964       |134,900       |
|Umzinyathi DM  |               |                |              |              |
|               |489,308        |101,337         |456,468       |93,157        |
|Amajuba DM     |               |                |              |              |
|               |145,502        |28,780          |176,883       |34,819        |
|Zululand       |               |                |              |              |
|               |871,807        |164,806         |943,715       |165,564       |
|Umkhanyakude DM|               |                |              |              |
|               |621,186        |115,446         |494,131       |89,842        |
|Uthungulu DM   |               |                |              |              |
|               |638,169        |117,076         |596,781       |104,358       |
|llembe DM      |               |                |              |              |
|               |597,152        |134,589         |559,482       |120,319       |
|Sisonke DM     |               |                |              |              |
|               |329,808        |83,735          |408,414       |98,890        |
|Ethekwini      |               |                |              |              |
|               |3,346,733      |894,717         |3,100,000     |717,381       |
|Msunduzi LM    |               |                |              |              |
|               |591,484        |146,362         |530,510       |130,990       |
|Newcastle LM   |               |                |              |              |
|               |362,640        |81,355          |364,956       |80,564        |
|Umhlathuze LM  |               |                |              |              |
|               |329,562        |80,291          |279,729       |70,458        |
|Total          |               |                |              |              |
|               |10,199,345     |2,369,859       |9,652,626     |2,0085,345    |









Table 2: Number of people and  households  without  access  to  basic  water
services
|WSA Name       |Total          |Total Households|Total         |Total         |
|               |Population     |(DWAF)          |Population    |Households    |
|               |(DWAF)         |                |(LG)          |(LG)          |
|Ugu DM         |               |                |              |              |
|               |364,966        |260,389         |268,353       |405,594       |
|Umgungundlovu  |               |                |              |              |
|DM             |87,444         |170,223         |132,740       |215,913       |
|Uthukela DM    |               |                |              |              |
|               |264,170        |274,715         |249,129       |368,921       |
|Umzinyathi DM  |               |                |              |              |
|               |222,001        |174,968         |327,328       |361,683       |
|Amajuba DM     |               |                |              |              |
|               |76,521         |94,396          |97,074        |142,037       |
|Zululand       |               |                |              |              |
|               |230,178        |302,132         |643,336       |476,338       |
|Umkhanyakude DM|               |                |              |              |
|               |284,903        |355,147         |261,931       |388,895       |
|Uthungulu DM   |               |                |              |              |
|               |234,468        |413,949         |383,922       |465,903       |
|King Shaka DM  |               |                |              |              |
|               |228,550        |297,770         |262,703       |329,752       |
|DC43DM         |               |                |              |              |
|               |84,715         |159,001         |272,252       |259,808       |
|Ethekwini      |               |                |              |              |
|               |360,642        |673,269         |321,124       |805,901       |
|Msunduzi LM    |               |                |              |              |
|               |112,715        |198,107         |32,198        |327,583       |
|Newcastle LM   |               |                |              |              |
|               |86,494         |51,015          |50,356        |117,321       |
|Umhlathuze LM  |               |                |              |              |
|               |36,302         |118,148         |38,363        |51,336        |
|Total          |               |                |              |              |
|               |2,673,069      |3,543,229       |3,340,809     |4,716,985     |



4.1.1 Challenges

The most  significant  challenges  to  ensuring  sustainable  water  service
provision in KZN include the following:

      Financial constraints

The cost to eradicate the backlog in  KwaZulu-Natal  is  estimated  at  R3.2
billion.  With the current (2005/06) MIG allocation of  approximately  R400m
for water, it will allegedly take  8  years  (2012/2013)  to  eradicate  the
water backlog in the province.  If the MIG water allocation is increased  by
10% per annum, this target can  allegedly  be  achieved  two  years  earlier
(2010/2011).

      Dispersed consumers and difficult topography

A number of the easier to  supply  areas  have  been  served  and  the  more
dispersed and  isolated  dwellings  still  require  services.   These  areas
require infrastructural  assistance  to  enhance  service  delivery.   Where
dwellers are 400m apart,  a  basic  water  supply  will  require  that  full
pressure tap be supplied to each dwelling.

      Operation and maintenance resources

Most municipalities have insufficient  resources  to  operate  and  maintain
infrastructure.   The  provision  of  new  infrastructure   and   inadequate
maintenance  to  existing  schemes  can  result  in  services  failing   and
therefore increasing the backlog.

      Local government capacity constraints

Some municipalities have  capacity  problems  when  it  comes  to  planning,
approving and implementing capital projects.  Cognisance and due  care  must
be given to the time required  to  plan  the  implementation  and  long-term
operation and maintenance of the scheme.

      Lack of funds for bulk supply and higher levels of services

Some areas require  regional  bulk  projects  that  required  large  capital
investments.  Better usage of the Municipal Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG)  is
required.

      Higher levels of service funding

Many municipalities have problems topping  up  the  MIG  to  provide  higher
levels of service.

      Inadequate water resource planning

Scheme failures due to failure of  the  water  resource  must  be  prevented
through thorough planning and water feasibility investigations.

4.1.2 General Recommendations

It is therefore recommended that:

    • More assistance on the WSDPs plans are required.
    • Municipalities need to rethink the information, in terms of  resources
      required, in the IDPs.
    •  Flexibility  should  be  applied  in  the  application  of  policies;
      particularly  in  difficult  topography  areas  and  where  settlement
      patterns are disperse.
    •  The  WSAs  long-term  decisions  regarding  water  service   provider
      arrangement must be finalised and suitable contractual arrangement put
      in place.  Water Service Provider business plans  should  be  prepared
      and regulation of WSP must be addressed.
    • Support to be provided by Department of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry
      (DWAF), the South African Local Government Association and  Department
      of Traditional and Local Government Affairs (DTLGA) for adequate water
      services and water resources planning not covered by project  specific
      feasibility investigation.

 2. Ugu District Municipality

The demographics of the district remain unchanged as  a  noticeable  pattern
of uneven development prevails.  On the one  hand,  there  is  a  noticeable
rural-urban divide, coupled with high levels of poverty in rural areas.   In
the 2003/04 IDP review process, communities have reaffirmed  their  priority
needs, as encapsulated in the Ugu  IDP  2002.   While  community  priorities
vary across different segments, ranking of priority needs  in  the  district
as a whole has seen ‘access to basic services’ as a top  priority.   It  has
also been noted that poverty and job creation have also  been  expressed  as
issues that need to be addressed urgently. The district  has  a  significant
number of people living below the minimum wage level.  This means  that  the
district has to budget on an annual basis for indigent support to  alleviate
the plight of needy residents.

The  status  quo  of  water  and  sanitation  services  for   the   district
municipality showed that in 2002, there was a 40% backlog for  water  and  a
60% for sanitation.  Of the 2005/06 MIG allocation of R95 million,  20%  was
allocated to sanitation and 60% for  water.   The  remaining  20%  of  these
funds would be utilised for community facilities.

All municipalities submitted their 2002 IDP’s and their 2003  Reviews.   The
Member of the Executive Council (MEC) noted substantial improvements to  the
original IDP document.  The  municipalities  have  begun  working  on  their
2005/06 Review to refine elements and to further facilitate compliance  with
the Municipal Systems Act.

In terms of the Local Economic Development (LED, the  unemployment  rate  is
estimated at 23%.  More than 80% of the households earn less than R1  600  a
month.  The securing of funding for LED strategies remains a challenge.

It is therefore recommended that:

    • A strengthening of the indigent support register was needed.
    • A concerted effort was needed to accelerate the delivery of water  and
      sanitation programme through considering whether the area  was  to  be
      declared a disaster area.
    • Long-term strategies were needed to minimise the impact of drought.
    • There was a need to reduce debt, water loss and maintenance costs.

 3. Zululand District Municipality

The ZDM is situated in northern KwaZulu-Natal (KZN). It covers  an  area  of
14,808 km2 and is divided  into  five  local  municipalities  (LMs),  namely
eDumbe (KZ261), uPhongolo (KZ262), Abaqulusi (KZ263), Nongoma  (KZ265),  and
Ulundi (KZ266). The area has recently  transferred  Wards  16  and  18  from
Ulundi LM to  uMzinyathi  DM.  The  district  is  predominantly  rural  with
commercial farmland interspersed by protected areas,  towns,  and  dense  to
scattered  rural  settlements  within  traditional  authority   areas.   The
majority of these rural settlements are small, making  service  delivery  to
these remote areas extremely costly. The  ZDM  comprises  1,022  settlements
divided into 15  urban  areas,  64  dense  settlements,  290  villages,  547
scattered settlements and 106 farm settlements.

The ZDM is legally obliged to provide the consumers  within  their  area  of
jurisdiction with  access  to  basic  water  services.  Basic  services,  or
minimum supply standards, have been defined by National  Government  through
a regulation, and it  is  to  these  national  standards  that  the  ZDM  is
planning on alleviating the water services backlogs. Basic water  supply  is
25l per capita per day, or 6kl per household per  month,  within  a  walking
distance of 200m from the homestead (other  technical  data  also  applies).
Basic sanitation provision is essentially a ventilated  improved  pit  (VIP)
latrine. The  consumer  units  are  divided  per  settlement  type,  however
projections for  the  backlog  alleviation  per  settlement  type  over  the
implementation period still need to be assessed. The objective is to  ensure
equitable access to water services for the population,  however  a  consumer
unit is a billable unit and therefore a consumer unit is a household. As  at
base year 2003/2004 there were 97,113 consumer  units  supplied  with  water
and  44,768  consumer  units  provided  with  sanitation  to  the  requisite
standards. Therefore the backlogs for water and sanitation are 41%  and  72%
respectively. Further detail is  required  on  the  public,  commercial  and
industrial consumers within the ZDM.

All municipalities submitted their 2002 IDP’s as well as their 2003  reviews
to the MEC.  The municipalities have begun  their  2005/06  IDP  Review  for
further compliance with the Municipal Systems  Act.   Further  attention  is
required on environmental management, disaster and performance management.

In terms of the LED, the district as a whole has  an  unemployment  rate  of
24%.  70% have an income of less than R800 a month.

The challenges mentioned by the DM officials encompassed the following:

    • The timber from Zululand is taken to other provinces or countries  for
      saw-milling  purposes,  and  this  the  impacts  on   the   employment
      opportunities for the local communities.
    • The District Municipality is  to  look  into  the  Reconstruction  and
      Development Programme (RDP) standard of water provision.
    • A database of existing standpipes is unavailable.

It is therefore recommended that:

    • Issues of poverty need to be addressed.
    • Policies need to be revised so that every household,  in  the  future,
      would be provided with water.
    • To undertake a detailed study to locate  existing  underground  pipes,
      and standpipes.

 4. Meeting with His Majesty, King Goodwill Zwelithini

The Committee had an interesting meeting with King Goodwill Zwelithini,  who
provided insights on some of  the  issues  that  impact  negatively  on  the
water, sanitation and forestry sectors in KwaZulu-Natal.

On issues pertinent  to  the  forestry  sector,  the  King  highlighted  the
following:

    • The tea plantations that worked well  in  the  past  were  financially
      funded and created job opportunities for the communities living in the
      area.  However, DWAF in  taking  the  initiative  to  cut  down  large
      plantations of trees and carting it to sawmills in Vryheid instead  of
      utilising local infrastructure is disadvantaging this community.
    • The rationale for moving timber from KwaZulu-Natal to other  parts  of
      the country to process was highly  problematic.   This  increased  the
      unemployment and takes projects away from communities.
    • There is a need for the government to allocate funds to  black  people
      to own projects and expertise is needed to empower these communities.
    •  Not  much  has  been  seen  of  Black  Economic   Empowerment   (BEE)
      initiatives, as outlined in the Forestry Charter, in this region.

On issues pertinent to water resources, the King highlighted the following:

    • An input in July 2005 on the Water Allocation Reform from the monarchy
      reflected some of the concerns of water distribution in  this  region.
      DWAF experiences problems in that although water is  allocated  for  a
      specific number of households, the movement of people and the creation
      of settlements challenge the resources.
    • In one instance, R3 million was allocated to the building of a dam  in
      Invuma.   Although  the  developers  were  warned  of  the  prevailing
      unsatisfactory conditions, such as build up of soil and sand from  the
      banks of the Invuma River, went ahead and built the dam.  In  a  short
      space of time, the dam was filled with sand and soil.
    • Although the St. Lucia area has been declared a World  Heritage  Site,
      oil pollution in this area is a major problem.
    • The skewed distribution of water to  communities  as  opposed  to  one
      commercial farmer, Mr Senekal, accessing the bulk of the  water  needs
      serious attention.  Poor  people  queue  through  the  night  to  fill
      buckets.

Response  to  His  Majesty,  King  Zwelithini  by  the  Chairperson  of  the
Portfolio Committee:
    • The Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry plays a critical
      role in the  passing  of  laws  pertinent  to  water,  sanitation  and
      forestry issues.  In terms of the Committee’s oversight functions,  it
      is necessary to also critically examine the changing  responsibilities
      of  DWAF,  in  terms  of  transference  of  obligations  with  service
      delivery.
    • It is  also  crucial  that  the  Portfolio  Committee  understand  the
      difficulties experienced by  the  Municipalities  in  translating  new
      functions.   These  issues  can  be  raised  at  Parliament  with  the
      Minister, and timely interventions can be undertaken.
    • The Constitutional right of people to services  does  not  necessarily
      transform to water allocation reform, but incorporates  other  sectors
      on the question of a better life for all citizens in South Africa.

 5. uMzinyathi District Municipality

The District Municipality is located in Northern KZN  and  the  major  towns
include Dundee and Greytown.  The municipality extends over approximately  8
079 km² with a total population of  479  938.   17  tribal  authorities  are
found within the district boundary.

The DM joined forces with other  WSA’s  (Newcastle  LM  and  Amajuba  DM  to
establish uThukela Water (Pty).  A 30 year-long term service  agreement  was
signed.  The WSDP was finalised and adopted in March  2005  and  the  DM  is
currently in the process of reviewing it in order to enhance it.  The DM  is
participating in the processes of uThukela Catchment Management Agency.

Umzinyathi DM has improved lives for many destitute communities through  the
development of many schemes (water and sanitation).  1 July 2003 –  3kl  for
urban and 6kl for rural. 1  July  2005,  6kl  for  all,  except  businesses.
Operation and Maintenance Costs – No  Income.  The  rural  schemes  cost  of
basic service is R35/KL. There is deterioration in service delivery.

All municipalities prepared, completed and submitted their  2003  IDP.   All
have completed the 2003 Review and submitted their plans as  a  ‘family’  of
municipalities.  This was undertaken for the  MEC  to  facilitate  alignment
between the municipalities.  All have  begun  working  on  the  2005/06  IDP
Review  to  further  improve  aspects  such  as  Institutional  Development,
Environmental Management and Performance Management Systems.
In terms of LED, there is severe poverty in this District.  As a whole,  the
district has an unemployment rate of 25%.  More than 80% of households  earn
less than R1 600 a month.  The largest  proportion  of  poor  households  is
located within the rural municipalities.

The challenges mentioned by the DM officials encompassed the following:

    • Financial constraints – eradicate backlogs against current MIG  annual
      allocations.
    • Dispersed consumers and difficult topography – supply areas.
    • Operation and maintenance resources – resources  in-house  to  operate
      and maintain infrastructure.
    • Local government capacity constraints – capacity in-house for planning
      and improving capital projects.
    • Lack of funds for bulk supply and higher levels of services –  capital
      investments; expansion of existing infrastructure.
    • Higher levels of service of funding – top-up funding for the provision
      of HLOS.
    • Inadequate water resource planning – scheme failures.

It is therefore recommended that:

    • Increase resources – financial and human.
    • Development of a WSP monitoring model.
    • Support by DWAF and DTLGA for water services and resource planning.
    • Financial support required of R9, 5 million for the current short-term
      measures.

 6. Umkhanyakude District Municipality
Umkhanyakude DM is the Water Services Authority in the area.   There  are  5
Local Municipalities in the area (Umhlabuyalingana, Jozini, Hlabisa,  Big  5
False Bay and Mtubatuba).

All municipalities  submitted  their  2002  IDP’s  to  the  MEC.   All  also
completed the 2003 Review.  All municipalities have begun their 2005/06  IDP
Review.

In terms of the Local  Economic  Development  (LED),  the  district  has  an
unemployment figure of 22% and approximately 70%  of  households  earn  less
than R800 a month.

The  status  quo  of  water  and  sanitation  services  for   the   district
municipality showed that in February 2005, there  was  a  46,99%  access  to
water, 21,30% access to sanitation and 58,55% access to free basic water.

The number of boreholes showed that of the 250 assessed, 150 were  repaired.
 Of the 100 schemes assessed, 100 were rehabilitated, and  4  water  tankers
were purchased, 4 hired and 5 repaired.

In the Esihligwini and  Gwliweni  areas,  falling  within  the  Umkhanyakude
District Municipality,  representatives  noted  that  there  is  no  running
water, (in the form of standpipes, etc).   People  walk  long  distances  to
streams or dams, and most times, these sources have dried up.  If  water  is
ferried to the people by tankers, people queue as early as two or  three  in
the morning to collect this much-needed resource.

An input of the situation under the Jozini Municipality reflected a  serious
problem with broken  water  pumps,  no  big  dam  or  functioning  boreholes
servicing the area.  Although an official  from  the  Unkhanyakude  District
Municipality, who is the Water  Service  Authority,  provided  explanations,
these were unfavourably received by the health sector.

The  challenges  noted  by  the  officials  of  the  district   municipality
reflected the following:

    • Maintenance and operation plans are needed.
    • Water services rollout is inadequate.
    •  There  are  a  number  of  backlogs  and  access  to  services  needs
      improvement.

It is therefore recommended that:

    • Assistance with regard to IDP and WSDP plans.
    • An immediate intervention to allow communities access to  their  basic
      water rights.

 7. Ilembe District Municipality

The previous Regional council of ILembe was located on the  east  coast  but
divided  into  two  geographical  portions.   The   re-demarcation   process
incorporated most  of  the  southern  portion  into  eThekwini  Metropolitan
Municipality, while the  northern  portion  remained  largely  unchanged  as
ILembe Local Municipality.  Two new local municipalities  were  established:
Ndwedwe and Maphumulo.  Local municipalities of this  district  municipality
include:   eNdondakusuka  Municipality,  KwaDukuza  Municipality,  Maphumulo
Municipality and Ndwedwe Municipality.

All municipalities submitted their 2002 IDP’s to the MEC for  assessment  as
well as their 2003  Reviews.   All  have  begun  their  2005/06  Review  for
compliance with the Municipal System Act.
The input that  follows  reflects  the  first  hand  experiences  and  lived
realities of community members in the Ilembe District Municipality.

Ilembe District Municipality:

      Sonkombo (Ward 8 and 10)

    • There is a reservoir that supplies Kwambase  but  this  reservoir  has
      dried up (Ward 10)
    • An engineer was sought to deal with the above issue but has not  lived
      up to meet his obligation of July 2005.
    • Standpipes serviced  some  parts  of  the  area.   In  two  instances,
      however, people used plastic containers to  catch  the  run-off  water
      from leaves that overhung from the mountain, and, in the other, people
      shared a small pool of muddy water with animals (Ward 8).
    • The above poses a health risk to the community and burdens  the  lives
      of the people even further.  This is particularly difficult for  women
      and children and impacts other areas of peoples’ lives.
    • People are still walking long distances to collect water from  streams
      that are polluted.
    • The numerous water services projects installed are unable to meet  the
      needs of the people, and it remains continuously dysfunctional.

 8. Joint Meeting Held at the Mosvold Hospital with representatives  working
    in the Health, Education, Justice and the Tribal Authorities Sector

A joint meeting held at the Mosvold Hospital  with  representatives  working
in the  Health,  Education,  Justice  and  the  tribal  authorities  sector,
highlighted the following issues:
      Health Issues

    • Since October 2004, the water  supply  to  the  Mosvold  Hospital  and
      clinics in this area is a problem.
    • Up until June 2005, there have been numerous cuts in the water supply.
       This not only affects the hygienic conditions for  the  patients  but
      makes it difficult to take X-rays as this process needs water
    • The non-availability impacts on the health services of the  community.
      Patients have to be turned away as the system cannot function and this
      compromises proper health services.
    • Even clinics are disadvantaged, as there  is  no  water.   Clinics  at
      times hire water tankers but this is very expensive.
    • Communicable diseases, without proper water facilities, could increase
      in this area.
    • Although the municipality has been contacted, and a number  of  public
      meetings held, there is still no continuous access to water.
    • Most boreholes dry up.
    • Though the hospital is on hilly terrain,  the  study  of  planning  of
      water pipes with an access to the Jozini Dam or the Limpopo  River  is
      not meticulously conducted.  No input and solutions are taken from the
      community and yet the community is the best knowledge base with regard
      to these matters.

      Home-Based Care

    • This project assists approximately 800 patients, most of whom are  HIV
      positive.  Since these people  are  so  ill,  they  cannot  walk  long
      distances and water is an essential part of their care.   Most  often,
      the home-based carers carry water or walk the distance to carry  water
      for these patients.
    • The income generating projects purchased tanks for the use of a number
      of garden  projects.   These  tanks  do  not  have  enough  water  and
      therefore the community garden projects are not sustainable.

      Child-Headed Households and Orphans

    • There are a number of child headed households  and  children  have  to
      walk 10 kilometres or more.  The public tanks charge 25 cents a  litre
      and many people cannot afford even this amount.
    • The projects  dealing  with  children’s  issues  rely  extensively  on
      volunteers from overseas.

      Education

    • The impact of children having to walk long distances to water  sources
      on their education is quite critical.   In  some  instances,  children
      cannot go to school, as they have to fetch water for their families.
    • Water is an important source of food provision and production, and  at
      times, children  are  quite  hungry.   This  adversely  affects  their
      involvement in their schooling and could have a  long-term  effect  on
      their academic input.

      Justice

    • An essential service such as justice was unable to access water whilst
      the court was in session.
      Tribal Authorities from KwaMngomezulu/KwaNyawo and      Mathenjwa

The tribal authorities expressed their  concern  by  the  above  communities
affected by serious water shortages in Ingwavuma District under  the  Jozini
Municipality.  The representatives maintained that the Shemula Water  Supply
Scheme is of no value  to  immediate  communities  as  the  pumps  installed
earlier broke down, and the entire  system  failed  to  serve  its  intended
purpose.

      Recommendations

The following incorporated recommendations  were  proposed  to  resolve  the
water problem in this Municipality:

   1. Whilst the Portfolio Committee visited Wards 8 and 10 in the  Sonkombo
      region, falling under the Ilembe District Municipality,  there  is  an
      urgent need to investigate the conditions of service delivery  in  the
      entire Sonkombo region.
   2. The construction of a big dam  by  blocking  Usuthu  River  Water  and
      thereby pumping water into NODAL water  reservoirs  at  the  following
      headmen constituencies in Ward 14, 15 and 17 of Inkosi  Mathenjwa  and
      Inkosi Mngomezulu, respectively.
        a. Ekuhlehleni Area.
        b. Emanyiseni Area.
        c. Engonyameni Area.
        d. Nkungwini Area.
   3. Another dam can also be built by blocking the Ingwavuma River  at  the
      Esiweni area.
        a. The water could assist the farming communities of Inkosi  Nyawo,
           Inkosi Mngomezulu and Inkosi Mathenjwa.
   4. The blocking of certain river valleys can be of  great  importance  to
      vegetable farming communities, as well as for the livestock.
   5. Water supply systems can also be installed  in  the  Western  part  of
      Inkosi Nyawo through Hlathikhulu Forest or  Esihlangwini  Area.   This
      will help the local community and that of Ingwavma Town.
   6. Need a limited amount of funding, to link the Shemula Scheme  to  this
      area.  If funds are given to upgrade the  scheme  and  utilise  bigger
      pumps, the area will be supplied with water.
   7. Although the terrain is  difficult  to  negotiate  on  an  engineering
      level, there are options, such as utilising closer sources to water to
      service the area.
   8. Sustained studies need to be undertaken in this area  to  utilise  and
      tap into the water resources that are available in this area.
   9. The bulk of the water from the Jozini Dam is being utilised by  a  big
      commercial  farmer,  Mr  Senegal.   Large  consumption  of  water  for
      irrigation purposes is needed, but a skewed distribution of this vital
      source to the community needs immediate address from  the  Departments
      of Land, Agriculture, Water Affairs and Forestry.

In conclusion,  the  community  representatives  noted  that  if  the  above
measures are taken into account as a matter of urgency, the  water  problems
in these  areas  could  be  permanently  resolved  so  that  other  economic
activities could develop in these areas.

Note: The Committee took immediate steps  to  bring  the  attention  of  the
above matters to responsible departments in a  memorandum,  dated  3  August
2005.

4.9 Presentations by Water Boards – KwaZulu-Natal

The presentations from the two water boards mentioned below maintained  that
although the Water Services Authorities have  a  responsibility  to  provide
adequate water services within their areas of jurisdiction, backlogs  cannot
be addressed through stand-alone schemes as they are  unsustainable  without
continual and direct technical, administrative and financial support.

The proposal from the presentations, in terms of their experiences  is  that
although regional bulk supply schemes to improve the water service  delivery
is not the only solution, there are advantages, listed  below,  of  regional
schemes over stand-alone schemes:

    • Sustainability of supply.
    • Rationalisation.
    • Economies of scale.
    • Linking water resources to water supply.
    • Resource/skill sharing.


   1. Mhlathuze Water

The Mhlathuze Water Area of Operation comprises cooperation or  negotiations
with the following municipalities:

    • Mhlathuze and Umkhanyakude  District  Municipality  had  the  original
      agreements, which they entered into in terms of which Mhlathuze  Water
      operated and maintained some of the plants on behalf  of  Umkhanyakude
      District Municipality.
    •  A  new  service  provision  agreement  between  Mhlathuze  Water  and
      Umkhanyakude  District  Municipality  has  been  signed  whereby   UDM
      appointed MW in terms of section 19 of the Act as the  water  services
      provider for the service specified in the agreement.
    • This newly signed agreement supersedes the original agreement.
    •  Negotiations  of  memorandum  of  understanding  with  the  uThungulu
      District Municipality is still underway.
    • MW is still negotiating  a  partnership  with  the  Zululand  District
      Municipality.
    • MW is still working on closer cooperation  with  the  IIembe  District
      Municipality in order to  investigate  ways  and  means  of  promoting
      closer cooperation and coordination between the two bodies with regard
      to water service provision in the municipality’s area.

Mhlathuze Water provided a further input on the areas and  manner  in  which
they partake in the Working for Water Programme.  The following  information
was provided:

    • In KwaZulu-Natal, there are 69  existing  projects,  and  the  uSuthu-
      Mhlathuze WMA, has 18 Working for Water Programmes since 2003.   These
      are in the Goedertouw, Ntambanana and Mfule areas.

   2. Umgeni Water Board

Established in 1974,  Umgeni  Water  is  one  of  Africa's  most  successful
organisations involved in  water  management  and  the  largest  bulk  water
supplier in the province of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. It is  one  of  the
largest catchment-based water utility in  Southern  Africa,  supplying  some
340 000 kilolitres of clean, safe  drinking  water  to  almost  4.8  million
people  annually.  Its  main  customers   include   eThekwini   Metropolitan
Municipality,   Illembe,   Sisonke,   Umgungundlovu   and    Ugu    district
municipalities, and the Msunduzi and Mngeni  local  municipalities,  amongst
others.

     1. Progress towards  implementation  within  Umgeni  Water’s  area  of
        operation

    • Mgeni Regional Scheme – Comprises of a number of sub-components,  viz.
      A planning  investigation  into  the  proposed  future  infrastructure
      requirements to upgrade the main spine has just been completed.
    • The Umbumbulu Bulk Pipeline is currently being constructed.
    • Pre-feasibility  level  planning  of  an  extension  of  the  Wartburg
      Pipeline has commenced.
    • Detailed feasibility planning of the Richmond pipeline is scheduled to
      start in August.
    • North Coast Regional Scheme  -  Detailed  civil  design  is  complete.
      Servitude registration and the environmental assessments are currently
      underway for the North Coast Bulk Pipeline.
    • Mvoti Regional Scheme - Pre-feasibility level planning of this  scheme
      has recently commenced.
    • South Coast Regional Scheme - Construction of the upper portion of the
      South Coast Bulk Pipeline is scheduled to commence  early  next  year.
      Design and environmental assessments are currently underway.
    • Mzintlava Regional Scheme - External consultants  have  recently  been
      appointed to undertake a reconnaissance level  planning  investigation
      based on the conceptual scheme initially presented.  This  study  will
      also guide the configuration of the adjacent schemes.
    •
    •  Mooi  Regional  Scheme   -   The   pre-feasibility   level   planning
      investigation of the Greater Nottingham Road area, which includes  the
      Mooi regional bulk pipeline to Msinga has been completed.
   3. Challenges Highlighted by the Water Boards

    • There is no co-ordination of work between the Water Boards  and  Water
      Service Authorities, and this creates tension and conflict between the
      two, in some instances.
    • Topography of the province poses immense problems to the  construction
      of water pipes to some areas.
    • The blue gum trees use up a lot of water and this depletes  the  water
      resources in the area.
    • Since the areas served by the Mhlathuze Board is  largely  rural,  the
      lack of infrastructure poses a problem.

It is therefore recommended that:

    • Water tariffs must remain affordable and integrated into the IDPs.
    • Risk on financial packages for schemes must be mitigated.
    • Water Services Authorities must work in partnership with Water Boards,
      and  take  ownership  of  what  is  needed  within  their   particular
      constituencies.
    • Water Boards in provinces need to work together for effective  service
      delivery.  The principles outlined in the Constitution, State  of  the
      Nation Address, Millennium Development Goals should be regarded as the
      most important, rather than profit margins.
    • There exists a need to share experiences and capacity with other Water
      Boards in the province, as well as Water Service Authorities, so  that
      the water sector can be strengthened.

Meetings and Site Visits

5.  Mpumalanga
5.1 Department of Water Affairs and Forestry

Mpumalanga Province has three  district  municipalities,  namely,  Ehlanzeni
District Municipality based in  Nelspruit,  Nkangala  District  Municipality
based in Middeleberg and Gert Sibanda based in Secunda.   The  province  has
17 Local Municipalities, all of which are  Water  Service  Authorities,  and
presently three are cross border municipalities  (Kungwini,  Greater  Marble
Hall and Secucuna).

An overview of the  broad  framework  on  issues  of  water  and  sanitation
delivery, reflected the following:

    • The Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Branch aims to ensure
      access to water for economic development, in  particular  Agriculture.
      There is a need to delegate the IWRM to the local  levels  to  redress
      the past imbalances.
    • Sanitation Service Delivery – Progress:   2005/06  Bucket  Eradication
      Programme – there are 34 bucket eradication  projects  running  within
      five municipality areas in the Gert Sibande District Municipality.  Of
      the 34 projects, 2 are VIP projects, while 32  are  waterborne  toilet
      projects. The current budget allocation for bucket eradication is  R27
      240 000.  R834 000 has been spent on the VIP toilets and  R7  397  000
      for waterborne toilets from the  2005/06-budget  allocation.  From  30
      June  2005,  203  VIP  toilets  have  been  built,  523  still   under
      construction, 618 flush toilets have been built and 8 377 still to  be
      constructed.
    • Transfer  Operations  of  schemes:   (check  details  from    original
      source)
    • The Working for Water  Programme  has  employed  3000  employees,  60%
      women, 5% disabled, 35% youth.

The challenges highlighted by DWAF incorporated the following:
    • Municipal Issues:  High indigent levels (as  high  as  80%  per  Water
      Services Authorities) were noted in some areas.   Municipalities  were
      under-staffed and in some cases had low capacity (Thembilise).  Due to
      low rainfall, catchment areas were often stressed.  In some instances,
      there is slow progress with Section 78 and Water Services  Development
      Plans.  The transfer of DWAF Water Schemes and  setting  up  of  newly
      acquired  Water  Service   Authorities   impact   on   municipalities.
      Municipalities  are  experiencing  problems  such  as  high  indigency
      levels, free water, poor record of  cost  recovery,  high  consumption
      levels, inadequate water  conservation  and  water  demand  management
      practices.  Cross border municipalities  pose  problems  in  terms  of
      service delivery.  The MIG is insufficient and the capacity to achieve
      2006 and 2010 targets may be problematic.  At times, there is  a  lack
      of coordination by  sector  departments  in  the  Project  Consolidate
      initiative.
    • Bucket Eradication:  The budget for meeting the sanitation  target  is
      insufficient and may pose a problem.  There are a number of  strategic
      planning gaps in addressing the sanitation issues.   The  funding  for
      sustainability of projects  is  limited.   Within  project  management
      units, there are few sanitation experts in municipalities,  and  there
      appears to be a growing technical skills gap.  The compliance with the
      MIG funding cannot be accessed, as  there  is  no  agreed  format  for
      technical feasibility studies.   There  is  no  stipulated  sanitation
      component of the water services with  the  MIG  allocation.   Critical
      aspects of education, health and hygiene appear to be neglected  under
      the MIG programme.
    • Transfer Operations:  Water tariff issues need to be addressed.  There
      are no proper water management systems in place  to  guide  the  equal
      distribution of water.
    • The Working for Water Programme:  Contractors want to  remain  in  the
      system even when they have completed their training.  There have  been
      allegations of corruption, nepotism  and  fronting  on  this  project.
      Exit policies have been ignored.

It is therefore recommended that:

    • Mechanisms should be set in place to delegate the IWRMs to  the  local
      levels.
    • Systems need to be put in place to ensure equal distribution of water.
       Databases must be created to facilitate this process.
    • The sanitation component has to be seriously viewed  and  placed  into
      the IDPs.
    • The MIG formula should  be  reworked  so  that  other  issues  can  be
      incorporated.
    • DWAF has to assist the province to undertake a proper skills  analysis
      with a view to capacitate.
    • DWAF has to work jointly with the  Department  of  Home  Affairs  with
      regard  to  movement  of  people  across  borders  from   neighbouring
      countries.  In future, this may increase the population of  particular
      provinces and will impact on the provision of water and sanitation.
    • The transfer of schemes to municipalities needs to be more structured.


    • A grey area that also needs redressing is  the  issue  of  bulk  water
      services.  Rules, regulations and systems of cooperation between  bulk
      water services, water service  authorities  and  providers  need  more
      systematic consideration.

5.2   Overview of the Province on Issues Relating to Water,  Sanitation  and
Forestry, Briefing by the MEC on Local Government

In providing an  overview  on  issues  relating  to  water,  sanitation  and
forestry, the MEC,  the  Honourable  Mr  J  Mahlangu  maintained  that  good
working relations exist between the  Departments  of  Local  Government  and
Water Affairs and Forestry in the  running  of  the  water,  sanitation  and
forestry projects.  The Departments are  working  toward  meeting  the  2008
target for access to clean water, and 2010 for sanitation facilities.
In highlighting the challenges  confronted  by  certain  municipalities,  he
noted the following:
    • The province has a huge shortage of water, as the Bronkhornspruit  Dam
      cannot supply  enough  water  for  the  area.   A  pipeline  is  being
      installed to address the water shortage.
    • In some municipalities, the transfer of schemes are in the process  of
      being completed.  In  other  municipalities,  there  are  problems  of
      capacity and limited guidelines on how to proceed with projects.
    • R1, 5 billion would be needed to meet the targets  of  the  Millennium
      Development Goals.
    • Findings show that the Nkangala District Municipality,  Tembilise  and
      Dr Moroka Local Municipalities have limited access to water.
    • R75 million has  been  set  aside  to  fund  a  project  to  eradicate
      approximately 20 000 bucket systems.
    • The Govan Mbeki and Delmas Areas are experiencing problems to  proceed
      with water and sanitation projects.  The MEC has promised to meet with
      the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, Ms B Sonjica,  to  discuss
      the problems and to negotiate for more funding.

It is therefore recommended that:

    • Stronger guidelines need to be devised in terms of how  municipalities
      proceed with projects.
    • The Millennium Development Goals should  be  seriously  considered  in
      terms of service delivery on water and sanitation.
    • Municipalities, to provide the optimum  service,  should  use  funding
      efficiently and appropriately.

5.3   Nkomazi Local Municipality

A shift has been noted in the functioning of  this  Municipality  since  the
Department of Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  arranged  and  implemented  the
Special Intervention Programme (SIP) in October  2004.   The  programme  was
set  up  to  assist  local  municipalities  implement  their  projects   and
undertake proper planning as Water Service Authorities.

In terms of transfers to the Municipality, the Department of  Water  Affairs
and Forestry, that is Operations and Maintenance  facilities  are  now  with
the Nkomazi Municipality as of the 1st July 2005.  All  staff  personnel  of
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,  and  the  Ehlanzeni  District
Municipality will be officially transferred on  the  1st  October  2005,  as
agreed during the road show at Tonga Offices.

In utilising the Municipal Infrastructure Grant  (MIG),  the  following  was
highlighted:

    • The water projects implemented by the local Municipality, that of  the
      Phakama Bulk Line, the  Pipeline  from  Komati  River  to  KamaQhekeze
      Reservoir are completed.
    • The sanitation projects of 2004/05 are  currently  under  construction
      and will be completed by the end of the 30th September 2005.
    • The Nkomazi Municipality has R17,  460  for  water  projects  for  the
      2005/06 financial year, and is  currently  awaiting  the  approval  of
      sanitation funds from DWAF for the 2005/06.

A draft of the WSDP is almost complete, was  scrutinised  by  the  Portfolio
committee, and will be published for public participation.  The IDP is  part
of this initiative.

The Nkomazi Municipality, with regard to Free Basic Services,  according  to
the RDP standards, provides about 60% of water, but this is  inadequate  for
communities.  According to research undertaken, approximately 38%  of  water
is lost every year.

5.3.1 Successes and Challenges

The following successes were noted:

    • There were useful DWAF intervention programmes to  aid  the  technical
      assistants.
    • A review of the WSDP is being undertaken.
    • The compilation of a database for service providers is underway.
    • The drafting of by-laws and policies has already commenced.
    • A 5-year capital programme for projects has been done.
    • A cost recovery programme has commenced  and  as  of  1  August  2005,
      schools, clinics, police stations, hospitals and business sectors  are
      being billed.
    • All MIG projects utilise Chinese materials, provided by DWAF so as  to
      speed up the process of cost recovery programme.

The following challenges were highlighted:

    • The cost recovery programme is  seen  as  a  major  challenge  as  the
      service providers do not have a start-up cost to implement the system,
      including data collection.
    • The Municipality is in the process of formulating  policies,  that  of
      Section 78 (DPLG) and Technical Reports (DWAF).

5.4 Emakhazeni Local Municipality – Visit to Belfast Treatment Plant

The plant supplies water to 3 000  households  and  intends  increasing  the
supply to 3 900 households. The plant is on Phase 1,  an  upgrading  process
to increase the water supply to  other  households.   R4  million  has  been
allocated to run the project, and an additional R4 million  is  required  to
complete it.  The targeted date for its completion is September 2005.

5.5 Gert Sibande District Municipality

The   Gert   Sibande   District   Municipality   comprises    seven    local
municipalities.  72%  of  its  budget  is  spent  on  water  and  sanitation
projects.  The officials from the District Municipality maintained  that  by
2006/07, all communities within the  district  will  have  access  to  clean
water and proper sanitation.

The  water  backlogs  in  this   District   Municipality,   reflecting   the
information on water services of households, as at 31  October  2004,  shows
the following:

|Municipal|Albert |Dipalesen|Govan |Lekwa |Mkhondo|Msukaligw|Pixley|
|ity      |Luthuli|g        |Mbeki |      |       |a        |ka    |
|         |       |         |      |      |       |         |Seme  |
|Water on |20 561 |10 036   |55 186|20 715| 7 115 |26 713   |9 528 |
|site     |       |         |      |      |       |         |      |
|Communal |  6 124|       52|12 034|   4  | 3 183 |     139 |5 497 |
|tap <200 |       |         |      |859   |       |         |      |
|m        |       |         |      |      |       |         |      |
|Communal |  8 312|      314|0     |0     | 3 558 |     139 |1 466 |
|tap >200m|       |         |      |      |       |         |      |
|Without  |  8 749|         |824   |0     | 4 868 |     835 |1 833 |
|water    |       |52       |      |      |       |         |      |
|Total    |43 746 | 10 454  |68 044|25 574|18 724 |27 826   |18 324|

The sanitation backlogs, as at 31 October 2004, reflected the following:

|Municipali|Albert|Dipalesen|Govan |Lekwa  |Mkhondo |Msukaligwa|Pixley ka   |
|ty        |Luthul|g        |Mbeki |       |        |          |Seme        |
|          |i     |         |      |       |        |          |            |
|Waterborne|  6   | 7 893   |55 698|18 669 |  6 740 |26 661    |  7 330     |
|Toile/Sept|562   |         |      |       |        |          |            |
|ic Tank   |      |         |      |       |        |          |            |
|Ventilatio|10 499| 1 202   |  5   |0      |  1 499 |      278 |  4 563     |
|n Improved|      |         |448   |       |        |          |            |
|Pit       |      |         |      |       |        |          |            |
|Latrine   |      |         |      |       |        |          |            |
|Pit       |21 873|0        |      |0      |  7 883 |      278 |        0   |
|Latrine   |      |         |626   |       |        |          |            |
|Bucket    |  1   | 1 254   |  7   | 6 138 |     355|      609 |  6 431     |
|System    |750   |         |464   |       |        |          |            |
|None      |  3   |     105 |      |       |  2 247 |         0|        0   |
|          |062   |         |141   |767    |        |          |            |
|Total     |43 746|10 454   |69 377|25 574 |18 724  |27 826    |18 324      |

5.5.1 Visit to Embalenhle Water and Sanitation Project

There are area taps and water meters have been installed. VIP  toilets  have
been constructed.  The  District  intends  to  convert  VIPs  to  waterborne
toilets when the budget permits.

5.6. Water Services in Dr JS Moroka Local Municipality

The officials noted that the current water  backlogs  at  this  municipality
stood at 31%, while for sanitation, the figure  was  76%.   To  address  the
backlogs, the municipality required a budget of R124 465, 00 for  water  and
R133 760, 00 for sanitation.  The above percentages of  backlogs  are  based
on the 2001 Statistics South Africa figures, with  an  estimated  2%  growth
rate.

The challenges noted by this municipality encompassed the following:

    • There is no metering system for free basic  water,  and  there  is  an
      infrastructure backlog.
    • If the millennium targets  are  to  be  met,  the  municipality  needs
      additional financial resources.
    • The municipality is struggling with management and monitoring tools in
      the operations and maintenance component of their work.
    • The communities are not well informed about the procedures  to  follow
      when reporting leakages.

It is recommended that:

    • More empirical research needs to be undertaken to strengthen databases
      on the provision or lack thereof of water and sanitation services.
    • Other municipalities with best practices, in terms of  the  developing
      of monitoring and management tools should be asked to assist with this
      aspect.
    • In terms of addressing the leakage problems, awareness campaigns  must
      be undertaken by the officials  so  that  communities  understand  the
      processes of informing municipalities/councils of any leakages in  the
      area.

5.6.1 Dr JS Moroka Municipality - Briefing on the STRIP Project

The STRIP project, renamed the Sibambisene Programme has as its objective:

    • The introduction of water saving measures within  the  villages  using
      the bulk of  the  water,  so  as  to  counter  the  cumulative  effect
      experienced by downstream users.

Approximately, 35 – 45% of the area does not  have  adequate  water  supply.
Most households have the basic level of water supply,  and  most  households
do not have a basic level of sanitation service.

The following challenges were noted in this municipality:

    • The operation and  maintenance  of  the  distribution  system  in  the
      Western Highveld Region is unsatisfactory.
    • The condition of the distribution systems have  deteriorated  rapidly,
      leading  to  significant  water  losses,  which  results   in   uneven
      distribution of the available water supplies.
    •  Unclear  institutional  responsibilities  result   in   a   lack   of
      accountability in terms of service delivery.
    • There is hardly or limited focus on customer care or the importance of
      maintenance.
    • There is no monitoring of illegal connections of water pipes.

5.6.2 Visit to Weltevreden Water Treatment Plant

The plant produces 6 ml of water for the supply of  4  local  municipalities
in Inkangala District Municipality.

5.6.3 Visit to Kabedi Sanitation Project

The project produces material for the construction of  VIP  toilets  in  the
Kabedi area.

5.7   Presentations by Water Boards

5.7.1 Bushbuckridge Water Board

The Buckbuckridge Water Board was established in  1997  in  accordance  with
the Water Services Act, Act 108 of 1997.  The Board is responsible  for  the
provision of bulk water services to other water services institutions.   The
Board currently operates in Bohlabela District Municipality,  and  parts  of
the Mbombela Municipality area (serving about 1.2 million people).

Major achievements of this Board include the signing of two  Memorandums  of
Understanding, one with Bohlabela District Municipality and the  other  with
the South African Local Government Association (Mpumalanga).

Challenges confronting the above board comprise the following:

    • Huge cost recovery, both bulk and retail levels.
    • Severe drought conditions which have impacted on rivers and dams.
    • The transfer of personnel was a long and tedious process.
    • Compatibility of staff and infrastructure, in terms of meeting  target
      outputs posed problems, with regard to the training of personnel,  the
      new conditions of employment, staffing levels  and  the  expertise  of
      personnel.
    •  Lack  of  budget  to  implement  capital   projects   (refurbishment,
      realignment of schemes for optimal use).
    • The transfer of pension of employees has not as yet taken place.
    • The signing of water service provider agreements with  water  services
      authorities is at times a problem.
    • The external auditor gave a disclaimer to the Board during the 2003/04
      financial year.  The Board, together with the department, subsequently
      appointed a firm of auditors to conduct  a  forensic  audit  into  the
      activities of the Board.  The report from this Board claims that  they
      are committed to clean governance,  and  thus  reports  from  forensic
      auditors assist in the achievement of good governance.

5.7.2 Inkangala Water Board

The Water board was established in 1999.  A management team  was  formed  to
ensure the functioning.  Though DWAF transferred its assets, transfers  were
not properly managed, as the Board was not involved in this  process.   This
Board needed the attention of the Minister  at  one  point.   The  Minister,
thereafter, formed a new Water Board that consisted of 3 Board Members  from
Rand Water and 3 from the then Water Board.

The Board confronts the following challenges:
    • Insufficient funding to run the activities of the Board.
    • There is a lack of technical expertise.
    • There is a lack of capacity to municipalities served by the Board.
    • There is no clear definition of bulk water.
    • There is no clarity on the future of the Board.

It is recommended that:

    • More proactive work to be undertaken by Water Boards, in  consultation
      with WSAs and WSPs to strengthen water  provision  in  this  province.
      This could entail working toward rules, regulations,  definitions  and
      process that suit the needs  of  the  communities  serviced  by  these
      sectors.

5.8   Forestry: Mpumalanga

5.8.1 Overview of Forestry: Mpumalanga

The functions of the forestry sub-directorate  can  be  divided  into  three
main components, that of direct management of plantations  and  conservation
areas,  the  development  and  restructuring.    The   sections   that   are
responsible  for  these  functions  are:   Commerical  Forestry  (plantation
management),  Indigenous  Forest  Management  (management  of   conservation
areas) and Forestry Advisory Services (development)

      Commercial Forestry

Five  plantations  along  the  Drakensberg  escarpment,  namely  Onverwacht,
Welgevonden,   Hebron,   Salique   and   Mariepskop   plantations   (Lowveld
Plantations).  There are a total of 375 staff members.

A total of approximately 11 000 hectares has been planted with  pine  trees.
Timber is contracted to two sawmills, York Lumber and  Geldenhuys  Sawmills.


Restructuring:  These plantations are to  be  incorporated  with  the  Blyde
River Canyon National Park (BRCNP), to  be  proclaimed  in  September  2005.
The plantations are being removed and the timber supply contracts have  been
cancelled for December 2006,  and  March  2007  respectively.   Thus,  final
transfer will take place during the 2007/08 financial year.

Injaka Plantation:  Has a total of 35 staff  members.   1400  hectares  have
been planted with mainly gum trees and some pine trees.  There is  no  fixed
supply contract and the local contractors do harvesting on tender.

Restructuring:  This plantation will be privatised to a BEE company to  take
over the plantation as a whole.  This is envisaged for 2006.

Issues relating to commercial forestry:   this  function  has  no  dedicated
budget allocation due  to  the  removal  of  this  responsibility  from  the
Forestry budget allocation from Treasury.   It  was  anticipated  that  this
asset would have been transferred to SAFCOL in 2001.  This transfer did  not
take place because of the complications around the York Lumber contract  and
the development of the BRCNP.  Only the national annual income  of  Forestry
is made available by  Treasury  as  a  budget  allocation  for  the  Lowveld
plantations.  This asset can also not be transferred to  the  BRCNP  without
the necessary resources to manage it.  The budgetary  requirement  is  about
R46  million  for  2005/06,  while  the  annual  income   of   Forestry   is
approximately r40 million.


5.8.2 Meeting with Salique Plantation Staff

      Bee Keeping Project

The Beekeepers’ Association (Bushbuckridge Association) was  established  in
March 2000, with a composition of 9 members.  Agriculture  Research  Council
(ARC), Department of Water  Affairs  and  forestry  (DWAF),  DACTS  and  the
Danish   International   Developmental   Agency   (DANIDA)   support    this
association.  BEE keeping is ideal as a resource for  poor  farmers,  as  it
requires low input costs  and  skills  levels,  minimum  infrastructure  and
provides health products, and possible cash income opportunities.

      Medicinal Plant Project

Traditional healers  formed  associations,  that  is,  the  Vukuzenzele  and
Bophelong.  DWAF, DANIDA, Mpumalanga Parks  and  the  Agricultural  research
Council support the projects.

The objectives of the above initiative are to:

    • Establish medicinal gardens and nurseries using traditional  products.
      Processing and packaging of medicinal products such as  creams,  teas,
      powders, and capsules, according to categorised  illnesses,  are  high
      priority of this venture.

The industry has great financial potential if fully developed.

      Participative Forest Management

The Participative Forest Management  in  Forest  Management  represents  the
communities.   The  forest  management  component   provides   training   in
mountaineering,  leadership  and  small  business  skills  for   traditional
healers.  The team envisages beginning courses in  environmental  education.
Global International NGO supports the team with food and transport.

The officials noted the following challenges:

    • Due to inadequate equipment, there is not much success.
    • Project run and initiated by a person with no knowledge of the areas.
    • There is no support from the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry.

Meetings and Site Visits

6.    Northern Cape

6.1   Department of Water Affairs and  Forestry  –  Overview  of  Water  and
Sanitation

6.1.1 Water Resources – Status

The arid climate and limited potential of  water  resources  that  naturally
occur in the water management area are a  major  constraint.   Both  surface
and groundwater sources are nearing full development and utilisation.

Approximately 30% of the population depend  on  ground  water  resources  of
variable quality.  87 settlements depend on  groundwater  resources.   Over-
exploitation of ground water sources in localised areas is a concern  as  19
communities utilise 80% of  resource.   Large  areas  of  the  province  are
dependent on releases from  the  Upper  Orange  and  Middle  Vaal  Catchment
Management Areas.  There are concerns about water quality in the Lower  Vaal
Catchment Management Area due to upstream activities.

6.1.2 Water conservation and demand management

The average per capita of water use in the Northern Cape is 146  litres  per
day with the minimum at 12 and the maximum at 657 litres per day.  A  number
of rural communities in the Namakwe utilise less than 25 litres per day.

It is suggested that those communities utilising more than  200  litres  per
day should engage in water conservation activities.  These  communities  are
Dibeng,  Kururman,  Kathu,  De  Aar,   Vanwyksvlei,   Noupoort,   Williston,
Calvinia, Loxton, Philandersbron, Nieuwoudville, Riemvasmaak and Kenhardt.

6.1.3 Water quality

The following was highlighted in terms of water quality in the province:

    • The western areas of the province are  characterised  by  poor  ground
      water quality in range of Class 2 to Class 3.
    • High levels of Flourides, Nitrates and salinity are found in a  number
      of communities in the central and western region.
    • In the coastal regions, desalination  of  ground  water  is  practiced
      resulting in low availability and high cost of potable water.
    • All surface water is of poor quality and  has  to  be  treated  to  be
      suitable for human consumption.
    • Data sets must be improved to achieve a better  perspective  on  water
      quality.
    • A study was conducted during 2004/05 on  the  drinking  water  quality
      status in the Pixley ka Seme and Siyanda districts.
    • The quality of water discharged – only  Upington  discharges  directly
      into the river and regular audits are done on the quality of the water
      discharged.  Kimberley discharges into Kamfersdam.  Smaller towns make
      use of oxidation ponds.  A licensing procedure is in place but in many
      cases, municipalities do not have resources to comply with this.

6.1.4 Water services authorities (WSA)

All local and  district  municipalities  of  the  Northern  Cape  are  Water
Services Authorities (WSA).  This is more than any other  province  (31  out
of 170 or 18% of the national total),  and  including  Moshaweng  it  is  32
WSAs.  R35 million has  been  approved  for  capacity  development  building
programmes being implemented in  13  WSA  and  another  4  plans  have  been
committed for 2005/06.


6.1.5 Project Consolidate

Priority Municipalities

|Northern Cape           |                                           |
|                        |Siyanda District Municipality              |
|                        |Tsantsabane Local Municipality             |
|                        |!Kheis Local Municipality                  |
|                        |Kamiesberg Local Municipality              |
|                        |!Kai! Local municipality                   |
|                        |Mier Local Municipality                    |
|                        |Kgalagadi District Municipality            |
|                        |Ga-Segonyana Local Municipality            |
|                        |Karoo District Municipality                |
|                        |Siyanquma Local Municipality               |
|                        |Kareeberg Local Municipality               |
|                        |Ubuntu Local Municipality                  |
|                        |Thembelihle local Municipality             |
|                        |Renosterberg                               |
|                        |Namakwa District Municipality              |
|                        |Karoo Hoogland local Municipality          |
|                        |Hantam Local Municipality                  |
|                        |Frances Baard District Municipality        |
|                        |82. Phokwane Local Municipality            |
|                        |83 Dikgatlong Local Municipality           |
|                        |Alfred Nzo District Municipality           |
|                        |84. Umsombovu Local Municipality           |

   6. Water and sanitation supply at schools and clinics
6.1.6.1     Water at Schools and Clinics

622 (93%) schools in the district with 241 670 (97%) learners have  a  water
supply that is on the school site.

All 26 clinics  in  Frances  Baard  have  water  on  site,  except  for  one
(Phomolong clinic in Mogareng).  All 42 clinics in Kgalagadi  have  a  water
supply on site.  All Siyanda’s 34 clinics are served with an adequate  water
supply, except for one, which requires attention.

Some of the challenges highlighted in  delivery  of  water  at  schools  and
clinics reflected the following:

    • Schools:  44 (7%) of schools in the districts of Frances Baard, Pixley
      ka Seme, Kgalagadi, Namakwa and Siyanda do not have a water supply  on
      the school site and  6  397  learners  are  affected.   Although  most
      schools have water on site, many require  Operations  and  Maintenance
      interventions, as the water supply is not assured.  No schools are  on
      the 2005/06-project list of the Northern Cape Department of  Education
      for water projects.  The North West Department of Education has listed
      6 schools in  Moshaweng  and  Ga-Segonyana  (to  be  transferred  from
      Northern Cape) to be supplied with water in 2005/06.
    • Clinics:  Problems at Pixley ka Seme  clinics  are  being  experienced
      (total 24 clinics).
    • Namakwa data outstanding.




6.1.6.2     Sanitation at Schools and Clinics

483 (72%)  schools  with  an  enrolment  of  219  242  (88%)  learners  have
sanitation facilities that meet basic standards.

Sanitation has been addressed at clinics  in  Pixley  ka  Seme  and  Frances
Baard.   All  clinics  in  Siyanda  have  flush   sanitation,   except   for
Riemvasmaak satellite clinic, which has no toilets.

Some of the challenges highlighted in delivery of sanitation at schools  and
clinics reflected the following:

    • Schools:  133 schools  are  still  without  basic  sanitation  and  50
      schools have mixed types of sanitation, for example,  pits  and  flush
      toilets are in use.  The monitoring and evaluation  studies  conducted
      in 2005 reveal that 13% of toilets at schools  are  not  working,  32%
      EnviroLoos, 10%  of  all  flush  toilets  and  1%  pf  VIP’s  are  non
      functional.
    • Clinics:  9 of the 42 clinics in Kgalagadi have  a  sanitation  supply
      that is below basic (21%).

   7. Water and sanitation supply at household level

6.1.7.1     Achievements

    • 90% of households have at least a basic supply of water in respect  of
      a distance of 200m or closer to their homes.
    • Basic sanitation is supplied to 74% of all households.  In  2001,  67%
      households had a basic sanitation supply, and by 2005, the  number  of
      households had increased to 74%.  The decrease in  the  backlog  since
      1996 is attributed to the efforts of all stakeholders,  which  include
      District Municipalities, DWAF, MIG and the Department of  Housing  and
      Local Government.

6.1.7.2     Challenges

    • 48 810 households living in settlements and towns  are  without  basic
      sanitation facilities in  2005,  and  by  2010,  another  18  390  new
      households will be formed that require services.
    • Another 21 718  households  living  on  farms  were  without  a  basic
      sanitation facility, and  by  2010  another  617  households  will  be
      formed.
    • Acceptance of dry  sanitation  in  the  arid  Northern  Cape  requires
      attention, especially in areas  that  do  not  have  sufficient  water
      resources.
    • Current reliable backlog data is lacking from some WSAs,  as  well  as
      the monitoring of backlogs.   This  problem  is  evident  due  to  the
      ongoing projects that address these backlogs, are implemented.
    • To ensure sustainability, the planning of waterborne  sanitation  must
      include the household facility, network, treatment works and return of
      discharge to the environment.

   8. Bucket sanitation

Approximately 16 000 buckets still exist in four districts (Siyanda  –  467,
Namakwa – 1082, Frances Baard  –  8900,  Pixley  ka  Seme  –  5643)  of  the
Northern Cape.

6.1.8.1     Achievements

    • Progress has been made in eradicating bucket  sanitation  with  bucket
      numbers halved in the past 10 years.

   9. Recommendations

    • Water backlogs at schools:  There is a need for improved databases  in
      terms of placing schools on project lists, if services are lacking.
    • Water backlogs at clinics:  There is a need for improved databases  in
      terms of placing clinics on project lists, if services are lacking
    • Sanitation at schools:  A budgetary increase is  needed  to  meet  the
      targets of providing all schools with sanitation at the end  of  2005.
      The Northern Cape can utilise the methods and practices of  the  North
      West in projecting the amount of money needed for  targeted  projects,
      with the inclusion of the two municipalities.
    • Bucket sanitation:  The 2006 target will not  be  met,  and  therefore
      this province needs to look at alternatives in terms of time frame.

  1. Frances Baard District Municipality

Frances Baard is located in the northeastern region of  the  Northern  Cape.
Its head office is situated in Kimberley. The DM consists of  four  Category
B municipalities, namely, Dikgatlong, Magareng, Phokwane and  Sol  Plaatjie.
The DM also looks after a  predominantly  rural  District  Management  Areas
with two small settlements at Dan Carl and Koopmansfontein.

According to figures released in February 2005, access to water in  this  DM
was 85,46%, access to sanitation totalled 90,97% and access  to  free  basic
water was 77,23%.  The status of the WSAs and WSDP submission  to  DWAF  was
adopted at this stage of reporting.

   1. Site Visit to Sol Plaatjie Local  Municipality  –  SIDA-Northern  Cape
      housing initiative

At the Galeshewe Project in the Sol Plaatjie  Municipality,  delegates  were
shown  a  SIDA-Northern  Cape  housing  initiative,   which   utilised   dry
sanitation inside houses.  Whilst  the  SIDA  funded  projects  had  running
water and dry sanitation, the area opposite this project still utilised  the
bucket sanitation.

It is therefore recommended:

    • Design and implementation of projects should include  and  incorporate
      all the residents of a particular community.  Alternatives  should  be
      sought if people struggle to pay for services, but not  providing  any
      access to certain portions of the community is problematic.

6.2.2 Site Visit to Platfontein

Schmidtsdrift was used as a training camp by the then South  Africa  Defence
Force (SADF) after the Batlaping Tribe had  been  forcefully  moved  out  in
terms of the legislation of the past.  In tracing their origin he said  they
are the !Xû and the Khwe with roots in Namibia who  were  fighting  side  by
side with the SADF against the liberation movements in  Namibia  during  the
struggle era. When Namibia became independent in  1990,  the  South  African
Defence Force (SADF) offered its erstwhile  trackers  sanctuary  in  a  tent
town it built for them on a windy plain in  Schmidtsdrift  in  the  Northern
Cape.
Four years later, with the new democratic government, the San believed  they
would be given security of tenure there, but the land was judged  to  belong
to the BaTlhaping, a Tswana group that had  been  removed  from  it  decades
earlier. The San at Platfontein were then relocated from  the  Schmidtsdrift
tent town, which  was  established  to  house  hundreds  of  San  and  their
families who had previously worked for  the  former  South  African  Defence
Force as trackers.

The conditions of living in Schimidsdrift were  never  easy  and  they  were
living in tents since 1990. They were haunted by the fact that  through  the
restitution process the Batlaping were claiming their land  back.  In  1995,
Cabinet tasked the Department of Land Affairs to seek alternative  land  for
the !Xû and the Khwe in Schmidtsdrift. Ultimately land  at  Platfontein  was
identified and an agreement to resettle the !Kû and the Khwe was reached.

Although the Departments of Land and  Housing  have  begun  the  process  of
providing  infrastructure  and  homes  to  the  Platfontein  community,  the
historical complexities of this displaced community of the !Xû and the  Khwe
pose immense problems on a social, economic and political level.

Whilst houses, according to RDP standard have  been  built,  residents  have
refused to move into these houses, claiming that:

    • The houses are of poor quality and incomplete.
    • Dry sanitation methods are unacceptable to most people.
    • Water to residents or 200m standpipes are not connected.
    • Poor accessibility to health facilities.

The challenges noted by the councillors in addressing the concerns  of  this
community are the following:

    • The residents at Platfontein are resistant to any type of  initiatives
      by the Municipality.  Many refuse to move into houses.
    • The clinic built was vandalised and due to the  reasons  cited  above,
      the !Xû and the Khwe refuse to utilise the facilities provided.

It is therefore recommended that:

    • Negotiations and mediation should be looked  at  as  possibilities  to
      resolve the tensions in this community.

   3. Site visit  to  Lindani  or  Transit  Camp  within  the  Sol  Plaatjie
      Municipality

Whilst the municipality is working toward settled households in  this  area,
communities have been shifted from one area  to  another  after  six  month.
Whilst sanitation is perceived as the first priority, this  issue  is  being
viewed in isolation from other service  providers,  such  as  housing,  etc.
Therefore,  one  finds  a  fragmented,  disjointed  and  incomplete  housing
project.

The councillors maintained that the dry sanitation system  was  a  temporary
one and as soon as the  infrastructure  was  formalised,  then  water  borne
systems will be the norm in this area.  Communities, however, complained  of
the unacceptability of the dry sanitation method.

The councillors maintained that the illegal occupations from people  outside
the community poses major challenges to their allocations.  There is also  a
major problem with vandalism in this community.

It is therefore recommended:

    • Councillors should  fast  track  the  building  of  houses  for  these
      communities.
    • An integrated  approach  between  different  sectors  and  departments
      should be the norm in ensuring that communities receive  all  services
      on time.

 2. Kgalagadi District Municipality

Statistics obtained from  this  district  municipality  revealed  that  with
regard to:

    • Household water supply:  78% of  households  have  at  least  a  basic
      supply of water in respect of a distance of 200m or  closer  to  their
      homes.
    • Sanitation: Basic sanitation is supplied to 58% of all households.

The challenges noted by the district municipality reflected the following:

    • Household water supply:  10 380 households living in  settlements  and
      towns do not have potable water within 200m from their homes
    • Household sanitation:  19 628 households  living  in  settlements  and
      towns are without  basic  sanitation  facilities  in  2005.  By  2010,
      another 6 101 new households will be  formed  that  require  services.
      Another 757 households living on farms were without a basic sanitation
      facility. By 2010, another 127 households will be  formed.  Acceptance
      of dry sanitation  in  the  arid  Northern  Cape  requires  attention,
      especially in areas that  do  not  have  sufficient  water  resources.
      Current reliable backlog data is lacking from some WSAs,  as  well  as
      the monitoring of backlogs as projects to address backlogs  are  being
      implemented.  To ensure sustainability,  the  planning  of  waterborne
      sanitation must include the  household  facility,  network,  treatment
      works and return of discharge to the environment.

   3. Site visits with officials  and  communities  of  the  Gamagara  Local
      Municipality and Ga Segonyana Local Municipality within the  Kgalagadi
      District Municipality

The input from this visit revealed the following:

    • The district municipality was identified by the President as  a  rural
      node, and is a water scarce area.  This may worsen in the future.
    • There are two types of sanitation schemes, that of a prefabricated VIP
      system and a self-build scheme.
    • The progress on eradication of backlogs on sanitation was a problem in
      this area, and only 53% of delivery was undertaken.
    • This district municipality  is  also  a  cross  boundary  municipality
      between the Northern Cape and North West, and poses a  few  challenges
      in terms of service delivery.
    • Due to its poor background, there are  large  backlogs  in  water  and
      sanitation delivery in this area.

 3. Siyanda District Municipality

Statistics obtained from  this  district  municipality  revealed  that  with
regard to:

    • Household water supply:  91% of  households  have  at  least  a  basic
      supply of water in respect of a distance of 200m or  closer  to  their
      homes.
    • Sanitation:  Basic sanitation is supplied to 75% of all households.

The challenges noted by the district municipality reflected the following:

    • Household water supply:  1 588 households living  in  settlements  and
      towns do not have potable water within 200m from their homes.  Another
      2 539 households living on farms are without  a  basic  water  supply.
      Current reliable backlog data, other than the  distance  criteria,  is
      lacking.  Backlog data of farms is reliant on the 2001  Census,  while
      the settlement data is current (July 2005).  The cost and implications
      of supplying water borne sanitation must be taken into account in  the
      planning and provision of water supply.
    • Household sanitation:  7 766  households  living  in  settlements  and
      towns are without  basic  sanitation  facilities  in  2005.   By  2010
      another 4 328 new households will be  formed  that  require  services.
      Another 7  021  households  living  on  farms  were  without  a  basic
      sanitation facility, and by 2010, another 1  302  households  will  be
      formed.  Acceptance of  dry  sanitation  in  the  arid  Northern  Cape
      requires attention, especially in areas that do  not  have  sufficient
      water resources.  Current reliable backlog data is lacking  from  some
      WSAs, as well as the monitoring of backlogs  as  projects  to  address
      backlogs  are  being  implemented.   To  ensure  sustainability,   the
      planning of waterborne sanitation must include the household facility,
      network, treatment works and return of discharge to the environment.



It is therefore recommended:

    • The issue of farm workers being able to access  water  and  sanitation
      facilities needs critical consideration.  Negotiations and tax  levies
      on farmers could be one way of providing this service to farms without
      a huge cost to the department or municipality.
    • Databases need to be updated so that progress on delivery/non-delivery
      is noted.

   3. Site visit with Mayors, Councillors,  Project  Leaders  and  community
      representatives of the Tsantsabane Local Municipality and  Khara  Hais
      Local Municipality within the Siyanda District Municipality

The input from this visit revealed the following:

    • Sanitation facilities were made available to the communities,  but  as
      yet, is not of working order.
    • No proper training was given to the community on how to use sanitation
      facilities.
    • The disposal of waste from  the  sanitation  facility  posed  a  major
      challenge.

   4. Site visit with the mayor, councillors, project leaders and  community
      of  Kai  Garib  at  the  Kakamas  Area  within  the  Siyanda  District
      Municipality revealed the following:

The input from this visit revealed the following:

    • In 2004.05, 11 bulk meters (zone meters) in Kakamas were installed  to
      determine water loss.
    • The bulk water service for  89  erven  in  Aughrabies  was  installed.
      Provision for another 22 stands were part of this project.
    • Five hydrants for every block of 20 houses provided  as  most  of  the
      houses are structures built with reeds  or  wood  and  are  frequently
      ravaged by fires/fire accidents.
    • The UDS toilet projects that were recently  completed  comprised:   50
      units in Aughrabies, 130 units in Alheit, 20 units in Lutzburg and  20
      units in Cillier.
    • Some residents are not utilising the UDS toilets in a  proper  manner,
      which leads to smelly toilets.
    • The residents are not maintaining and  cleaning  the  toilets  in  the
      correct way.

 4. Working for Water Project in the Upington Area

The workers on this project noted the following challenges:

    • Payment is often delayed  and  people  wait  a  long  time  for  their
      salaries.
    • The  training  provided  to  effectively  rid  of  alien  species  was
      insufficient.
    • The people charged with this project do not  have  the  capability  to
      draft the exit policy.
    • The issue of quality control has to be addressed.
    • The quality of tools utilised for this project is not very good.
    • Procurement and tendering to contractors for those projects need to be
      evaluated.

Meetings and Site Visits

7.    Eastern Cape

 1. Department of Water Affairs and Forestry in King William’s town

The officials from the Department of Water Affairs and  Forestry  from  King
Williams’s town briefed the Committee members about how the visit  would  be
conducted between the Department, Communities  as  well  as  Councillors  in
order to have a coordinated visit to the Province within OR Tambo and  Chris
Hani District municipalities. The official from  the  Provincial  Department
of Water Affairs and Forestry indicated to the members  that  the  oversight
visit to the Eastern Cape would be fruitful to both the Department  and  the
members of the Community and also to the Members as well.

The leader of the delegation from the Committee, Ms  Manana  indicated  that
the main purpose of visit by the Committee  was  to  see  the  progress  and
processes  that  were  being  done  by  the  Department  as  well   as   the
Municipality in service delivery pertaining to the sanitation,  building  of
latrines and forestation. The Committee would also  be  informed  about  the
challenges that the Community was being faced.

It is therefore recommended that:

    • The Department of Water Affairs officials  together  with  Councillors
      would accompany the visiting members of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
      Water Affairs and Forestry.
    • The Officials from the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry  would
      coordinate all activities on the oversight visit by the members of the
      Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry.

 2. Regional Directorate of Water Quality  Management  Department  of  Water
    Affairs and Forestry, Eastern Cape Region

The members had a short briefing with  the  Regional  Directorate  of  Water
quality management in the Eastern Cape Region.  The  members  were  informed
about the state  of  Duncan  Village  in  terms  of  sanitation,  water  and
conditions of Section B and C  in  Duncan  Village.  One  of  the  officials
informed the members that the  problem  with  Duncan  Village  was  the  bad
conditions of  roads,  limited  washing  facilities,  slow  bucket  toilets,
blocking water supplies and blocking drains.

The official also indicated that the Department of Engineering services  and
Water  Quality  management  in  the  Buffalo  City  Municipality  had   some
interventions in order  to  deal  with  the  issues  that  were  facing  the
community leaving in Duncan Village in Sections B and C.  The  interventions
that were being made by the Department were

    • Awareness campaigns
    • Livelihood based approach
    • Making of toilet paper by the community
    • Provision of food to the Community

It was therefore recommended that:

    • The Members should visit the area so that to see as what was happening
      in the area of Duncan Village Section B and C.

 3. Chris Hani District Municipality
The members were briefed by the Mayor of Chris  Hani  District  Municipality
about the communication that exists between the Province, District  and  the
local Municipalities in terms of service delivery. The members were  briefed
about the project that the Municipality was engaged in.  The  Mayor  briefed
the Committee about Shiloh Irrigation Scheme.  Members  were  informed  that
Shiloh irrigation Scheme was  a  project  where  members  of  the  community
within the areas surrounding Peddie were involved in irrigation scheme.

Chris Hani District Municipality noticed that the project was  deteriorating
and it was not serving the purpose of  providing  people  with  water.   The
Municipality decided to repair and renovate Shiloh dam for  the  purpose  of
providing clean running water as well as for irrigation purposes within  the
surrounding rural areas. The Department of Water Affairs and  Forestry  were
assisting the Municipality.

In 2003 the Municipality was  involved  in  ploughing  maize,  potatoes  and
beans. These products were marketed in East  London.  Campaigns  to  provide
clean running water within the municipalities were  being  intensified.  The
Mayor also raised an issue where an  indication  was  made  that  Ukhahlamba
District Municipality was implementing the water project that  was  supposed
to be implemented by Chris Hani District  Municipality.  The  issue  or  the
process was not communicated to the Municipality concerned

Members wanted clarity as how many people are employed  in  the  scheme  and
who was  financing  those  employees.  Clarity  was  also  sought  on  which
department were involved  in  the  scheme.  Concerning  provision  of  clean
running water members wanted to know  how  many  rural  villages  that  were
affected.  What  was  statistics  information  concerning  sanitation.  What
campaigns was the municipality involved in environmental cleaning.
It transpired that there were no exact  figures  as  how  many  people  were
employed in the  scheme  since  the  people  were  working  for  themselves.
Concerning the involvement of  Departments  in  the  scheme  Departments  of
Agriculture,  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  and  Social  Development   were
identified. In regard to the villages that were not  getting  clean  running
water it emerged that 65% were not having access to clean running water  and
70% were not getting sanitation

It was therefore recommended that:

    • The issue of Water  Project  being  provided  by  Ukhahlamba  District
      Municipality is investigated by the Chris Hani  District  municipality
      and a report be made available to the Committee
    • A detailed report on the state of affairs on  the  activities  of  the
      Chris District Municipality will be made available  to  the  Committee
      Members for their information

 4. OR Tambo District Municipality

The major issues that the OR Tambo District  Municipality  was  facing  were
the issue of providing  water  services  to  all  municipalities  that  were
forming  part  of  the  District  Municipality.  All  Municipalities   meter
readings were not functioning properly  except  the  one  from  King  Sabata
Dalindyebo. Another issue that was raised was the transfer of processing  of
timber  from  Highbury  to  Ugie.  This  had   an   effect   in   employment
opportunities. The Municipality  was  not  consulted  when  the  process  of
transfer was made.

The  OR  Tambo  District  Municipality  also  raised  an  issue   concerning
uncooperative behaviour by the  KSD  Municipality  in  connection  with  the
transfer of water and electricity services. Another issue  that  was  raised
was the issue of treatment of  water  in  ponds  at  Prison.  As  there  are
overflow in the ponds the Directorate of the Engineering  Services  for  KSD
Municipality opened it into the river at night. A letter and a  report  were
given to the Deputy Minister and the MEC for Local  Government  and  Housing
in the Eastern Cape for their consideration and attention  and  no  response
had been received as yet. The OR Tambo Municipality  in  rendering  services
to the Municipalities was experiencing a major backlog and  the  money  that
was needed was in the region of R2, 5 billion.

It was therefore recommended that:

    • The issue of transfer of forestation from Umtata to Ugie  is  reported
      to the Minister.
    • That a meeting between KSD Municipality and OR Tambo  be  convened  in
      order to discuss the issue of overflow at Prison.

 5. Lukhanji Local Municipality

The problem that has been  encountered  by  Lukhanji  Municipality  was  the
issue of housing in terms of coordination between the  Consultants  and  the
Municipality. The condition of road was also the matter that was of  concern
to  the  Municipality.  Condition  of  roads   make   impossible   for   the
Municipality  to  efficiently  and  effectively  provide  services  to   the
Communities

It was therefore recommended that:

    • That the Lukhanji Municipality must work in a coordinated effort  with
      the District  Municipality  so  that  the  problems  that  were  being
      encountered are solved


7.6   Engcobo Municipality

The Municipality of Engcobo  under  Chris  Hani  District  Municipality  was
experiencing the problem of electricity where many of  the  rural  areas  do
not have electricity. The electricity supplier  ESKOM  promised  to  install
electricity. But, later on came  and  indicate  that  there  were  no  funds
available.   It further emerged that in the process of building of  latrines
members of the community were asked to pay for building sand and  there  was
no money available.

The Community further informed the members that some areas were having  hard
rock and it’s difficult for the community to  dig  the  required  height  of
latrines.  Concerning  water  provision  it  transpired  that  there  was  a
tempering with water connections in that some of the community was  involved
in illegal connection of water. Further that water  comes  in  and  out  and
other locations are without clean water. The community was  of  the  opinion
that they were not informed about  any  new  developments  that  affect  the
community

8.    Site Visits

8.1   Engcobo Municipality Water boreholes project

Members were also able to visit water borehole project during the  visit  to
Engcobo Municipality.  The  water  borehole  project  was  done  because  it
transpired that water was not enough to supply the people  in  the  locality
of Engcobo. Members were informed that that because  of  the  long  distance
between the rural areas and  the  areas  that  were  affected  were  Beyele,
Qumanco, Lahlangubo and Lucecweni.  The Municipality is  commended  for  the
initiative that the Municipality had undertaken in  order  to  devise  means
and ways of providing clean running water.
It is therefore recommended that:

    • The Municipality must inform the community about any developments that
      were happening and affecting the community.
    • The members of the community must attend  the  community  meetings  in
      order to be updated about any developments that affect them.

8.2   Buffalo City Ward 3 Sanitation Project

The Members visited  Ward  3  within  Amathole  District  Municipality.  The
Project that is involved in Ward 3 is building of latrines. The Project  was
started in 2004 and will end  in  March  2006.  Project  Steering  Committee
administers the Project with 15 women  builders  who  were  trained  for  45
days.48 builders and 500 labourers are employed in the  Project.  In  regard
to operation 100 structures are  build  per  month.  Three  structures  were
built per day and the cost is R2 100 for labour and  material.  After  five-
year period chemicals will be used to control overflow. Only  concerns  that
were raised by the Community were that the progress was very  slow  and  the
Community was aware that suppliers of materials might cause the delay.

It was therefore recommended that:

    • The municipality must interact with the suppliers so  that  deliveries
      are made on time.

8.3   Buffalo City Ward 8 Sanitation Project

The Project that is involved  in  Ward  8  is  provision  of  water  to  the
community in Bongweni B Locality. The Reservoir has a water capacity of  540
000 kilolitres and is to operate  soon.  The  Project  would  supply  +-5000
people. The Project was financed by MEEG to a tune of  R7  million  and  the
budget ended on 30 June 2005. This amount  of  R7million  had  already  been
utilised and there was some further funds that will be needed in the  region
of +-R15 to 16 million in order to be able  to  supply  entire  Phase  1.The
Community was only waiting for ESKOM to connect electricity probably by  the
end of September 2005.Meanwhile the local  municipality  was  supplying  the
community with water tankers.

One of the Councillors who was briefing the Committee  about  Water  Project
in Thyefu indicated that the project started in August 2004 and was  running
smoothly. The main problem that was encountered by  the  community  was  the
design structure of the Sandile dam. Further that the water  tank  that  was
supplying the community with water only came once and after  3  to  4  weeks
and the water was not readily available to the most of the villages.

The Councillor informed the members that a sum of R4, 6 million  was  needed
for the current financial year in order to complete supplying  of  water  in
Gcinisa and Ntsinekana localities being Phase 1. But the total  amount  that
will be needed to cover all the  villages  will  be  R18  million  including
Phase 2.  The projected finish is April 2006.The target that  had  been  set
by the government for supply of clean running water  by  2008  will  not  be
accomplished.

It was therefore recommended that:

    • ESKOM be engaged in speeding up of connection so  that  water  can  be
      provided.

 4. Buffalo City Ward 10 Sanitation Project

The problem that was faced  by  the  community  in  Ward  10  in  Sanitation
Project was consultants and hard soil. It transpired  that  the  consultants
were involved in the Project in 2003 and was discharged in 2004  because  of
poor performance. Another problem was the soil type and this  made  somewhat
impossible for the proper digging of latrine.  Members  were  informed  that
another consultant has  been  appointed  by  the  Regional  Office  and  was
waiting for approval

It was therefore recommended that:

    • The issue of poor performance by the consultants in dealing  with  the
      projects is referred to the Department of Water Affairs  and  forestry
      for their attention.


8.5   Buffalo City Ward 12 Sanitation Project

Members visited Ward 12 and were  informed  that  the  Project  of  building
latrines was started in 2003 to be completed in 2005. The problem  that  was
encountered by the community was that the project is slow, no  training  was
done, material shortage is also rife,  and  consultants  are  not  available
when needed to clarify certain issues. Another problem  that  the  Community
experiences was the fact that the consultants submit false  reports  to  the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry indicating that  a  certain  number
of latrines had been completed yet the number  on  the  ground  is  not  the
correct one. For example a report was given  that  1400  latrines  had  been
build whereas in the true sense only 120 had been completed.

8.6   Buffalo City Duncan Village Cleaning and Sanitation Project

The Duncan Village locality  was  encountering  problem  of  bad  conditions
wherein 220 people were using 1 toilet, limited  washing  facilities,  water
supplies were blocking as well as drained system was  not  working,  Members
also observed the dirtiness in Duncan Village. The  leader  of  the  project
addressed the Committee  members  about  the  work  that  was  done  by  the
volunteers as well as the problems that the  volunteers  were  experiencing.
The volunteers indicated that they were not  working  and  they  don’t  have
protective clothing in order for them to work. The volunteers also  informed
the members that they would like to get some incentives for  the  work  that
they were doing, as they were unemployed.

It was therefore recommended that:

A meeting is held with the Department  of  Engineering  Services  and  Water
management within the  Buffalo  City  Municipality  so  that  the  issue  of
protective clothing is discussed.

8.7   Katberg Forest

The Committee Members, Officials from DWAF  and  Councillors  from  Amathole
District Municipality visited Katberg forest. The members  were  briefed  by
the official who was in charge for the  forest  operation  in  Katberg.  The
area in Katberg in terms of forest plantation  was  that  in  Katberg  there
were 1600 hectors of area, Glen Can 1190 hectors Benholm 443  and  Mankazana
190 hectors

 Members were informed that trees that were planted there were:

    • Pines species.
    • Gum trees.
    • Selling of poles at Mankazana plantation .

The members were also  informed  that  everything  was  going  well  in  the
Forests at Katberg. Members were concerned about  the  name  of  the  forest
being Kat berg

It was therefore recommended that:

    • The name of Katberg is changed, as it was not reflecting  the  present
      dispensation.

8.8   Tyume Sawmill

Members were briefed by the owner of Tyume Sawmill who informed the  members
that the Sawmill started operating in 1982 from Carthcath. The  Sawmill  had
a staff component of 50% men and women with 86 permanently employed and  70-
employed temporary. In terms of the production the company produces  100  to
150 cubic meters of cutting per day.
The production that was involved in  Tyume  is  making  of  Windows,  doors,
ceiling materials and also other building materials.

The only concern  raised  by  the  Tyume  Sawmill  was  that  there  was  no
cooperation between the small and big Sawmills.

The work that is being than  by  the  owner  of  the  Sawmill  in  terms  of
offering jobs to the local authority be commended.

 9. Shiloh Irrigation Scheme
The Committee members visited Shiloh irrigation scheme  in  Peddie.  Members
were able to see building of the pump station, which after completion  would
be able to pump water to another dam, which was being built,  within  Shiloh
area. The project was started in April 2005 and would be completed in  March
2006. In the project there were 37 unskilled personnel who are employed.  In
terms of budget allocation the members were informed that  R14  million  had
been provided.

Overall Recommendations

South Africa is  a  long  way  through  developing  new  policies  following
national and globally recognised  best  practices.   However,  the  evolving
water reforms that includes  decentralisation,  and  the  emergent  problems
encountered, also requires innovative strategies in reform,  regulation  and
support for effective water services provision.  A number  of  interventions
and best practices that need to be addressed and reflected in water  policy,
law, institutions and management,  internationally  and  nationally,  reveal
that the following is needed for the efficient functioning of water  service
institutions and their viability in rural and urban areas:

    • Basic principles such as equity and efficiency in  water  distribution
      and allocation, water administration based on catchments, the need for
      holistic and integrated management approaches,  the  need  to  balance
      water use between socio-economic uses and uses to  maintain  ecosystem
      integrity.
    • Clarification of the roles of the government, civil  society  and  the
      private  sector  and  their  responsibilities   regarding   ownership,
      management and administration of water resources.  Under  this  theme,
      the following should be included:
         o Absence of conflicting water rights legislation.
         o Effective mechanisms for intersectoral dialogue.
         o Economic incentives.
         o Mechanisms for the  participation  of  the  community  or  other
           stakeholders.
         o Role of women in water management.
         o The effects of vested interest.
         o Mechanisms for coordination and conflict resolution.

At a practical level, and more particularly in the  case  of  South  Africa,
practical  management  instruments  should  be  developed  to  assist  water
managers.  The importance of IWRM lies in selecting, adjusting and  applying
the right mix of tools for a given situation.   Five  categories,  according
to  the  United  Nations  Department  of   Economic   and   Social   Affairs
publication, Governing Water Wisely for Sustainable Development[2],  deserve
special attention:

    •  Water  resource  assessment:  comprising  data  collection  networks,
      environmental impact assessment techniques and risk management  tools,
      for example, for floods and droughts.
    • Communication and information: raising awareness  is  often  a  potent
      instrument for improving management, particularly when accompanied  by
      opportunities for informed stakeholder participation.
    • Tools for water allocation and conflict resolution:  allocation  could
      be done through a mix of regulatory and market  instruments  based  on
      valuation of costs and benefits; and conflict resolution  tools  could
      provide guidance on  issues  of  upstream  versus  downstream,  sector
      versus sector and human versus nature.
    • Regulatory instruments: including direct controls  such  as  land  use
      plans and utility regulation, as well as economic instruments (prices,
      tariffs, subsidies and others) and encouragement  of  self-regulation,
      for example, by transparent benchmarking.
    • Technology: both new and traditional technologies might provide  scope
      for progress, within the water sector as well as in others that affect
      water demand.

Integrated management will  need  to  tackle  sectoral  agencies  protecting
their traditional roles and responsibilities, as well  as  the  problems  of
overlapping  or  conflicting  legal  mandates  and  responsibilities.    The
limited array of senior and powerful advocates for the concept of IWRM  make
it  difficult  to  alter  the  well-entrenched  existing  water   governance
systems, which tend to reflect sectoral approaches.

As water-related services are extended to promote  public  health  and  food
production, uncoordinated institutions can be confusing and  lead  to  water
resources depletion.  It is equally  alarming  that  in  many  countries,  a
large number of water supply and sanitation projects  and  water  management
policies continue to be developed in isolation from each other.

Effective water governance requires change in attitudes and behaviour  among
individuals, institutions, professionals, decision-makers – in short,  among
all involved.  Participation by the public or stakeholders is  an  important
tool in implementing such changes as it facilitates more informal  decision-
making and eases conflict resolution.   It can also  guarantee  that  voices
of relatively powerless groups, such as women  and  indigenous  people,  are
heard.   Participation  offers  people  the  opportunity   to   meet   their
responsibilities, as well as the opportunity to claim their rights.

Key aspects of sustainability include empowerment  of  local  people,  self-
reliance and social justice.  These  reflect  concern  about  principles  of
equity, accountability and  transparency.   One  way  to  incorporate  these
principles into real-life management  is  to  move  away  from  conventional
forms of water governance, which have usually been dominated by  a  top-down
approach, and  professional  experts  in  the  government  and  the  private
sector,  and  move  towards  the  bottom-up  approach,  which  combines  the
experience, knowledge and understanding of various local groups and people.

Report to be considered.

4.    Correction of Report – PC on Housing


The Interim Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on  the  Prevention
of Illegal Eviction from and Unlawful Occupation of Land Amendment  Bill  [B
11 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec 75)  (published  in  the  Announcements,
Tablings and Committee Reports of 2 November 2005,  p  2491),  contained  an
error in the opening paragraph. It should have read:

      The Portfolio Committee on Housing, having considered the  subject  of
      the Prevention of Illegal Eviction from  and  Unlawful  Occupation  of
      Land Amendment Bill [B 11  -  2005]  (National  Assembly  -  sec  75),
      referred to it and classified by the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a
      section 75 Bill, begs to report the status of the Bill as follows:

-----------------------
[1] Overview of Functions of Water and Sanitation provided for  in  a  paper
prepared by Atkinson D. van der Watt T  and  Fourie  W,  entitled,  Role  of
District Municipalities, 25 September 2003
[2] United Nations Department of Economic and  Social  Affairs  publication,
Governing Water Wisely for Sustainable Development


