---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 May 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-05-17
---

TUESDAY, 17 MAY 2005
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Good afternoon, members. I would like to thank you
for being here this afternoon. We want to welcome the Minister here today.
Ms Sigcau, we welcome you this afternoon. A request has come through from
the Minister if we will allow her to be seated when she addresses the
House, because she is not too well. I don’t think there is any problem,
Minister, we will allow you to be seated. Thank you.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I rise to say that on the next
sitting day of the Council, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That this House-

     1)  notes the 20 April statement by the DA on the judiciary as an
        attempt to grossly misrepresent and falsify the position of the ANC
        on the transformation of the judiciary;


     2)  further notes the DA’s intention to propagate the lie that the ANC-
        led government seeks to undermine the Constitution and democratic
        values, for which its cadres and millions of South Africans fought
        tirelessly during both colonial and apartheid oppression;

     3)  further notes that, referring to both the ANC public statements
        and action in government as evidence, the DA unequivocally states
        that the people’s movement is not committed to the independence of
        the judiciary, the transformation of its institution;


     4)  issues a warning that the DA’s statement expresses contempt for
        transformation and fundamental social change, and through them, its
        leaders are increasingly calling for the marginalisation of the
        overwhelming majority of South Africans, who seek a future truly
        free of the legacy of apartheid past;

     5)  Calls on all reasonably-minded South Africans, organisations and
        parties deeply to commit themselves to the attempts of a
        developmental state, led by the ANC, to ensure the realisation of
        freedom, wealth, property ownership, and vibrant democracy, in
        search of a true better life for all.


Thank you.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Mr Frans Mohlala)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: I move without notice:

     That the House-

     (1)    notes with sadness the sudden and tragic passing away of our
         comrade and colleague, the Chief Whip of the Limpopo Province,
         Frans Mohlala, in a motor vehicle accident yesterday while
         performing his duty to the people of our country;


     (2)    recognises the valuable contribution that Chief Whip Frans
         Mohlala made in the struggle for a liberated and democratic South
         Africa;


      3) further recognises and appreciates the enormous contribution which
         he made in the Limpopo Provincial Legislature;


     (4)    further mourns the loss of this hard-working leader and cadre of
         the peoples’ movement;


     (5)    conveys its condolences to the Mohlala family and their friends;
         and


     (6)    wishes them strength and fortitude in their time of sadness. May
         his soul rest in peace!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


           CONGRATULATIONS TO CAPTAIN GRAEME SMITH AND THE PROTEAS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D A WORTH: Chair, I move without notice:

     That the House-

     (1)    congratulates the captain, Graeme Smith, and his cricket team,
         the Proteas, on winning the test matches convincingly in the West
         Indies to secure the series;


     (2)    notes that the Proteas have become the only team, since the
         initial one-day international began in the Caribbean in 1977, to
         complete a West Indies tour unbeaten; and


      3) wishes the team  continued  success  in  the  series  against  New
         Zealand and Australia.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


               (The late Ambassador Bavumile Herbert Vilakazi)

Mr D G MKONO: I move without notice:

     That the House –

     (1)    expresses its sorrow at the news of the  untimely  death  on  21
           April 2005 in Kampala of Ambassador Bavumile  Herbert  Vilakazi,
           the South African High  Commissioner  to  Uganda  and  a  former
           member of the National Assembly;


       2) recognises the valuable  contribution  that  Ambassador  Vilakazi
          made to the struggle  for  a  democratic  South  Africa,  to  the
          National Assembly where he served in various  roles  and  to  the
          country at large as its representative in Uganda;


     (3)    mourns the passing of our former colleague Mr Vilakazi;


     (4)    conveys its sincere condolences to the Vilakazi family and their
           friends; and


     (5)    wishes that they be filled with strength and fortitude in  their
           time of sadness.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


             TAKEOVER OF ABSA BY BRITISH BANKING GROUP BARCLAYS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K SINCLAIR: I move without notice:

  That the Council–

  (1) notes that the takeover of Absa by the British banking group Barclays
       has been officially approved by the Minister of Finance Mr Trevor
       Manuel and that this is the single, largest foreign investment in
       South Africa to date, which could lead to a vast inflow of R32
       billion into the South African economy;
   2) welcomes the strict conditions that have been set for the transaction,
      namely –


        a) that Absa will, amongst other things, retain its South African
           character and will remain listed on the JSE; and


        b) that the CEO and most of the top management must be South
           Africans;


 (3)  further notes that Barclays has also committed itself to supporting
      Absa’s empowerment initiatives; and


  (4) acknowledges that this transaction confirms the positive state of  the
      economy of South Africa and must be a feather in the cap in respect of
      the way in which the ANC government and Minister Manuel  are  managing
      the economy of South Africa.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Debate on Vote No 6 – Public Works:

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Chairperson, the hon Deputy Minister of
Public Works, the hon Chairperson of the Select Committee on Public
Services, all MECs from the various provinces, hon members, senior managers
from the department, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, the
Department of Public Works undertook a major restructuring exercise in 2003-
04 to improve its capacity to be able to deliver efficiently and
effectively, relying primarily on its network of regional offices.

The aim has been to bring our services closer to our clients’ operations.
Our regional offices have also been building relations with their
provincial and municipal counterparts with the aim of achieving a more
integrated approach.

Some of the major achievements for 2004-05 are as follows: One of the key
programmes to be launched by government is the Expanded Public Works
Programme, which is operational in all provinces at the moment. In the
first nine months of the programme R2,4 billion was spent on 1 890 projects
to create 140 056 job opportunities. This exceeds the target of 130 000
opportunities for the first year of the programme.

The role of my department in the programme is to put in place an enabling
environment to facilitate and roll out the programme. The Expanded Public
Works Programme is a government-wide programme and its success depends on
provinces and municipalities taking ownership of the programme and using
their budgets to create more employment coupled with training for the
unemployed.
The Department of Public Works has a strong unit in place which is
available to provide provinces and municipalities with advice, drawing on
the best practices from around the country. We are confident that with the
co-operation of all organs of state in all spheres of government, the
Expanded Public Works Programme will continue on a yearly basis to exceed
its employment creation targets and make a significant contribution to
alleviating unemployment and promoting “a nation at work”. I must really
thank all the provinces for what we have achieved so far, for without them
I would not be talking these big numbers. [Applause.]

The expansion of Limpopo’s Gundo Lashu Labour Intensive Road Programme
under the Expanded Public Works Programme to date, is an example of how the
programme can work. The Gundo Lashu Programme, which began as an initiative
of the Limpopo Provincial Government, has gained national recognition as an
example of best practice. This programme has now been expanded to all nine
provinces, with 32 provincial departments and municipalities having signed
memoranda of understanding with the national Department of Public Works and
the Construction Seta to provide similar recruitment and training of 500
contractors and 1 000 supervisors.

The Expanded Public Works Programme unit in the department has facilitated
this expansion. This facilitation has included putting in place agreements
with various partners in the programme, including agreements with Absa Bank
to provide access to credit and bridging finance for the learner
contractors, with the Construction Seta to provide the funding for the
training and the IDT to provide social facilitation services.

The participating provinces and municipalities use their infrastructure
budgets to provide the learner contractors with practical training
projects. A memorandum of understanding will soon be signed with First
National Bank, which will help our people to gain further access to
finance, and I can just whisper: It’s good news! [Laughter.]

The established business community is starting to join us in our endeavour
to implement the Expanded Public Works Programme. The Business Trust has
committed R100 million to provide programme management support to all
levels of government to ensure that lack of capacity is not an impediment
to implementing the Expanded Public Works Programme. This programme
management support is currently being put in place on the ground.

All of these learner labour-intensive contractors are registering on level
1 or 2 with the Construction Industry Development Board’s Register of
Contractors, and by the end of their learnerships they will have acquired
the necessary experience and track-record to register at level 3 or 4 of
the register.

Each of these contractors will typically employ between 50 and 100 people
on labour-intensive construction sites. This initiative will therefore
simultaneously make a significant contribution to broad-based Black
Economic Empowerment and develop the management and supervisory skills
required to manage labour-intensive construction projects in an efficient
and cost-effective manner.

I just want to explain at this stage that if there are any of our people
who have a problem with the registering of contractors, they could really
call on the CIDP to come and explain the process. There just is nothing to
fear, it is a question of understanding what is actually happening. But
somebody brought to my notice that there is a bit of fear in that area.

Another provincial Expanded Public Works Programme initiative, which has
gained national recognition as an example of best practice, is KwaZulu-
Natal’s Zibambele Programme under which women are appointed as road
maintenance contractors in rural areas. We are currently working with the
KwaZulu-Natal Department of Transport to produce a plan also to expand this
programme to other provinces and municipalities.

During the past financial year, my Ministry has challenged big business
through their corporate investment budgets in support of our efforts to
promote development through the Expanded Public Works Programme. Siemens,
Microsoft SA, Anglo-American and First National Bank have responded in a
manner which will move the process forward. Siemens and Microsoft SA have
formulated an agreement to help bridge the digital divide in rural South
Africa. A pilot project will be launched at the Harding Municipality in the
next few weeks. The two companies have also donated computers to learner
contractors of the Western Cape to assist with their entrepreneurial
development. The Chief Executive Officer of Anglo-American has set out,
together with myself, what we call “Adopt a Village”.

Credit goes to the Independent Development Trust which assisted my office
with the mobilisation process as we engaged big businesses. Mandated by
Parliament, through the Ministry of Public Works, to manage the
implementation of government programmes, the IDT supports all spheres of
government in meeting their development targets. In 2004-05, the IDT set up
over 344 new community structures and also project-managed among other
things the construction of 141 schools in the Eastern Cape and another 124
infrastructure projects in Gauteng under the Zivuseni Poverty Alleviation
Programme.

The IDT is also assisting provinces in rolling out and implementing the
Expanded Public Works Programme. The IDT has been supporting provinces to
develop the provincial framework and business plans for the implementation
of the Expanded Public Works Programme, as well as running a programme
implementing age and role in Mpumalanga, North West, Western Cape and
Eastern Cape, with agreements with Gauteng and Free State being finalised.
With regard to its function of providing for the accommodation needs of
national government departments, the department spent approximately R3
billion on various capital works projects during the past financial year.
By the end of the financial year the department had fully spent its capital
budget for 11 out of 12 client departments and fully spent its own capital
and maintenance budgets.

Some of the notable capital works projects that were successfully
undertaken included the R109 million upgrading of the Port Elizabeth
magistrates’ courts building and commencement of the construction of the
R42 million SA Police Service and Justice complex at Motherwell near Port
Elizabeth. So, housing has to come here. Two other police stations were
handed over to SAPS at Tsomo and King William’s Town in the Eastern Cape.
In Gauteng the following were delivered: the R40 million magistrates’
offices in Tembisa; the R1,2 million Soweto Local Criminal Record Centre;
and a R6,5 million upgraded Mabopane police station.

Two community safety centres were completed. One was completed at
Tshidilamolomo in North West for R8,5 million ...[Interjections.]
Ndiyanqena ukuthetha IsiXhosa ... [I am lazy to speak isiXhosa] ... and the
other one was completed at Galeshewe in the Northern Cape for R35 million.
This means that since the opening of the first centre at Tembalethu near
George in the Western Cape, in October 2000, all the provinces except
Mpumalanga and the Free State now have community safety centres in
realisation of the goal of the national integrated crime control strategy
of government.

In the Free State a completed R15 million police station at Mangaung was
handed over to the SAPS in June 2004. In the Western Cape the R103 million
refurbishment project of 90 Plein Street for the use of Parliament was
completed and delivered on schedule. Earlier this year we handed over the
R30 million renovated parliamentary media centres to the Government
Communication and Information System, GCIS, which is situated at 120 Plein
Street. Included in the project was the upgrading of the Cabinet room in
Tuynhuys to accommodate the presidential press corps as part of information
sharing and democratisation.

It was with pride that we completed the R4,3 million Inkosi Albert Luthuli
legacy project in KwaZulu-Natal, and handed it over to the Department of
Arts and Culture in honour of the struggle stalwart who laid concrete
foundations for the democratic South Africa that belongs to all who live in
it, be they black or white. In the Northern Cape more than R8 million
repair and renovation projects were undertaken on behalf of the Department
of Defence in Kimberley, and a R9 million police station was constructed
for the SAPS.

During 2005-06 the national Department of Public Works will manage the
expenditure of R7,5 billion, which is made up of its own budget of R5,5
billion and R2 billion’s worth of projects funded from the budgets of its
client departments. The department’s own budget is comprised of R1,28
billion for leasing, R1,08 billion for municipal services, R947 million for
property rates, R927 million for maintenance, R946 million for personnel
and administration, as well as R372 million for capital works.

Looking at some of the building programmes for 2005-06, some of the
highlights of the department’s building programme include the construction
of three new embassies in Ethiopia, Lesotho and Nigeria; and the
construction of new-generation prisons in Northern Cape, North West,
Gauteng and the one that was delayed, which is Nigel, in Leeuwkop. The
total cost of these prisons is estimated to be more than R1 billion.

Other major capital works will include two construction projects for
Correctional Services worth R12 million and R6 million at Potchefstroom and
Mogwase respectively, as well as two others for the SAPS in Jouberton and
Amalia – all in the North West province. Both the SAPS and Correctional
Services in the Eastern Cape will benefit from the construction of the R43
million police headquarters at Bisho and the R21,5 million piggery at the
Middledrift correctional facility. The R22 million Nerina Place of Safety
is under construction for the Department of Justice.

In Gauteng a R169 million new Pretoria campus for the National Library of
South Africa is under construction on behalf of the Department of Arts and
Culture. Another R36 million major upgrading of the SAPS forensic science
laboratory is under way in Tshwane. In the Free State we shall undertake in
phases the upgrading and renovation projects worth more than R85 million at
the No 3 Military Hospital on behalf of the Department of Defence. Other
projects include the R16 million upgrading and renovation of prisons for
Correctional Services, and the construction of the R7 million and R6
million police stations in Verkykerskop and Phuthaditjhaba, respectively.

In response to the President’s call, we shall intensify our communication
with our client departments to plan early and prioritise for the delivery
of at least two community courts per province, as well as to find
alternative accommodation for the children currently in custody,
particularly in KwaZulu-Natal, the Western Cape and Gauteng.

There are some initiatives we have undertaken to improve service delivery.
The department is embracing the President’s call to turn every public
servant into an activist for social delivery. Internally, the department
has launched a management charter known as the DPW leadership way with the
aim of introducing a new management ethos in the department and to address
problems such as low staff morale, poor management practices, lack of
urgency and lack of customer focus. Integrity, urgency, customer focus and
teamwork are some of the values ingrained in the leadership way. Deviations
will be met with the full might of our disciplinary machinery.

The department is also implementing a large-scale service delivery
improvement programme as part of its strategic drive to improve customer
service and offer value for money to clients. This programme includes
setting service delivery standards, introducing more business-like
management methods, and entering into service level agreements with client
departments. Problems of capacity are also receiving attention through the
recruitment of learners, interns and young professionals into mentorship
programmes in the department.

The department has carried out reviews of some of its existing programmes,
including the Repair and Maintenance Programme, Ramp, and the Emerging
Contractor Development Programme, ECDP. One of the improvements resulting
from these reviews is the department’s new contractor incubator programme
under which a group of 81
medium-sized black contractors have been selected for mentoring and
training with the aim of providing them with the opportunity to become
successful contractors.

Our mentorship programme has the development of business management
expertise as its core focus. Approximately R182 million worth of work per
prison will be executed by the contractors on the contractor incubator
programme in each of the four new-generation prisons.

Challenges related to tendering that were previously identified are
currently being addressed through the alignment of our systems to the
Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act and the supply chain
framework. The outcomes will entail more transparency, simplicity and
standardisation of procurement procedures across the public sector, as well
as alignment with the black economic empowerment legislation.

To eradicate the scourge of fronting, we are tightening our procurement
procedures, in particular, with regard to where preference points are being
claimed. We have appointed a service provider to screen and verify
credentials given in the supplier register. In a number of cases the
revelations are shocking. Stern measures will be taken against anybody
misrepresenting facts with a purpose to deceive. These shocking
revelations, if I may give you an example, concern joint venture companies.

When our people go around verifying membership, you will find that there
are people who are part of a joint venture – such as a fencing company -
but are actually farm labourers. When fencing has to be done, they go and
do it and, when it’s over, they then go back to the farms.

In some other cases it is labourers who are not even aware that they are
part and parcel of a company. Some of them claim that their salaries vary.
At times they get R3 000, but during a barren season when they have to go
back to the farms, they get something less than that. Of course, there are
also disappointing companies, whom we have been praising left, right and
centre as up and coming within the construction industry, and who do not
even sign for any decision-making. We have been praising these companies.
Once we are finished, I will have to give the report to the MECs so that
they are alerted to the scourge.

Current efforts to develop and transform the construction and property
industries include the process of producing transformation charters, as you
know. A target date has been set forth for both of these charters to be
finalised and launched in September 2005. The President raised serious
concerns about the capacity of the Public Service to implement programmes
aimed at addressing the infrastructure backlogs inherited from the past.

For example, he mentioned weaknesses in the governance system which result
in the school-building programme unfolding at a much slower pace than
envisaged and delays with the allocation of infrastructure grants. Together
with its counterparts at provincial level, the department is working on a
number of programmes aimed at addressing these concerns.

The infrastructure delivery improvement programme, which we are
implementing together with the Construction Industry Development Board,
National Treasury and Development Bank of South Africa, DBSA, involves
working with provinces and municipalities to improve the management of
infrastructure programmes from project planning through to procurement,
project delivery and maintenance.

Another important programme in this regard is the implementation of the
contractors’ and projects’ registers by the Construction Industry
Development Board as required by the Construction Industry Development
Board Act. Over the past year the contractors’ registers were piloted in
Limpopo, KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng and will be implemented nationwide by
the end of 2005.

The main aim of the contractors’ register is to make the construction
industry more sustainable. The implementation of this register will result
in the reduction of the number of contracts that have to be cancelled due
to poor performance by contractors. It will also provide a framework for
the development of contractors and will provide incentives for construction
companies to improve their compliance with minimum government standards,
including occupational health and safety.

Let me take this opportunity to commend the initiative taken by the leading
industry stakeholders in declaring this week, that is from 16 to 20 May
2005, as the construction, health and safety week to coincide with the
international conference scheduled in Port Elizabeth from 17 to 20
September 2005. This conference is subtitled: “Rethinking and Revitalising
Construction Safety, Health, Environment and Quality”.

There is legislation that we are proposing for 2005 and 2006. We have
produced a government-wide immovable asset management policy, which is
currently at a drafting stage and will be tabled in Parliament during the
course of this year. The aim of the Bill will be to establish uniformity
and ensure the application of minimum norms and standards in the management
of immovable assets across all spheres of government. The Expropriation Act
of 1975 was last amended in 1994, and the department has engaged the
services of external legal experts to work on the amendments. The
department also intends to bring these amendments to Parliament during the
course of the year.

The 2005 programme of action requires the Departments of Public Works and
Public Service and Administration to develop a framework to improve the
physical work environment. Some of the elements of this framework are
already being put into place, including the proposed government-wide
immovable asset management policy, the infrastructure delivery improvement
programme, the department’s service delivery improvement programme and
plans for improving accommodation.

Together with the demand-side management unit of Eskom, the department will
also be implementing an energy saving programme in various government
facilities such as prisons, magistrates’ courts, police stations and office
buildings. The aim of the programme is to optimise the utilisation of
electricity in the identified facilities.

I am inviting hon members who can make it to join me in a walkabout as we
celebrate Energy Efficiency Month at Number 1 Military Hospital at Thaba
Tshwane in Gauteng, on Thursday 19 May 2005.

In conclusion, despite the constraints of a budget which is limited in
comparison to the backlogs, the Department of Public Works is focused on
delivering on its mandate and improving on the quality of services to its
client departments. The various departmental programmes and initiatives,
which I have described, will increasingly lead to improved audit reports,
better customer service and improved service delivery. And if, together
with our counterparts in the provinces and the staff in the department, we
work the way we have decided to do of late, I am positive that in future,
when somebody talks of Public Works, it will be with a smile on the face,
not a frown. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Order! I want to thank
the hon national Minister of Public Works for her in-depth contribution to,
and participation in, the debate. Minister, we wish you well for the future
and we express our appreciation for the work rendered by your Ministry.
Thank you very much for your participation.

Mr R J TAU: Thank you, Madam Chair, hon Minister and Deputy Minister,
members of this House, members from provincial legislatures, distinguished
guests and comrades. Lest we make a mistake it is important to note that
our participation in this important debate today is different from the one
of last year.

We need further to note the historic nature of this debate in that today,
as opposed to last year, we reflect on the achievements and observe the
challenges that lie ahead of the department and the Ministry in order to
improve on those that would not otherwise make us meet the expected
outcomes.

Last year, when our President Thabo Mbeki announced the launch of the
Expanded Public Works Programmes in all our provinces, and the subsequent
development of a programme for the implementation thereof by the hon
Minister Sigcau, many detractors laughed at the programme as wishful
thinking by the ANC. What they, in fact, forgot to remember is that we were
informed by our 2014 vision of halving unemployment and integrating the
South African economy to benefit all those who live and work in it.

Firm on our commitment to better the lives of our people, today we stand
with pride as we engage in this debate. As opposed to last year, with the
planned launch of the programme, today, as we are busy with this debate, we
know that women, young people, and the general employable South Africans
are hard at work in the Modimola integrated project in the North West,
Zibambele in KwaZulu-Natal, Zivuseni in the Gauteng Province, and Gundo
Lashu in Limpopo.

As we engage in this debate today, we are sure of happy South African
people, whom through our commitment to improving their social standing in
Galeshewe, Delportshoop, Mataleng in the Northern Cape, and George in the
Western Cape, are earning something to feed their children, wash their
bodies and pay for their services.

These people, hon Minister, during our oversight work in the provinces and
our constituency work have requested us to say to you and to the President
of the Republic, thank you very much. [Applause.] They said we should thank
you and the President not because you did them a favour. They thank you not
because you have mercy on them or because you pity them; but, because
together with the President and your department you have been able to
restore their dignity. And, you have been able to give them a second chance
in life.

It is important to note that we are not only talking about people who are
proud and happy to wake up and go to work and earn a salary at the end of
the day. We are talking here about people who today, after being barred to
the periphery of the economy for the better part of their lives, can bake a
brick and lay it. These are the people who, today in a space of a year, can
construct a road and maintain it, like the young women’s company at
Cofimvaba in the Eastern Cape.

As a committee we take note of the great strides that the department has
been able to achieve in the first nine months since the launch of the
programme last year. The creation of more than 144 000 jobs through 1 890
projects throughout the country exceeding the 130 000 target, is
remarkable.

With the 1% increase that brings our Budget for this financial year to R5,5
billion - and a once-off payment of R559 million owed to the municipalities
to eliminate arrears for both services and rates for government-owned
properties-presents an opportunity during this financial year to improve on
the services that the department provides for its clients. However, the
committee notes that with the strategic plan as presented, this amount, of
course, might still not be enough.

While we note the achievements by the department, the committee during its
visits to provinces also noted some challenges that need to be addressed in
this financial year: to improve our capacity to communicate with the
general population about the Expanded Public Works Programme, with
particular emphasis on officials in the provincial departments and with a
very significant attention to the municipalities. We have observed that
with some departmental officials, and most importantly, in the
municipalities, there is a difference when it comes to the implementation
of the guidelines, which may be as a result of a lack of understanding or
pure lack of clarity on the guidelines.

We also note that we need to increase and consolidate our capacity in the
Expanded Public Works Programme unit in order for it to liase with
stakeholders and provide support to the departments, provinces, and
municipalities. We have also noted that in some provinces, municipalities
are not part of the provincial steering committees and as a result there is
a vacuum that exists between the municipalities and the provincial
departments. Therefore, that in itself creates or leads to serious
confusion.

The recruitment of emerging contractors and supervisory staff onto the
special labour-intensive contractor learnership programme with the aim of
having 15 000 learners by the end of 2005-06 financial year, means greater
emphasis should be put by the department on municipalities so that we are
able to ensure that they are not left behind in the process of
implementation.

We, however, also take note of the infrastructure delivery programme, which
is being implemented together with the Construction Industry Development
Board and National Treasury. Our role of course, together with the
department and our people, is to monitor and ensure that the programme is
fairly implemented.

As said by our movement and as reflected in the Freedom Charter, there is a
need to close the gap that exist between the first and the second economy.
Through the Expanded Public Works Programme we wish to achieve exactly
that. It is important that as we are doing a good job to assist our people,
we should not lose sight of some weaknesses that come with red tap as
reflected in some of the provinces.

It is important that the departments, particularly in provinces, should
improve their capacity of payment to contractors, especially the emerging
contractors. We also need to improve our capacity to deal, as a matter of
urgency with the question of fronting, as the Minister has already
highlighted, and issues leading to corruption and opportunities that get
left in the air.

One of the key principles that we identified, as a means of addressing the
economic imbalances of the past, is to build and strengthen co-operatives.
While waiting for the finalisation of the co-operatives Bill, we urge the
department to put in place measures that will ensure that we prepare our
people through the assistance and training of the establishment and
maintenance of co-operatives.

The committee appreciates the hard work that the department is doing in
addressing the problems faced by our people. The commitment expressed to
the completion of the asset register, to deal with the infrastructure
backlogs, the desire to ensure that their client departments are serviced
properly and in time, the improvement of service delivery policy in the
spirit of Batho Pele that is leading the way, are all positive signs and we
appreciate that.

On behalf of the committee, I wish to extend our appreciation. Together
with the poor, the workers, the department and the Ministry we can make a
meaningful contribution to make South Africa a working nation.

Chairperson, the committee on public services moves for the adoption of
this Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]


Mr S J MOHAI (Free State): Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Minister
Sigcau, Deputy Minister, colleagues from other provinces, hon members,
comrades and friends, the clarion call made 50 years ago that the people
shall share in the country’s wealth remains as valid as ever.
The freedom we attained 11 years ago will be hollow and meaningless unless
underdevelopment, poverty and unemployment are eradicated. The legacy of
apartheid that continues to define the living conditions and economic
relations in our country has to be permanently undermined and eradicated.
We need to build a people’s economy with an accumulative regime that seeks
to redistribute the wealth in a manner that benefits the vast majority so
that the people can share in the wealth of the country.

The Public Works Budget Vote we are debating today is a catalyst in poverty
eradication and job creation, as well as in broadly improving the
performance of our economy. This is so because infrastructure development,
which is the subject matter of this Budget Vote, can help us to address the
historical backlogs, to create jobs through labour-intensive methods and to
lower the input cost of doing business in South Africa so as to attract
investors and thereby create sustainable jobs in the medium to long term.
It is with a developmental perspective that we as government must
continually discharge our Public Works function.

During the past financial year the department of public works, roads and
transport in the Free State made a number of achievements on the public
works front. These include the successful launching of the Expanded Public
Works Programme which took place in Qwaqwa, in the Thabo Mofutsanyana
District, in September last year. The launched anchor project, which
included construction of the 10-kilometre-long Makoane Road and 1 000
houses, went a long way in meeting the infrastructure needs of the
community of Thabo Mofutsanyana as a presidential nodal area.

The implementation of the Expanded Public Works Programme is well on
course. Our progress in this regard includes the fact that we have created
7 708 jobs in all four sectors of the EPWP, namely in the infrastructural,
social, environmental, cultural and the economic sectors. We have also
implemented learnerships as part of developing skills through the Expanded
Public Works Programme. We continue to promote SMME development through the
EPWP.

During this financial year we will intensify the implementation of the
Expanded Public Works Programme in the province in all the four sectors. We
will build on the momentum already generated last year and ensure that we
tighten up co-ordination with all departments and municipalities. We will
create more jobs, develop skills and promote the development of SMMEs.

In our provincial Budget Vote tabled on 14 April, we noted and committed
ourselves to addressing the following challenges. A long planning cycle and
lack of co-ordination led to delays in the implementation of projects, and,
to some extent, capacity problems also continue to be a challenge. The late
payment of contractors led to cash flow problems and inevitably affected
the delivery of much-needed infrastructure - the chairperson of the
portfolio committee has alluded to this point. This also negatively
affected growth and sustainability. The ineptness of our handling of the
procurement cycle tended to create more problems that affected service
delivery. The management of contracts, contractors and consultants warrants
significant improvement. And, lack of access to credit facilities by small
contractors has an adverse impact on the execution of projects and on the
development of small contractors.

Work has already begun in earnest to address these challenges. We have
started talking to client departments about some of our proposals with
regard to improving the planning and execution of construction projects on
their behalf. We are in the process of approving new measures that will
ensure that we lower the turnaround time for the payment of contractors.

For the purposes of a comprehensive approach to infrastructure development,
the provincial government will develop a comprehensive provincial
integrated infrastructure plan that will cover such developmental issues as
roads, transport, schools, housing, water, sanitation and other
infrastructural imperatives for growing and developing the provincial
economy.

Our department has already begun to formulate aspects of this plan as they
relate to our line function. We are taking the transformation of the
construction industry in a very serious light. In this regard, we are
finalising our comprehensive incubator strategy for small and emerging
contractors.

The construction industry, like the rest of our economy, has and continues
to be dominated by a tiny minority in which economic power is concentrated.
This has to change; that belongs to a past we radically broke ranks with in
April 1994. The industry has to transform in a manner that reflects our
vision of a South Africa that belongs to all those who live in it, united
in their diversity.

We are therefore preparing to host a provincial construction summit in
August of this year. This summit will assess the progress we have made in
changing the construction industry for the better; and identify obstacles
and challenges, and thereby come up with a programme of action for a
thoroughgoing transformation of the industry, particularly in the province.

All our transformation endeavours in the province will be in the context of
the construction charter that is currently being developed, a process in
which we have been very active as a province. We are also active as a
province in the Construction Industry Development Board’s construction
registration service, which is aimed at contractor development through
Public Service procurement.

The property industry is another important branch of our economy, and, like
the rest of the economy, it has to be transformed in line with our broad-
based black economic empowerment and RDP policies. Government owns and
manages a considerable slice of property, and has the potential to
reconfigure property relations in keeping with our vision of social change.
This point, borrowed from our recent provincial Budget Vote, is worth
restating on this occasion.

The formulation of the property charter, therefore, has to be welcomed as
an important development in the process of transforming the property
industry. We must resolutely combat the monopoly and conservativeness that
reign in the property industry. Thus, in the province we will have targeted
and focused endeavours to lease and acquire property for historically
disadvantaged people. Our leasing-out policy and practice must, equally,
target historically disadvantaged women, youth and people with
disabilities.

The plight of women and youth as disadvantaged groups must always feature
very prominently in our transformation and empowerment endeavours. All job
creation programmes should cater particularly for women and youth. Their
skills development and SMME development should also seriously integrate
these groups. The empowerment of these groups is based on the fact that
they constitute the majority of the unemployed.

Because of the imperative of these targeted groups in our overall work,
their empowerment will not only be a natural outcome of work, but also of
conscious effort and planning. This is why we will always have clear
targets for every financial year as to what our anticipated contribution is
in empowering youth and women.

Our province, under the leadership of the premier, has also recently
engaged in a process that will soon culminate in the adoption of a
provincial growth and development strategy. Our provincial growth and
development strategy will, among other things, help us as a province to
elaborate comprehensive social infrastructure for growth and development,
elaborate a provincial road to economic prosperity, and develop good
governance and a secure environment which are key to the prosperity of the
province.

In conclusion, we must surge ahead in building a productive economy that is
labour-intensive with high levels of service, a highly skilled workforce
and a modern system of work organisation and management. A society in which
there are economic opportunities for all, poverty is eradicated, income
inequalities are reduced and basic services are available to all has to be
built as a matter of urgency. The development of infrastructure through our
Public Works function has a crucial role to play in this regard. I thank
you, Chair. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Thank you, hon MEC
Mohai, for your contribution to the debate. Before I continue with the next
speaker, I have an announcement to make, which is that the commissioner of
oaths workshop will continue tomorrow morning at 09:00 in the Old Assembly.
All members should be present. Thank you very much.

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, these days a
debate on Public Works is normally dominated by the topic of the Expanded
Public Works Programme, and today is no different, nor is it surprising
given the dire need for jobs in a country plagued by ever-present and
growing unemployment.

I am on record as saying that I support the concept of the Expanded Public
Works Programme as a deliberate attempt by government, representing the
public sector, to use its budgeted expenditure on certain goods and
services to create additional work opportunities for the unemployed.

I said that I, along with my party the DA, supported the concept, but we do
have severe reservations about the implementation by the various sectors
within the three spheres of government and the oversight function by
Parliament.

We also believe that the programme should be vigorously extended to the
private sector. I’m also on record as even having challenged the hon
President to agree to a pilot project in this regard with industry in an
area of high unemployment, like Highveld Steel near Witbank in Mpumalanga,
which is virtually surrounded by impoverished squatters who are driven to
all sorts of criminal activities and unacceptable social behaviour.

The hon President wiped my proposal off the table. Well, actually, he wiped
it off the podium, by quoting the constitutional and legal rights of
workers in terms of our labour laws. Of course, what the President did not
concede is what we have said all along: that our labour laws are far too
stringent and unadaptable.

However, at a briefing on the Expanded Public Works Programme by the
department towards the end of February this year, the select committee ...
[Interjections.] Why don’t you listen, instead of babbling? [Laughter.]

I said that at a briefing on the Expanded Public Works Programme by the
department towards the end of February, the select committee was advised
that the department was actually in the process of engaging with the
private sector in that regard. This is indeed very good news and, on top of
that, government is at last also admitting that some of our labour laws are
counterproductive and should be reviewed. This is also very good news.

So, to quote a previous colleague of mine, we don’t want to say that we
told you so but, then again, we did tell you so, didn’t we? We really
believe that our unemployment problem must rate optimum attention and that,
if necessary, amendments are warranted to allow this programme to be
extended to the private sector. The spin-off will not only be an extension
of the programme, but it will also render more permanence in employment in
industry, as opposed to the somewhat haphazard present system involving
what is really, in some isolated cases I admit, no more than glorified
piece jobs.

I honestly believe that what I suggested previously and again today is
positive and that those exponents - like my friend here - of DA-bashing in
this country amongst the members of the ruling party, must surely think
again when they constantly accuse us of only being negative. This is a
positive proposal.

But the job of a responsible opposition, and I stress “responsible”, like
my party the Official Opposition, is not that ... [Interjections.] Sore
point, sore point, Chairperson! Let me repeat: freedom of speech ... like
my party, the Official Opposition, is not that of being praise singers and
marble polishers of the governing party. [Interjections.] We have a duty to
point out when things are wrong, and to suggest viable alternatives.

So I will not disappoint the DA bashers because we certainly do have some
serious reservations on the implementation and management of the programme.
My colleagues in the National Assembly have also already pointed out some
important problem areas, such as permanence and continuation. So I will
resist repetition and will concentrate on one or two further points only in
regard to the programme.

The first area is one of a more technical nature in that we are disturbed
to hear that compliance with the guidelines by provinces and municipalities
has been very poor thus far and is also expected to be poor for 2004-05
especially in some provinces and many municipalities. [Interjections.] That
is not me saying that; it is the department saying that. So don’t shout at
me; look around you.

As a federalist I believe in the devolution of power and in the protection
of the autonomy of the three spheres of government, as prescribed by the
Constitution. At least I am something, Mr ... [Inaudible.] ... Sinclair. I
am not a nothing; I am something. At least I belong to a party. In
Afrikaans, “ek is gelukkig nie ’n draadsitter nie”. [As one would say in
Afrikaans, fortunately I do not sit on the fence.]

I said that I believe in the protection of the autonomy of the three
spheres of government, as stipulated in the Constitution. So I certainly am
not propagating Big Brother bullying tactics here today, but when an
important national programme such as the Expanded Public Works Programme,
which is reliant upon intergovernmental funding, suffers because of the
incompetence or lackadaisicalness of the elected representatives of the
ruling party, then national government should step in and take corrective
measures. There is no other way.

Why is it that audits indicate – official audits – that not all provinces
and municipalities are complying with the Division of Revenue Act’s
conditions that require projects to be tendered as labour-intensive
projects according to Expanded Public Works Programme guidelines?

Why is it that in Mpumalanga the economic sector is reported to be lagging
far behind in job creation, while 4 701 jobs had been created by the
environmental sector by the end of February 2005, 3 098 jobs by the
infrastructure sector, and 2 926 jobs by the social sector? Clearly,
something is wrong somewhere. The good programme is suffering because of
bad management, and that indictment can only be laid before government.

My last point, and a point that should be of great concern to all who
support democracy and freedom of choice, speech and movement, is that there
is a growing number of accusations that corruption has crept into the
programme, sadly, in the form of nepotism and jobs for pals. One such
accusation that does come from me; it comes from a group of people in
Pilgrim’s Rest who refer to themselves as “concerned citizens”.
[Interjections.] I’ve got their names here. I can show them to you, Mr
Botha. [Interjections.] You don’t have to question me; I’ve got their
letter. [Interjections.] Maybe you should shut up. I have got the podium. I
am entitled to speak. [Interjections.] You should sit still.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Watson, can I ...
[Interjections.] Hon member, could you please observe the following ruling.
Hon Watson, could you concentrate on your speech, and not be provoked or
turned around. This is a normal thing. Just say what you were going to say.

Mr A WATSON: I most certainly will, Chairperson, but if you don’t protect
me, I have a right to do so myself.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, on a point of order ...

Mr A WATSON: I said that one such accusation came from a group in Pilgrim’s
Rest who refer to themselves ... [Interjections.] I thought we were rowdy -
just listen to this lot! [Interjections.] They refer to themselves as the
“concerned citizens”.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Sorry, could you take your seat, hon
Watson? Could I take your point of order, Ms Terblanche?
Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I am referring, on a point of order, to Rule 33, which
states that the member may not be interrupted. I would therefore ask you to
protect all members in this House. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I won’t take that ...
[Interjections.] Order! That, at worst, is out of order. Could you proceed,
hon member?

Mr A WATSON: Mr Chairperson, I am still trying to address you on the
grievances of the “concerned citizens” of Pilgrim’s Rest.

An HON MEMBER: Name them.

Mr A WATSON: I can if I want to. Do you want me to name them? Don’t
challenge me. Terence Mathole, Godfrey Mabuza, Doreen Sithole, Kenny Komne
...

HON MEMBERS: DA, DA!

Mr A WATSON: Have they no right to be DA? [Laughter.] Must all people ...
You see, the light has come on. You see, the hon member and the other
members have now really proved their true fashion in life, because if
you’re not ANC, you’re rubbish. That is exactly what my friend has just
said there. Yes, Mr Sinclair, maybe they are DA, but so what? They are
citizens of South Africa. They have a right to be DA; they have a right to
have concerns; and you don’t have the right to question that.
[Interjections.] So, please, let me continue. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Chair, could the member take a question?

Mr A WATSON: No, I haven’t got time to take a question. [Interjections.] Mr
Chairperson, the closing date for questions is next week Thursday. I’ll
answer them with the Ministers. [Interjections.]

They state that 75 potential jobs were advertised for the revamping of
Pilgrim’s Rest in preparation for the World Gold Planning Championship
later this year. Sadly, they claimed that nobody from Pilgrim’s Rest was
employed, despite the fact that many of them were well qualified for the
advertised positions and that all of them were unemployed.

All the jobs were given to outsiders with proven ANC links, Mr Sinclair -
not NNP links, ANC links. [Interjections.] That is nepotism to the highest
degree. [Interjections.] They further claim that they only got a response
to their grievances from the local manager of the department when they
threatened to march to the office of the MEC. Then, only, were they heard,
but not at all sympathetically. When they asked whether they were doomed to
remain street sellers of nuts and trinkets while local jobs were given to
outsiders with, as I said, proven ANC links – boyfriends and girlfriends of
ANC members – they were told that selling nuts on the street was also a job
and that they should be thankful.

I think that is bad. I think it is terrible to take jobs away from local
people in order to give them to your outsider pals, and then for the MEC to
say, “Selling nuts is also a job and you must be happy with that”. I think
that is a disgrace. This kind of attitude should not be tolerated. A
membership card of the ANC is not a certificate of competence.

Government, and particularly the Minister and respective MECs, should
ensure that this programme ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Could I take a point of order from
the hon Majodina?

Ms P C P MAJODINA (Eastern Cape): Thank you, Chair. Is it parliamentary for
a member to mislead the House?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: On what point has the member ...

Mr A WATSON: You are wasting my time, Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, could you take your seat?
I must make a ruling on the point of order. You’ll be the first one to ...

Mr A WATSON: As long as you don’t take up my time.

Ms P C P MAJODINA (Eastern Cape): All the accusations the member is coming
up with, if he has such rich information that he can accuse the ANC of
nepotism and all that, then he must bring facts, so that whoever is accused
...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, the point of order is not
granted. Continue, hon Watson.

Mr A WATSON: I wonder who is sleeping. I said that a membership card of the
ANC was not a certificate of competence.

Government, and particularly the Minister and respective MECs, should
ensure that this programme is for all the people, because South Africa is
the land of all the people. [Interjections.]

I also call on the Chairperson of the NCOP to ensure that oversight visits
to the provinces ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mr Watson, you are going to be given
a tough time today, and I must allow this. This is democracy. Hon Chief
Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I just want to get confirmation
on whether the member is now agreeing that the DA is adopting the Freedom
Charter in that South Africa belongs to all. [Laughter.]

Mr A WATSON: Mr Chairperson, I’ve been called funny names by the Chief
Whip, but today I must tell him that he cannot read, because all the
posters of the DA say that it is the party for all the people.
[Interjections.] So, please, open your eyes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member, your time has
expired. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: My time has not expired.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: It has, it has! [Applause.] Order,
hon members! Before I call the next speaker, I must make the following
ruling and observation, which I really appeal to all of you to heed,
otherwise it won’t augur well for individuals. This debate is about the
budget policy, a statement on the department. It is a critical issue that
has to do with the lives of millions of our people out there, and they are
watching us.
The Minister, at the end of the day, is the one who is going to respond to
the debate, and the Minister must respond to all members of this House. The
manner in which we haggle with each other becomes so disruptive that it
gets to the point of making it difficult for even departmental officials to
pick up on some of the issues that are being raised here, who are supposed
to do so.

I really want to warn hon members. It has never happened before, but I am
going to deal with individual members who are disruptive in this House. I
really want to make the appeal - without really making reference to anybody
– that everybody has the right to be listened to in this House,
irrespective of whether you agree or not. Also, those who are speaking find
it opportune to respond, to digress from what they are supposed to be
saying in order to respond to provocation and haggling from other members.
I can’t make a ruling on that. So, without wasting more time, I hope all of
us are going to observe that ruling.

Mr C MARTIN (Eastern-Cape): Hon Chair of Chairs, hon Minister, Ministers
present here today, colleagues from other provinces, members of the House
and hon guests, today I feel very honoured to participate in this debate in
support of the Budget Vote for the National Department of Public Works.

Indeed this debate is particularly important to me in many ways because I
just joined the department a few days ago, and therefore it really affords
me an opportunity not only to present the province’s perspective on public
works but also to learn and share ideas and strategies with colleagues from
other provinces and the national department.

In support of Vote 6 today, allow me to premise our perspective as the
Province of the Eastern Cape by taking this House down a short memory lane
to revisit the President’s words six years ago when he said:

   If, by word and deed, we take our place amongst the ordinary people who
   position themselves amongst a nation that is at work to build a better
   life for all within a caring society, then should we expect that the poor
   of the world will set a garland of grace on our heads and present each
   and everyone of us with a crown of splendour. Thus we will all at the
   starting point that we are on course.

Indeed, these wise words from our President find complete resonance in our
daily endeavours, by word and deed, to join a nation that is at work to
build a better life for all.

Amidst trying circumstances and enormous challenges, we also want to
reassure the nation that we in the Eastern Cape Province, in general, and
the department of public works, in particular, have arrived at the starting
point and that we are indeed on course.
In defining our contribution to strengthen the people’s contract to create
a better life for all we will focus on the aspects of the Expanded Public
Works Programme, the construction industry, the transformation process and
properties.

In acknowledging the responsibilities that came with the implementation of
the Expanded Public Works Programme, we undertook to facilitate the
provision of institutional support, as well as the co-ordination of the
programme. In this regard the provincial steering committee has been
established, three sectoral committees are in place and functional and
implementation plans for infrastructure and social clusters have been
developed and approved by the Steering Committee, Steercom.

In addition we have already established 110 learnerships within the
entrepreneurial programme, which include the following: 30 learnerships in
the urban renewal and integrated sustainable rural development programme,
30 for the social development cluster and Coega, and 50 for the school
building programme.

We are also strengthening the institutional capacity in our department in
order to provide sound co-ordination of the programme. By the end of next
week we will have issued adverts to attract suitable, capacitated personnel
to lead the Expanded Public Works Programme in the department. We hope that
this endeavour will speed up the implementation of the programme.
Regarding the property management, we wish to reiterate what we said
earlier in the financial year, that one of the things we have not been
doing as government is that we have not been dealing with the property and
asset base of the state as an area with the potential to stimulate economic
growth and development in the province. Instead, we have been dealing with
the portfolio as a mere administrative function, yet there is enormous
economic activity going on in the property industry in the 21st century.

We went on to say that from this financial year we would deal with the
property portfolio as economic investment rather than mere administration
and management of assets. To achieve that we say we will do a number of
things including facilitating the completion of the disposal policy, so
that we can be in a position to dispose of noncore properties for
empowerment and further arrangements. The policy will seek to promote
property development in municipalities in a manner that will stimulate
economic activity in especially the small towns in the province.

We have already begun doing the small things that will assist us. Currently
the department is in the process of updating all lease agreements with our
tenants and landlords. The purpose of this updating is to eliminate the
month-to-month lease agreements, agreeing on equitable and fair rates per
square metre and to agree on the optimal utilisation of office space. The
last-mentioned is specially related to the department’s landlords.
The tenants’ lease agreements are also in the process of being updated to
arrive at the agreed tariffs for both the government and private tenants.
The debtors management system for the collection of rentals is already in
place and functioning. By June 2005 the tenants will receive their first
automated statement of accounts from the department. The tariff policy is
also being finalised and this will allow us to have different tariffs for
specific types of buildings and escalation clause.

We are happy with the contribution we are making in support of the efforts
undertaken at a national level regarding the industry. The department has
been co-ordinating inputs of the province towards the development of a
construction industry charter. This charter will be setting the tone
nationally for the transformation of the construction industry. We want to
assure you, hon Minister, that we will do everything in our power in
support of the completion of the draft by August 2005.

Again, we wish to reiterate some of the points we raised earlier in the
year regarding the material supply. The Construction Industry Development
Board status report notes this on the cost of material: Increases in
material costs manifesting within the industry are a course for concern and
those of 2003 exceeded that of inflation, with some increases reaching up
to 20%.

The 2004 forecast anticipated an increase of 8% in building costs, still 2%
above the expected rates of inflation. Some materials are globally priced,
for instance, increased demand for material in the growing economy of China
has significantly impacted the global commodity price of steel.

Cost and availability of materials is even worrisome when it comes to the
provincial scenario. We have recently discovered that there is a shortage
of material suppliers in the province, for example, in the R43 million
hospital project we are engaged in in Mzimkulu- Rietvlei Hospital, all the
building material in excess of R7,7 million in that project is sourced from
Kwazulu-Natal, with Durban and Harding, indicated as the nearest major
centres at 220km.

As members will remember, our province did exceptionally well in the
schools and clinics building programme in the last financial year. We will
double our efforts to continue to do good in this regard, of course, funds
permitting. We are determined to speed up the process of reducing the mud
structures and with the kind of determination that we have, we sure will
succeed.

In conclusion, once again, we wish to thank the House and we appreciate
this opportunity to come and participate in this debate in support of the
Budget Vote. The province of the Eastern Cape supports the vote. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr M B GWALA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, Minister of Public Works, Deputy
Minister and colleagues in other provinces, ladies and gentlemen, allow me
to begin by saying how pleased we are that Minister Sigcau has recovered
from her bout of ill health. And allow me to wish her good health in
future.

Prior to last year’s elections, as a member of the KwaZulu-Natal
legislature, I was a critic of the KwaZulu-Natal department of works.
Having being appointed the MEC of works in 2004 did not mean that I shelved
my criticism, I am still a critic - only now I criticise from the inside
with a more informed background. I have had the experience of working with
my department for close to a year and found  that, firstly, the senior
management team is dysfunctional; secondly, the current organisational
structure is not aligning to the co-function of the department; the
departmental vacancy rate is in excess of 30%, and includes very high rates
for professional and technical staff with no departmental retention or
attraction response; and fourthly, every aspect of human resource
management is problematic, like recruitment, planning, performance
management and disciplinary management.

To begin to address these problems I have announced a changed agenda, aimed
at transforming the department into a top performer. The department’s
changed agenda acknowledges the precarious situation the department finds
itself in. I have not tried to implement grandiose but meaningless plans to
address these problems. Rather, through the changed agenda I have
implemented major programmes to address this problem in the right way at
this time.

I will now focus on some specific issues that emanated from the changed
agenda. An international expert, Mr Les Cook, has been contracted to review
the service delivery model to fully meet client department requirements for
delivery of high quality infrastructure. It is accepted that this must
begin by improving the relationship with client departments. The
appointment of client relationship managers for each client department is
an important first step in this regard. The point must, however, be made
that endeavours to improve the relationship between the works department
and its clients cannot be placed at the door of the works department alone.

Client departments must realise that part of the value of the MTEF process
is that it allows for advanced planning. We must move away from the
situation where clients submit plans to the departments of works at the
last minute and expect results yesterday. Client departments need to beef
up their human resources who deal with such infrastructure prioritisation.
In addition, they must learn to be specific in their requirements. As
Minister Sigcau has stated in the press: “It is like being a tailor and
someone comes and say he wants a suit, but he doesn’t know what colour or
what design.”

The heart and soul of the department of works should be in its property
management system. Currently it would appear that we have neither a heart
nor a soul. This needs to be rectified. To this end we will ensure that
such a system will be in place by May 2006. The fact that this system will
utilise an information technology platform that is already used by the two
biggest client departments will further enhance provincial co-ordination.

It is unfortunate that the same level of progress has not occurred at the
national level. The Jozini situation is but one example of the problems
that emanated from the lack of an asset register at the national level.
Members of the National Assembly portfolio committee were shocked to find
that at one building, apparently previously occupied by the South African
National Defence Force, a situation existed where numerous unlicensed
vehicles were being worked on, whilst an adjacent building was filled with
lounge furniture.

I do not know if what was going on in these buildings was legal, but why
the mind really boggled was that an individual was paying rent for the
buildings - to whom and on what basis was not forthcoming. How many other
national buildings across the province are being similarly used? In some
places former disused courts are being used as shebeens. Minister Sigcau,
it is critical that your department give this matter urgent attention.

The presence of an asset register in the province by next year will no
doubt aid the process of relocating government departments to
Pietermaritzburg. In this regard prominence must be given to making
underutilised buildings user-friendly for departments, before rushing off
to hire expensive privately-owned buildings.

The President, in his state of national address mentioned that the delivery
of classrooms still has not reached the desired expectations. In KwaZulu-
Natal we have identified a backlog of over 14 000 classroom. As such, the
KwaZulu-Natal Department of Works will make classroom construction our
number one priority. To this end we have proposed a five-year programme to
fully eliminate the backlog. This will involve the construction of 1 500
classrooms in 2005-06, with 2000 being built in the second year; and 4000
classrooms in each of the remaining years. I should also mention that when
we construct such classrooms, we should take into account the special needs
of disabled people.

In KwaZulu-Natal the ultimate responsibility for the Expanded Public Works
Programme rests with the department of transport, as opposed to the
department of works. Nevertheless, I must state that within the department
of works we are fully committed to the ideals of the EPWP. To facilitate
this the department is currently involved in the development of the
Construction Industry Transformation Charter by the national department.

While I have been painting a promising picture, I must also allude to the
human resource constraints the department operates under. The Construction
Industry Development Board has documented the fact that the construction
industry lacks capacity at all levels. KwaZulu-Natal mirrors this
situation. We need to address the number of learners being equipped in
maths and science at schools, and universities need to produce more
architects, engineers and quantity surveyors. At the moment, with a
scarcity of these skills, it is difficult for the public sector to compete
with private sector firms that offer substantially better remuneration.
This is a severe constraining factor in inhibiting retention and
replacement of staff.

As such, all we have been able to do is focus on other operational factors
impacting on the appeal of the department as an employer. As such, we are
attempting to deal with problems in the recruitment, planning and
performance management arena and are focusing on efforts to make senior
management less dysfunctional. We have also tried to strengthen the HIV and
Aids budget as part of the employer system programme. Ultimately, however,
the only way the department can succeed in this regard is if it is able to
pay skilled technical staff salaries that are more closely approximate to
what they are likely to be offered in the private sector.

At the end of the day, however, all members of this House must accept that
the lack of capacity in the construction industry in general could
significantly hinder development in the public and private sector alike.
All leaders need to apply their minds as to how to reverse this trend.
The type of work my department does makes it vulnerable to corruption and
fraud. I have instructed the Head of Department, Dr Madlopha, vigorously
and ruthlessly to deal with fraud, corruption, nepotism and other
malpractices so that they can be rooted out and the culprits dealt with.
Citizens of KwaZulu-Natal deserve clean government administration. Arrests
of some forty individuals are imminent in cases involving Persal fraud and
procurement malpractices. It is further hoped that the introduction of the
supply chain management will curb instances of procurement fraud. At the
same time the media needs to handle the issue of corruption in the
department in a responsible and serious way, as opposed to the
sensationalist alarmism that has been appearing in the Sunday Times. I wish
to support the budget.

Ms N T MCHUNU: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, and the MECs from all the
provinces, the chairpersons of the departments of work and hon members,
thank you very much for giving me the honour to address you in this debate.

The mission of the department clearly states that it is to promote the
government’s objectives of economic development, good governance, rising
living standards and property by providing and managing the accommodation,
housing, land and infrastructure needs of national departments and by
promoting the national Expanded Public Works Programme and encouraging
transformation of the construction and property industries.

Thus the department endeavours to efficiently manage the life cycle of
immovable assets under the department’s custodianship, provide expert
advise to all three spheres of government and parastatals on immovable
assets and contribute to the national goals of job creation and poverty
alleviation through the co-ordination of public works programmes; it forms
an integral part of that and provides strategic leadership to the
construction and property industries. The budget of the Department of
Public Works implies funding for a department that works and that makes
everybody an active worker, not a passive armchair policy-maker.

The Department of Public Works and all other line departments, which work
closely with it, have to ensure the success of the mission that is laid
down. The working wagon of the department moves on financial wheels, which
is the budget. The beauty of a country is measured by the beauty of its
building lay-out and environmental cleanliness, which is the aesthetic
beauty, so buildings have to be built with long-lasting materials that will
cater for the climatic conditions of that region. An example is having
prefabs that are too old, and with holes in an area that is cold. The
department therefore could perhaps consider replacing old prefab houses. In
Cape Town that may be a hazard now, due to cold and unwelcome guests.
By the way, the department should go beyond houses and look into sewerage
drains that become homes to these uninvited guests. That means working
closely with and the health and environmental inspectorate of the
Department of Health. The co-business of the department, that is providing
accommodation services for all government departments, requires good
budgeting.

It is a well-known fact and a concern that there is a backlog, especially
in schools with classrooms. Is there a hope of closing this gap, are we
halfway with the construction of classrooms; or do we still have a long way
to go? The delay that usually occurs of transferring money from client
departments to works departments has to be dealt with. The role of the
Expanded Public Works Programme is appreciated, and we all need to run with
it, provided that its budget is well catered for.

With all the training that takes place in the Expanded Public Works
Programme, trainees have to be involved in cleaning and classroom
construction for their practicals. That will solve the unemployment problem
and also assist with poverty alleviation. This is where co-operatives
should play a role, when communities save money together and participate in
these programmes.

Schools need minikitchens where orphaned children may be taught how to
cook. We all know What is happening with the endemic disease of HIV/Aids.
Many families are now headed by children, so they need to be taught how to
cook, and the teachers in schools can be of great help. But kitchens with
low properties can assist a lot in teaching these orphans. As hon members
of this House we need to assist this department with oversight work, as
some projects die along the way when funding dries up.

We could look into our provinces to see the number of projects which were
started by the department of public works that have literally died down
because no proper follow-up was done. The budget is supported by the IFP,
but more commitment is needed from communities with their labour to own
products and further their partnership with the private sector as our
Minister indicated. [Applause.]

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, hon MECs
and hon members, as we move into the second decade of our democracy it is
necessary to take a critical look at some of the department’s abilities to
accelerate job creation, alleviate poverty, and build a prosperous South
Africa that benefits all,
as explained by the Freedom Charter and underpinned by the people’s
contract.

As a custodian of state immovable assets, the Department of Public Works
has an important role to play in alleviation of poverty and unemployment.

A major concern is the budget shortfall on Program 2 of the national
department’s budget for the provision of land and accommodation for which
only R1,640 billion was allocated. This programme included capital works,
maintenance, leasing, rates and payments of municipal services. As a result
of decades of underfunding the backlog on maintenance has grown to
approximately R12,5 billion.

It is further estimated that in addition to this amount the department will
require annually R2,5 billion for normal maintenance. The current
maintenance budget of R940 million is therefore insufficient to meet even
the ongoing needs for the maintenance of the about 100 000 facilities
throughout South Africa.

It seems certain that the current backlog in maintenance will grow annually
unless something is done about it. Of utmost urgency, therefore, is the
development of a holistic maintenance plan that will result in all assets
being repaired to restore operational efficiency as soon as is possible and
then maintained as such.

In the Free State the national department was allocated only R91 million
for capital jobs and R91 million for maintenance for the current financial
year. What is very pleasing, however, is the fact the Free State branch of
the department was able to spend 100% of its capital works budget for the
2004-05 financial year by 31 March 2005.

I would like to call on the Minister and provincial departments to look
again at the potential role that repairs and maintenance can play in the
creation of sustainable jobs, skills development, and the development of
entrepreneurs in the long term, as well as wealth creation.

Repairs and maintenance can create real business opportunities for emerging
entrepreneurs. They are more labour intensive, require less capital, and
are more profitable than large construction jobs. More entrepreneurs can
participate in the repair and maintenance contract market, and it is an
ongoing growing market. Here I refer to painting, plumbing, glazing,
electrical jobs, landscaping and flooring jobs, to mention but a few.

I am further of the opinion that the cost per job will compare favourably
with the benchmark set by the Expanded Public Works Programme in terms of
costs per job. More funding should therefore be made available for repairs
and maintenance by possibly reallocating some of the funds allocated for
new capital projects to the repair and maintenance programme. This will
require the speeding up of reviewing the repair and maintenance and
emerging contractors development programme.

One of the main challenges that the national and provincial departments
face is the transformation of the property industry. Currently this
industry is still in the hands of white landlords. This is very evident in
the Free State, where 98% of this industry is dominated by a very small
number of landlords who monopolise the current leasing rates, especially in
Bloemfontein.

I therefore would like to request the Minister to speed up the development
of the transformation charter for the property industry as a matter of
urgency, and at the same time request the industry to fully participate in
this very important transformation charter. A further concern which flows
directly from the underfunding is its effect on the ability of the
department to pay rates on state property, municipal services and leasing
commitments.

The select committee has also raised its concern regarding this matter, and
the effectiveness of the cash flow of municipalities and their ability to
deliver services. Black Economic Empowerment is still the cornerstone of
government policy, to enable the majority of South Africans to access the
mainstream economy. The national and provincial departments are therefore
ideally poised to contribute significantly to Black Economic Empowerment in
2005.

With any project launched by the department we should however be wary of
fronting, which remains a real problem. We need to safeguard these
initiatives against all forms of corruption. The true benefits must reach
the intended target. On this point I would like to reply to a remark made
by the DA leader in Mpumalanga on 16 April, when he stated that the ANC
only pays lip service to corruption. By that he implied that this
government is, firstly, not serious about combating this scourge and
secondly, suggested that we are promoting it.

I will remind all that as a national revolutionary democratic movement, the
ANC is bound by its revolutionary morality to combat corruption at all
levels. [Interjections.] This government has done more to combat corruption
than other previous governments. This is also the most transparent
government this country has had in its entire history. [Interjections.]

I would like to remind DA members, especially those in this parliament,
provincial legislatures and local governments, who were part of the
previous apartheid government, of the secret funds which existed that were
not subjected to accountability and reporting, and which are still being
discovered today. It is about time that these people do some introspection
and self-reflection on their own roles in hiding or condoning these
activities.

They were silent on these and other related corrupt activities. Statement
like these are far from the truth and malicious. My question to the DA is:
What are they doing actively to combat corruption in the structures they
serve, other than merely shouting from the sidelines.

Ek wil hulle ook herinner aan die R3 miljoen skeidingspakket wat die DA-
beheerde George-munisipaliteit aan die munisipale bestuurder gegee het. Dit
is niks anders as wanbesteding nie, en dus moet hulle ophou om hulle voor
te doen as die bewaarders van moraliteit in Suid-Afrika. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Die Morkel-Harksen-aangeleentheid is nog vars in ons geheue.(Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I also want to remind them of the R3 million severance package the DA-
controlled municipality of George gave to the municipal manager. That is
nothing but misappropriation, and they must therefore stop representing
themselves as the custodians of morality in South Africa. [Interjections.]
The Morkel-Harksen matter is still fresh in our memory.]

Despite the budget constraints and challenges, the Department of Public
Works, including the provincial department, is focused on improving the
lives of all South Africans. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms K C MASHEGO-DLAMINI (Mpumalanga): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, my colleagues, MECs from different provinces, members of this
House, members of staff of Public Works, ladies and gentlemen, I feel very
much honoured to be afforded the opportunity to discuss the merits and the
demerits of the Minister’s Budget Vote. I am more than honoured, because
this is a historic year. It is a historic year because of the following:
The 20th anniversary of the formation of our alliance partner, the Congress
of SA Trade Unions; the 50th anniversary of the formation of the SA
Congress of Trade Unions, Sactu; the 10th anniversary of the death of
Isithwalandwe, Joe Slovo; the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter and
the 93rd anniversary of our glorious movement.

In observing 50 years of the Freedom Charter we must reconfirm our
commitment to a revolutionary struggle to bring into being a better society
founded on dignity and equality for all. It is a humbling thought that in
10 years of democracy South Africa has made such rapid strides in
transforming the very fabric of its society. To quote President Thabo Mbeki
in his state of the nation address on the 11 February 2005:

  We assert that our country as a united nation has never in its entire
  history enjoyed such a confluence of encouraging possibilities.

However, even as we enjoy the realisation of the dream held by the people
who gathered in Kliptown nearly half a century ago, we know our freedom
will not be complete until all our people are freed from poverty and
economic dispossession. This freedom can only be achieved if the programme
of action set out by the government that cares for its people is
effectively implemented and if all who participate in this programme are
committed to service delivery in the spirit of Batho Pele.

We commend the Minister, the provincial MECs and the Department of Public
Works for a pivotal role in the service delivery and the responsibility
allocated to them to lead the Expanded Public Works Programme, the
government efforts to put in place a range of public works programmes to
alleviate poverty and unemployment as called for and entrusted to us by the
President.

We, in the province of Mpumalanga, have seen the fruits of the launch of
the Expanded Public Works Programme, which has culminated in the extensive
job creation that has added value to the lives of those targeted and
contributed about R375 million with 10 744 jobs, towards the expenditure of
the national achievement of R2,4 billion for the 1 890 projects, which the
Minister has announced. We have created some 145 056 job opportunities, in
spite of the late start by the province. This is good work to be celebrated
in this House. We congratulate the national and provincial Expanded Public
Works Programme and all the role-players who participated in this
programme.

The 1 500 learnerships have become a special purpose vehicle to ensure
skills development and to produce entrepreneurs that will exist with a
sound business output. We have realised about 36 learnerships in the
province and their contribution will be significant in the coming financial
year, when the economic sector is in full swing with the venture
learnerships throughout the country.

These learnerships will make an important contribution to the broad- based
Black Economic Empowerment. We need more intervention by the private sector
to participate nation wide in line with our gross domestic product.

In view of the large quantity of computer hardware that the government has,
intervention of the bridging the digital gap intervention must be commended
and encouraged. It is meant to spread the computer hardware evenly in those
provinces that are vast and rural by nature, in order to ensure the
creation of sustainable community participation; bridging the formation and
digital divide; access to facilities; building an information web; linking
communities; enhancement and conservation of knowledge within marginalised
areas; and the development of skills.

With regard to the Adopt a Village strategy, we move that the programme be
replicated throughout the country with the view of involving Salga for the
benefit of the intended communities, especially now that the municipalities
will be largely participating in the Expanded Public Works Programme.

With regard to the Independent Development Trust, IDT, their experience and
expertise is invaluable to the Expanded Public Works Programme. Therefore,
they need to receive more support, visibility and engagement within their
provincial spheres now that more school projects and maintenance will
follow a new trend of development.

With regard to its function of providing for the accommodation needs of the
national government departments, the department has announced that it has
spent about R3 billion on various capital works projects during the past
financial year. By the end of the financial year, the department had fully
spent its capital budget for 11 out of 12 client departments and fully
spent its own capital and maintenance budget. This is highly commended.

The vigorous recruitment programme that was implemented at national level,
which resulted in a substantial drop in the vacancy level of skilled posts,
particularly in technical fields, must be replicated in provinces in order
to ensure consistency and synergy. In this financial year our department
has signed service level agreements with client departments in the
province. Within that agreement, the department will construct and renovate
schools, clinics and offices to an amount of R0,5 billion.

  I stand before this House today with confidence in the able manner in
  which the Minister has been able to support us in dealing with the
  challenges of infrastructure in our provinces. It is very true that with
  the budget allocated to the national Department of Public Works,
  maintenance backlogs will still remain a serious challenge. When I try to
  analyse the contribution of the job opportunities by the EPWP, I thought
  of Mother Teresa when she said: “We sometimes
feel that what we do is just a drop in the ocean, but the ocean will be
less because of that missing drop.’’ [Applause.] Indeed, the contribution
in pushing back the frontiers of poverty is in the right direction. We
really commend the support we are getting from the national department.

The late president of our movement, O R Tambo, once spelt out the true
meaning of the Freedom Charter, which he proclaimed as the Year of the
Charter, to our country and people in the late 1980s in his statement on 8
January to mark the 25th anniversary of the Freedom Charter. He said:

  The Freedom Charter contains the fundamental perspective of the vast
  majority of the people of South Africa of the kind of liberation that all
  of us are fighting for.


  Hence, it is not merely the Freedom Charter of the ANC and its allies;
  rather it is the Charter of the people of South Africa for liberation.
  Because it came from the people during what he proclaimed the Year of the
  Charter; it remains still a people’s Charter - the one basic political
  statement of our goal to which all genuinely democratic and patriotic
  forces of South Africa adhere.

Indeed, the speech of the Minister has correctly adhered to this vision of
the ANC, as it was once stated by their late president.

Mr Watson, you must understand that Pilgrim’s Rest is a government monument
town. It only has accommodation for public works staff who are working for
government. Nut sellers are in business in our town, Pilgrim’s Rest. Jobs
in government, especially in the Department of Public Works, are advertised
and people are ... [Time expired.]

Mr T MUFAMADI (Limpopo): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, colleagues and friends, MECs from various provinces, hon members
of the NCOP and distinguished guests, I must say that we start our
participation in this debate, as people from Limpopo and the country at
large, still reeling from a great sense of shock and disbelief at the
sudden passing away of our fellow compatriot, a soldier and a freedom
fighter for our liberation and the freedom our people, Comrade Frans
Mofapha Mohlala.

I must say we have already started feeling the void he has left, barely 24
hours since he passed on. We are also inspired to participate in this
debate in the same spirit and motivated by the legacy he has left behind;
that of serving his people and fighting against poverty without asking for
any form of compensation or reward. And he, indeed, in this regard died on
duty. He died doing what he knew best – providing political education to
the members of the congress alliance because he always believed that the
best soldiers of our movement, defending democracy and freedom for our
people, are conscious members of the party that is now in government.

Hon Minister, it is in this spirit that we commit ourselves as a people and
representatives of our people in Limpopo that we shall continue from where
he left off and ensure that the success, implementation and realisation of
the objectives of our Freedom Charter, as envisaged 50 years ago, that we
will have to continue to struggle for the creation of a united, democratic,
nonsexist, nonracial and above all prosperous South Africa for all our
people. We will do so by ensuring that all the programmes that we have
agreed to in terms of the people’s contract of ensuring that we will
provide facilities, and better facilities, for our children at all levels
of our schooling is realised. But we shall contribute as a department to
continue to meaningfully participate in halving the levels of unemployment
and poverty by the year 2014.

We will do so by making sure that we continue to intensify our labour-
intensive methods such as Gundo Lashu and now Sakha Sonke in the
construction industry. We will do so by ensuring that we bridge the gap
between the first and the second economy, because for us this is not a
choice, but an imperative for all South Africans.
Let me also reflect briefly on the speech delivered by our hon Minister,
particularly around the issues of the Construction Industry Development
Board, CIDB. I must say, as a pilot province, together with the eThekwini
Municipality, we have, hon Minister, learnt valuable lessons and gained
valuable experience from implementing this programme, and we are willing to
share our experiences with sister provinces to make sure that we deepen the
understanding and the importance of regulating this industry.

The problems that we have gone through we regard as only teething problems,
hon members, just as in the implementation of any new legislation. You will
recall that when we first implemented the Public Finance Management Act the
first thing that accounting officers thought of was to resign, because they
saw the negative rather than the positive side of the Act. Now what we have
realised as Limpopo is that this Act is an enabling Act that will make it
possible for emerging contractors to graduate from being emerging to fully-
fledged contractors and meaningful role-players in the industry.

However, what is important is the ability of us as government to continue
to address the fears and anxieties that are experienced within the industry
itself, particularly within the ranks of the historically disadvantaged
emerging contractors. As a province we are in a process of popularising and
deepening the positive aspect of this Act, for it is important for the
historically disadvantaged entrepreneurs and contractors to participate
meaningfully so that in the next few years the industry could be fully
transformed.

It is also important that we begin to bring on board our sister departments
so that they gain a common understanding of the implication of the Act
itself as it is implemented, particularly in housing and road agencies.

Currently, hon Minister, what is happening in Limpopo is that those
contractors that cannot get into the system, for one reason or the other,
found it important for themselves to move into the housing department to
continue to do construction work. But what we are saying is that it is
important that provinces at some point should not necessarily find
themselves in a situation where there are no contractors eligible to do
construction work because they have not been registered with the CIBD
programmes.

In terms of the Expanded Public Works Programme, hon Minister, our view as
a province is that, and I think this should be the view of government as a
whole, the Expanded Publics Works Programme is not necessarily a
responsibility for government alone. It is a responsibility of all role-
players in the economy. So, it is not just the sole domain of government to
dispose of its resources in a manner that can contribute to reducing the
burden of unemployment in our society.
But in order to bring together the role of government departments, various
sectors within government and other sectors in the economy, the centrality
of the Setas is very, very important. And we are in a process of
addressing, in this regard, the problems that we have or the challenges
that we have experienced as government in Limpopo with the Minister of
Labour, Comrade Membathisi Mdladlana.

We have successfully launched various programmes in this regard,
particularly around the emerging contractors programmes, which in our view
will be as successful as the Gundo Lashu programme and the Sakha Sonke
emerging contractors’ programme. I must also say, hon Minister and hon
members of the NCOP, that a separation of this department from other line
functions has helped us to focus and build capacity and to bring back the
centrality of Public Works as a department in the provision of
infrastructure in government.

I can proudly report to you, hon Minister, that as of today, a total amount
of no less than R180 million, since the beginning of this financial year,
has been committed, and we have got contractors on site to deal with the
challenges of classroom backlogs and particularly to deal with the
challenges of children learning under trees, in particular in our rural
hinterland. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon MEC, I am afraid your time has
expired. [Applause.] I will now call upon hon ... [Interjections.]

Mr T MUFAMADI (Limpopo): We thank you, and support the budget of a hard-
working Minister. [Applause.]

Mr H YAWA (North West): Tla ke go leboge Modulasetulo ka tiro ya gago e e
manontlhotlho. [Let me thank you, Chairperson, for your splendid work.]

Hon Minister Faku, Deputy Minister Kganyago, the chairperson of the select
committee - in his absence now - hon members, delegates and colleagues from
other provinces, the Freedom Charter is the beginning and the end. That the
Freedom Charter is the beginning and the end remains valid today and
forever. As we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the charter this year, we
need to take stock of our achievements towards the realisation of the
vision of this charter.

The pace of delivery is gaining momentum in the platinum province. In
support of this Budget Vote, allow me to share with your august House some
of the achievements of the department that I have the honour to lead.
According to our asset register - completed and installed in five
workstations in this financial year - the total portfolio of our fixed
assets is estimated at R11 billion.

As you are aware, providing integrated sustainable public infrastructure is
one of our core functions in the Department of Public Works. This mandate
covers, in the main, the implementation of capital development programmes
for the Departments of Health and Education. In addition, we are also
responsible for major renovations, day-to-day maintenance and preventative
maintenance of public buildings. Co-operation and communication with our
main client departments eg the Departments of Education and Health are of
paramount importance. This critical success factor is further influenced by
the location of the budgets for these programmes in the client departments.

Regarding the provision of health facilities, in the last financial year my
department completed five major hospital renovation projects at the
combined contract value of R428 million on behalf of the Department of
Health. We have also completed the building of 29 clinics in the
historically marginalised rural areas. As the pace of delivery gains
momentum, we will execute seven clinic-building projects for the Department
of Health in this financial year. All of these projects are to commence at
the end of next month.

Concerning hospital revitalisation, under this programme we have completed
the delivery of the R39 million Swartruggens Hospital. This 30-bed facility
also includes a housing project for staff. As a department, we are proud to
have delivered to the Department of Health and the communities of Kgetleng
River municipality a technologically advanced public hospital that is
second to none.

As the pace of delivery gains momentum, the construction of the R200
million Moses Kotane Hospital will commence by the end of next month. The
construction of the R190 million Vryburg Hospital will commence by the end
of October this year. I should indicate that all three new hospitals under
this programme represent a total paradigm shift in public health
infrastructure design and construction, and competitive public
infrastructure alternatives to private health facilities.

Concerning the schools building programme, my department completed 13
school building projects in the past financial year on behalf of the
Department of Education. For the current financial year 13 school building
projects at a combined value of R82,1 million are to be undertaken on
behalf of the Department of Education. We are taking practical steps to
achieve better results today and tomorrow than we did yesterday. Therefore
contractors will be on site at all 13 schools as of next month. I want to
assure you, hon Minister, that the finger pointing at the department will
soon be something of the past.

With regard to improving the relationship with client departments, in order
to improve service delivery and to govern interdepartmental relationships
and expectations we have entered into a service level agreement with the
Departments of Education and Health. We have established a joint
departmental task team with the Department of Education to develop a five-
year provincial infrastructure maintenance and development plan by the end
of July this year. We are confident that, in the long run, only forward
planning will see us overcome maintenance and developmental challenges
facing the Department of Education and us.

We will also engage in the maintenance and renovation of the offices and
administration block at Ga-Rona at a cost of R48,4 million. This project
will run over two financial years and will create accommodation for an
additional 1 264 public servants in the circle of Ga-Rona. On completion of
the project Ga-Rona will accommodate 2 056 public servants. This will
alleviate the office space shortage experienced by most departments.

Concerning the Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, creating work and
fighting poverty are central in our programme as government, for the
creation of a South Africa that truly belongs to all. According to our
fourth quarterly report we managed to create 18 450 job opportunities
through the Expanded Public Works Programme across all spheres of
government in the past financial year.

For the current financial year all departments have registered EPWP
projects with the project management unit in the office of the Premier.
This will enable us to monitor compliance with EPWP national guidelines. We
hope that our representation on the provincial municipal infrastructure
grant committee will ensure alignment of municipal infrastructure grant
projects to the EPWP, and improve co-ordination and reporting.

For this financial year we have identified Modimong village in the
Bophirima region as the next village for major intervention, after the
Modimola EPWP project which was launched last year in September. The second
phase of the Modimola project, which is to commence by the end of next
month, will involve labour-intensive road maintenance, construction of
village roads and the provision of farming infrastructure. Fifteen
learnership contracts are to be awarded to beneficiaries trained in the
first phase of the project. Thirty potential farmers identified through the
food security projects in the first phase are to be trained in farming and
food production.

We have also identified 38 projects in the various regions of the province
for the rolling out of the Expanded Public Works Programme. Through these
projects close to 2 000 jobs are to be created by the Department of Public
Works alone. We have, jointly with the Department of Education, identified
50 schools for minor and major renovations through labour-intensive
construction methods. The selection of beneficiaries will have a stronger
bias towards women, the youth and the disabled.

Because this government actually wants to make the people masters of their
destiny, learnerships are therefore of paramount importance to this
objective. In the past financial year we offered internships to 40
unemployed youths who are graduates and diplomates in communication,
financial accounting, legal services, supply chain management and human
resources. In partnership with the office of the Premier and the Public
Sector Education and Training Authority, the department is currently
implementing 66 learnerships in project management, public sector
accounting, human resources management and construction.

In conclusion, allow me to quote what an African genius, poet and writer,
Ben Okri, said in his poem titled The Awakening Age, and I quote:

  O ye who travel the meridian line,
  May the vision of the new world within you shine.


  May eyes that have lived with poverty’s rage,
  See through the glory of the awakening age.


  For we are all richly linked in hope,
  Woven in history, like a mountain rope.


  Together we can ascend to a new height,
  Guided by our heart’s clearest light.


  When perceptions are changed there’s much to gain,
  A flowering of truth instead of pain.


  There’s more to a people than their poverty;
  There’s their work, wisdom and creativity.


  Along the line may our lives rhyme,
  To make a loving harvest of space and time.

As a department, we have resolved to denounce “business as usual” and to
change perceptions about ourselves, because ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, your time has expired.
[Laughter.]

Mr H YAWA (North West): ... we believe that when perceptions are changed,
there is much to gain. Thank you. Ke a leboga. [Applause.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Hon Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, MECs, special
delegates and colleagues, I read in one of the papers early this year that
an old man in KwaZulu-Natal went to St Lucia to fish. When he got there he
dozed off while fishing. He then decided to sleep. While he slept he
thought he was dreaming when he was being pushed by a very huge crocodile
towards the water. When he woke up he realised, “I am not dreaming but it’s
the reality that this crocodile is pushing me towards water”. This story
says that the crocodile is strong even on land, let alone in the water.

If propaganda could not sustain itself during the dark age when budgets
were passed to suppress and eliminate the indigenous people of this
country, what more when the leaders were in Robben Island, when the leaders
were in exile and when propaganda was trying to convince the people of
South Africa, black and white, that the ANC was a terrorist organisation?
This movement was able to defend itself during those difficult times while
it was on land, that is when they were outside. The crocodile is strong in
the water. The crocodile is now here in South Africa. [Applause.]

It’s extremely important to analyse issues. When we deal with the budget of
the Minister, the budget that has to do with the people of this country and
addresses the inequities of the past, whenever you talk, you must think
twice because the people of this country are now politicised and no longer
agree with any propaganda. They know the truth.

The ANC does not need an opposition party because the electorate are the
opposition. [Interjections.] Listen! Listen! Listen! The electorate that
elected the ANC into power are a serious opposition if the ANC does not
comply with the promises made. Therefore the understanding has to be very
clear.

I respect you, Mr Watson, very much but what do you mean by a responsible
opposition party? [Interjections.] What do you mean? Because if you say,
“responsible opposition party” we have to analyse that. We have to analyse
what you mean. But then we realise again that somebody does not understand
the word “opposition”. If you oppose anything for the sake of opposition
you are busy losing ground regarding the people of this country who are
gaining momentum on political education. They understand issues better than
when the crocodile was in exile.

Therefore I want to say that the NNP will be quoted in the history of
mankind into the future. [Interjections.] Definitely, they will be quoted.
If they were opposing propaganda and the giant is here, they realise the
giant is here and say, “Hey, this giant is not a communist and not a
terrorist but this giant has the truth”. You have to change your mindset
unless something is wrong. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Moatshe, can you give me some
time to hear the point of order. Hon Watson, before you say anything, this
is what I am going to apply generally, not to you in particular: I am not
going to allow members’ time to be wasted. You must precisely state the
provisions of the Rule according to which you rise on a point of order
because members have a tendency to make statements.

Mr A WATSON: I respect the member very much, but he is not adhering to the
topic for discussion. He is delivering a sermon on my speech. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: The point of order is not sustained.
Continue, hon Moatshe.

Rev P MOATSHE: Thank you very much. In fact, what I am saying has a bearing
on the budget today. If the mindset of the people of this country who were
dented by the past is not shifted and turned around, we will waste a lot of
budgets that we pass here. Therefore it is imperative for us to make our
people understand.

Regarding the Expanded Public Works Programme that Mr Watson said is now
being overemphasised, it means that the ANC is gearing up the people of
South Africa, sharpening their minds and focusing on speeding up change in
this country. We have short-term goals and long-term goals. Therefore the
Expanded Public Works Programme has its short and long terms. Obviously,
since it has been brought into life it has made a difference in the lives
of the people of this country. That’s why I wanted to save the DA because
it might be flushed away with the waters of history. [Interjections.]

What we are doing here today will have to withstand the test of tomorrow.
It will be very unfortunate if we undermine the thinking capacity of the
people of South Africa. But let’s not build on those few who were
privileged during the apartheid system - those who were privileged and who
still think they are dreaming, like the old man who thought he was dreaming
while in reality he was being pushed by a crocodile towards the water. We
must awaken the people of South Africa not to be mislead by an
irresponsible opposition.

An HON MEMBER: Amen!

Rev P MOATSHE: This budget is contributing so much towards the turning
around of history.

An HON MEMBER: Hallelujah!

Rev P MOATSHE: Obviously, it’s a sermon to you, Mr Watson, that you may be
saved or repent, otherwise you will be flushed away by the waters of
history. I thank you. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you. Order, hon members! Mr
Watson, I think this thought-provoking and challenging speech by Rev
Moatshe has woken up most of the members who were asleep earlier on.
Without any waste of time, I will call upon the Minister of Public Works,
hon Stella Sigcau, to close the debate.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:  Chair, first of all I must thank all the
members. I do not know whether it is the 10 years of democracy, but there
is a change in this House. Also in our approach to debating issues, there
is a serious change and it is a qualitative change. [Applause.]

Once upon a time I used to say “with our hands”, and I think that the
essence of what was coming out of this debate was a justification of how,
with our hands, we can change who we are, how we do things and for whom we
do things. We are talking at a time when issues around the second economy
are being highlighted in our country and it is important that, as we talk
of the moulding of that second economy, we are mindful of the fact that
this is that particular time when we need to lift our people by the hand
and move them forward. That is why I say am happy that the debate today was
highly qualitative. “Ukuba sithetha inyani, besisazi ukuba sizakuya kwi-
NCOP sizokuphumla.” [If one must tell the truth, we thought that we would
come to the NCOP just to sleep.]

But today, it was an education of the first kind coming from various
participants, and I really must thank the House for that, because even as
we run the departments it enriches us when there are frank debates and when
the nature of what is being said is educational and when people, without
necessarily being rude, point out where some of the issues need to be
corrected because there are still some gaps. I must also say that it has
actually paid to dividends have some of the Minmecs we have been having
with the MECs.
“Nikhulile, niyayazi into eniyenzayo kwaye niyayazi into eniyifunela abantu
benu.” [You have grown up, you know what you are doing and you know what
you want for your people.]

This is very important. And what I also like is the fact that we are
growing in the sense that instead of being made to run into some corners,
because here and there people are not happy with some of the issues around
the work we do, for the first time people were coming up with solutions on
how to deal with some of these issues.
“Ngoba uma ungazimela mntanami, uyozimela kude kube nini?” [If you can
hide, my child, how long will you hide?] What is important is to come up
with answers for our new South Africa.

Let me address the whole question of poverty, which some parties think we
are overemphasising and the issue of the Expanded Public Works Programme,
whose hands some parties think we are overplaying. All I want to say is
that you have to live next door to poverty, you have to see poverty with
your own eyes and you have to smell the smell of poverty, then you will
understand the importance of this thrust by government to say let us create
jobs, even if they are not of a long duration, so as to bring fire and food
to those homesteads. And while we are dealing with that programme, it does
not mean that as government we sit back and pat ourselves on the back. We
are also asking how do we move the process forward so that in future we can
talk in terms of sustainability. But if you are going to wear the biggest
boots you have and kick the programme in the teeth even before it has
unfolded, I won’t say there is no hope for your party because you might
just be an individual. There is no hope for you. [Laughter.]

One of the issues that at times can be said to be a blessing to mankind
“ukuba nesazela” [to have conscience]. You feel that, oh my God, why should
I look at this? Where is my conscience? Then you go back and say: Just how
do we put things right?

I once saw on TV these young people who were just driving along and the
water splashed other people, but they just drove on regardless. We are not
a society built like that. We are supposed to bring out what is humane and
what is best in us and really I’ll go to sleep. I am sure as from today you
will never hear of a sick Stella, because I felt something tangible
happening within these walls. [Applause.] I felt people questioning their
consciences, not loudly, but in a manner in which thereafter they put their
vision of the South Africa which is getting to yet another term of office.

I want to believe that if we start with the destitute, hold them by the
hands and work with them, it will be the best gospel that can be preached
from any pulpit, making sure that those people believe that there is a
future for them. I am humbled, I am sure the MECs also are and members of
the committee of this House are humbled too by the fact that God has made
us live at this moment in time, when we have to make a difference.

“Andifuni maxoki mna.” [I do not want liars.] You go to the people and say
we are doing a,b,c and d and yet you come here to Parliament to sleep, you
have no conscience, you just mimic. All we will say is: Dream on brother,
dream on sister, but we will leave you there and lead our people by the
hand to the greener pastures we fought for in order to be a democratic
state.

I am happy that this debate is happening at a time when we are looking back
at the pronouncements of our Freedom Charter, because as our forebears
wrote this, they never thought that there would be a time when it would
just fit snugly and would begin to be seen to be practising what were their
dreams, what they planned for the future of this country. All I can say is
this: Thank you for participating in this debate and using ... They will
think that I like Limpopo. Yesterday I was talking of “Gondolashi” and
today I am talking of “Sakhasonke”, but I want to believe that it is the
right word for the type of spirit that we want to see, being the spirit of
how South Africans move into the future.

“Ndiyabulela”. [Thank you.] This was a very enlightening debate, and I hope
that members of my department have noted some of the issues that were
mentioned here which are still part and parcel of our shortcomings and we
will go back to the drawing board and make sure that we correct those, for
we dare not stop making sure that our people are part and parcel of the
second economy till in our country we talk only in terms of one economy.

I want to thank the various members of our staff in the department who,
this year, for some reason I cannot understand, have had some kind of
injection and are very vigilant about their work. I think that as I look at
them sitting there and when they later on join you in having dinner with us
they won’t be doing it out of shame, they will be doing it because they
feel that together with you we are going to be taking our South Africa
somewhere.

Finally, some people get bored when you talk of learnerships. Learnerships
are essential, they are the seedbeds for what we say we can deliver even
for the rest of Africa, because we are working together to try and make
sure that our continent does not slumber but that it moves forward.

“Ndiyabulela kakhulu mhlali-ngaphambili.” [Thank you very much,
Chairperson.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you very much, hon Minister,
the Deputy Minister and also, I think on behalf of this august House, we
must extend our sincere gratitude and appreciation to our special
delegates, MECs and chairpersons of portfolio committees, because without
them this debate was going to be hollow, but with them we have been able to
see where the gaps are, sharing experiences of how certain complex problems
are resolved in a particular province and what the challenges are in other
provinces and we hope that the Department of Public Works out of this
debate will emerge a much better department than ever before.

I want to thank everybody for having participated in this debate and also
announce that there is going to be a function hosted by the Ministry at
Marco’s. The logistics and the details with respect to that will be
announced after I have officially adjourned the House.

That concludes the debate and the business of the day. The House is
adjourned.  We therefore request all members, special delegates and
permanent delegates to remain for five minutes to get the logistics on how
to go to the function.

The Council adjourned at 16:46.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                            MONDAY, 18 APRIL 2005



COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
    on the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Mutual Defence
    Pact, dated 10 March 2005:


         The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
         considered the request for approval by Parliament of  the  Southern
         African Development Community (SADC) Mutual Defence Pact,  referred
         to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of section  231(2)  of
         the Constitution, approve the said Convention.

   Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
    on the United Nations Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
    Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflicts, dated 10 March
    2005:

         The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
         considered the request for approval by  Parliament  of  the  United
         Nations Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of  the  Child  on
         the Involvement of Children in Armed  Conflicts,  referred  to  it,
         recommends that the Council, in terms  of  section  231(2)  of  the
         Constitution, approve the said Convention.


         However the Committee wishes to express  its  concerns  around  the
         process leading to Committee reports on Protocols.  The  fact  that
         Protocols only come to Parliamentary Committees after  having  been
         signed by the Executive and not prior, is discomforting.  It  would
         be appreciated if in future a relevant Committee could be consulted
         to  express  the  provincial  views  before  the  Executive  signs,
         especially on matters affecting Provinces.


         Furthermore, there is no provision in this  Protocol  to  reprimand
         countries that violate it despite being signatories to it.


   Report to be considered.

                          WEDNESDAY, 20 APRIL 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   Defence Special Account Amendment Bill, 2005, and Armaments
         Corporation of South Africa Limited Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted
         by the Minister of Defence on 23 March 2005 and 31 March 2005,
         respectively. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence and
         the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.


National Council of Provinces


1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


      (1)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration:


            Strategic Plan of the Department of Trade and Industry for 2005
         to 2008.


      (2)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


      (a)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for
              2005-6 to 2009-10.
      (b)   Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2003-2004
              [RP 183-2004].


      (3)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration:


      (a)   Agreement on the Financing of Innovative Local Economic
              Development Initiatives by South African Department of
              Provincial and Local Government between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
              of Italy, in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
              1996.
      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement on the Financing of
              Innovative Local Economic Development Initiatives by South
              African Department of Provincial and Local Government between
              the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the Republic of Italy.

      (4)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:


      (a)   Government Notice No R.165 published in Government Gazette No
              27320 dated 24 February 2005: Fees payable in terms of the
              Securities Services Act, 2004 (Act No 36 of 2004).
      (b)   Government Notice No 170 published in Government Gazette No
              27332 dated 25 February 2005: Fixing of rate per kilometre in
              respect of motor vehicles for the purposes of section
              8(b)(ii) and (iii) in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act
              No 58 of 1962).


      (5)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration:


      (a)   Strategic Plan of the National Treasury for 2005-2008 [RP 27-
              2005].
      (b)   Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Service for 2005-
              2008.


      (6)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:
            Proclamation No R.5 published in Government Gazette No 27221
         dated 31 January 2005: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals, in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

      (7)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services for consideration:


            Memorandum by the Minister of Public Works setting out
         particulars of the building Programme for 2005-2006 [RP 24-2005].


TABLINGS



National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson


     The following statement has been submitted to the National Council of
     Provinces by the MEC for Local Government, Housing and Traditional
     Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal.

            Statement in terms of section 106(3) of the Local Government:
         Municipal Systems Act (Act No 32 of 2000).

     This statement is referred to the Select Committee on Local Government
     and Administration for consideration and report.


     Copies of the statement are available from the office of the
     Clerk of Papers.


                            FRIDAY, 29 APRIL 2005


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


      (a)   Special Report of the Auditor-General on alleged irregularities
         at the Armaments Corporation of South Africa (Pty) Ltd [RP 40-
         2005].

      (b)   Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
         Division of Revenue for 2006-2007, tabled in terms of section 9 of
         the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
         1997).

2.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Agreement between the Government of Sweden and the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa on Development Co-operation, 1 July
         2004 – 30 June 2007, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

            c) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the
            Government of Sweden and the Government of the Republic
              of South Africa on Development Co-operation, 1 July 2004 – 30
              June 2007.


3.    The Minister of Health

     Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Commissioner for
     Occupational Diseases for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the Mines and Works
     Compensation Fund for 2003-2004.



                            THURSDAY, 5 MAY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 3 May 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Membership of Committees
     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
         Committees viz:


         Budget Committee:
         Appointed: Fubbs, Ms J L (Alt)


         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of  Children,  Youth  and
         Disabled Persons:

         Appointed: Batyi, Ms F



         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women:
         Appointed: Batyi, Ms F

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

      Withdrawal of papers tabled
     The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development has written to
     the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, withdrawing the
     following reports tabled in Parliament on 28 September 2004 and 3
     February 2005 in terms of section 13 of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act
     No 90 of 1993):

     (a)    Report on the provisional suspension from office without
          remuneration of Magistrate S E Tebe;
     (b)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate R
          Ameer;
     (c)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate M
          S Makamu;
     (d)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Senior
          Magistrate M J S Nhleko;
     (e)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate M
          K Chauke; and
     (f)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate L
          D Monageng.


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Gender Equality
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 187-2004].

2.    The Minister of Home Affairs

      (a)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
         on Co-operation on Matters relating to Elections in the Democratic
         Republic of the Congo, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

      (b)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
         on Co-operation on Immigration and Population Matters, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996 108 of 1996).


                             FRIDAY, 6 MAY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Council of Provinces


1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

      The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
    relevant committees as mentioned below:

     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


            Special Report of the Auditor-General on alleged irregularities
         at the Armaments Corporation of South Africa (Pty) Ltd [RP 40-
         2005].

     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and the Joint Budget Committee for consideration:


            Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
         Division of Revenue for 2006-2007, tabled in terms of section 9 of
         the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
         1997).

     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Social Services for consideration:


            Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation
         Commissioner for Occupational Diseases for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Mines and Works Compensation Fund for 2003-2004.

     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:
            (a)  Agreement between the Government of Sweden and the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa on Development Co-
              operation, 1 July 2004 – 30 June 2007, tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

            (b)  Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.


                            THURSDAY, 12 MAY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


         (i)     Re-determination of the Boundaries of Cross-Boundary
             Municipalities Bill [B 12 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)
             [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 27531 of 25
             April 2005.]
         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial
         and Local Government of the National Assembly, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 13 May 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (1)   Re-determination of the Boundaries of Cross-Boundary
         Municipalities Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister for Provincial
         and Local Government on 19 April 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Provincial and Local Government and the Select
         Committee on Local Government and Administration.

      (2)   Education Laws Amendment Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister
         of Education on 28 April 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Education and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.


                             MONDAY, 16 MAY 2005



TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
     Report on the Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for
     2005/06 [RP 38 of 2005].

2.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Republic of Turkey regarding
         Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Turkey regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
         Administrations.

      (c)   Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the Republic
         of Turkey for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
         of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms
         of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (d)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Republic of
         South Africa and the Republic of Turkey for the Avoidance of Double
         Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes
         on Income.

      (e)   Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Republic of Gabon for the
         Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
         with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
         of the Constitution, 1996.

      (f)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Convention between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Gabon for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
         Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.

      (g)   Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Republic of Ghana for the
         Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
         with respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital Gains, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.
      (h)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Ghana for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
         Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital
         Gains.


3.    The Minister of Education

     Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2005 to 2010.

4.    The Minister of Arts and Culture
     Strategic Plan of the Department of Arts and Culture for 2005 to 2010.


                            TUESDAY, 17 MAY 2005



TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Strategic Plan of Parliament of the Republic of South Africa for 2004-
     2008.

2.    The Minister of Correctional Services
     White Paper on Corrections in South Africa – February 2005.


