---
title: 'National Assembly - 07 April 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-04-07
---

THURSDAY, 7 APRIL 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             NOTICES OF MOTIONS

Mr S J MASANGO: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following substantive motion:

That this House shall debate the failure of the Mpumalanga education
department to provide this year’s textbooks to thousands of learners,
particularly to those at some of the poorest schools in the deep rural
areas, despite the fact that the second school term has already started,
and that this House resolves that this provincial MEC for education should
be called before the Portfolio Committee on Education to account for these
inexplicable delays and explain how he intends to ensure that the problem
is corrected and never repeated.


Mr C M LOWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I    intend
moving the following substantive motion on behalf of the DA:

That this House notes with dismay and disapproval that the hon Rhoda
Joemat, MP, who has pleaded guilty to defrauding Parliament, and stealing
R72 000 of the people’s money, and who was fined R80 000, has been
appointed by the ANC to represent it on Parliament’s Joint Budget
Committee. [Interjections.]




                             MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS



                  PARLIAMENT’S OBSERVER MISSION TO ZIMBABWE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K K KHUMALO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, on 1 March 2005
the House adopted a resolution to constitute Parliament’s observer mission
to Zimbabwe. It is important to know that the ANC and other political
parties like the PAC, put together their missions at their own expense to
observe these elections.

To suggest, as the ID has done, that some members of the Parliamentary
delegation were there under the protection of their parties is politically
mischievous, misleading and incorrect. Those who abandoned Parliament’s
mission to Zimbabwe are unhappy, as they did not find what they had hoped
for.

Those members of the delegation who made statements insinuating that
Zimbabwe should operate in line with adopted and accepted guidelines,
including the SADC principles and guidelines, in fact ensured that they
themselves would not be bound by such guidelines. These guidelines clearly
state among other things, that the observers should refrain from making
personal media statements.

However, even though they feel that Zimbabwe should be bound, these members
do not feel bound by guidelines adopted by the representatives and leaders
of millions of African people.

This raises serious questions about their commitment to the African
continent and the wellbeing of its people. Nevertheless, despite the hon
Vincent Gore or Mr Jankielsohn, Africa will succeed, for now and forever!
Thank you. [Applause.]


                             PROJECT CONSOLIDATE


                            (Members’ Statement)

Mnr W P DOMAN (DA): Agbare Adjunkspeaker, met die aanstelling van kenners
om 136 uit die 284 munisipaliteite te probeer red, is dit duidelik dat
Minister Sydney Mfumadi se Projek Konsolideer, volgens ons in die DA, ’n
pypdroom is. Projek Konsolideer moet gesien word as ’n erkenning deur die
ANC dat die mislukking van munisipaliteite om basiese dienste te lewer
hoofsaaklik daaraan te wyte is dat amptenare wat aangestel is dikwels
familie en lakeie is wat onbevoeg is om die werk te verrig.

Die posisie sal alleenlik verbeter word as onbevoegde, en in baie gevalle
korrupte munisipale amptenare, permanent vervang word. Erger nog is die
algemene verskynsel van onbevoegde en korrupte ANC raadslede wat nie deur
die ANC gedissiplineer of vervang word nie. Projek Konsolideer is goed
bedoel, maar doodgebore om ’n wesenlike verskil te maak.

Dit gaan die verstand te bowe hoe een of twee persone byvoorbeeld
Johannesburg, met ’n begroting van R16 miljard, ’n personeel van
27 000 wat 4 miljoen mense bedien, gaan omkeer. Hierdie tref-en-trap-
benadering ontbreek aan legitimiteit, sal nie die samewerking van amptenare
kry nie, en sal nie die krises waarin die ANC plaaslike regering gedompel
het, omkeer nie.

Ons wens Projek Konsolideer sukses toe, maar is bevrees dat dit weer geld
is wat in ’n bodemlose put gestort word. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, with the appointment of experts in
order to salvage 136 out of a total of 284 municipalities, it is clear that
Minister Sydney Mfumadi’s Project Consolidate is a pipe dream, as far as we
in the DA are concerned. Project Consolidate must be seen as an admission
by the ANC that the failure of municipalities to deliver basic services, is
due mainly to the fact that appointed officials are often relatives or
lackeys incapable of performing the work.

The situation will only improve if incompetent, and in many cases corrupt
municipal officials are permanently replaced. Even worse is the general
occurrence that incompetent and corrupt ANC councillors are neither
disciplined nor replaced by the ANC. Project Consolidate is a well-
intended, but stillborn attempt to make a real difference.

It is beyond comprehension how one or two persons are going to turn around,
for instance, Johannesburg with its budget of R 16 billion and a staff of
27 000 employees, serving 4 million people. This trial-by-error approach
lacks legitimacy, will not be supported by officials, and will not turn
around the crisis brought about in local government by the ANC.

We wish Project Consolidate success, but we are concerned that it is simply
more money being poured into a bottomless pit. [Applause.]]


                           POLICE OFFICIAL KILLED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Deputy Speaker, this week a policeman, Sibongile
Kamteni, a member of the VIP unit, was shot dead a few metres away from his
house. He was in full police uniform when the attack occurred, and he was
the second police officer to have been killed in four days.

Our police officers must not be allowed to become targets for criminals. We
therefore hope that the people who committed this cruel and senseless crime
are brought to book as a matter of urgency, and are given the harshest
possible sentences permissible by law, in order to deter other criminals
who target, or who are thinking of targeting, police officers.

We need to get a strong message across that the killing of police officers
must be stopped, and that the perpetrators of these crimes be severely
dealt with. We send our heartfelt condolences to the family of the
deceased, and hope for a speedy and full recovery for the two women who
were injured in this attack.

      AGREEMENT BETWEEN POPCRU AND DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E T XOLO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the memorandum of agreement signed
between the Department of Correctional Services and Popcru at Krugersdorp
on 31 March is welcomed by the ANC. We are encouraged by the degree of co-
operation displayed by both parties in their efforts to settle their
respective differences and to define a new course for the parties and the
department as a whole.

This positive step serves to signify that the provision of correctional
services is an essential service, and that ensuring the effective and
efficient functioning of the Department of Correctional Services is the
responsibility of all of us.

We anticipate, therefore, that the issues contained in the settlement,
namely working arrangements, a programme to build good relationships,
deadlock-breaking mechanisms and timeframes to address issues, will
undoubtedly contribute to an effective relationship not only between the
parties, but amongst all other stakeholders as well. Thank you.


            CORRUPTION AND MALADMINSTRATION IN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MDAKA (UDM): Madam Deputy Speaker, the UDM has noted with dismay the
increasing reports of corruption and maladministration in local governments
throughout the country. In Plettenberg Bay, high-ranking officials with
unexplained expenses incurred on a trip to Paris have had their behaviour
endorsed and whitewashed by the council. [Interjections.]

In a similar cynical exercise of endorsement the council of Beaufort West
has reappointed the municipal manager, Truman Prince, thereby implicitly
condoning his actions. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, order!

Ms N M MDAKA: In the Free State, North West and Mpumalanga violent protests
have erupted amid allegations of corruption, maladministration and a
complete breakdown of service delivery. [Interjections.]

It is significant to note that these problems are characterised by one
common denominator, the fact that these are overwhelmingly ANC-governing
councils. [Interjections.] Simultaneously, we have increasingly been
receiving reports in the run-up to the local government elections of ANC
politicians, from various levels of government, engaging in blatant acts of
electioneering in the distribution of essential services to the poor, such
as social grants and food parcels. [Interjections.] Their distribution of
these poverty alleviation measures...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member.

Ms N M MDAKA: ... should occur strictly ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member.

Ms N M MDAKA: … in terms of who is most in need. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order!

Ms N M MDAKA: It should be administered by officials. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member!

Ms N M MDAKA: Yes, we cannot condone …

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms N M MDAKA: We cannot condone politicians meddling in poverty alleviation
to score cheap political points and distributing poverty relief where they
want. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, will you please take your seat!

Ms N M MDAKA: It should go where it is most desperately needed.
[Interjections.] I thank you. [Applause.][Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member of the UDM, I have tried more than five
times to tell you that your time has expired. I take this very, very
seriously. You have shown disrespect to the Chair. I tried so many times! I
am not asking you to respond to me. I am telling you that this kind of
behaviour is unacceptable. It must never, ever be repeated.
[Interjections.]




       COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFERED BY DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr Y WANG (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, information is the key to knowledge
and skill. Access to information and the acquisition of skills are often
difficult for our communities to achieve. Last year, Prof Smith, the head
of the Department of Information Systems of the University of Cape Town
initiated the bold step of including 20 contact hours of ICT-related
community service as part of the curriculum of the honours degree in
Information Systems.

By allowing his students to be actively involved in building a computer
software system with youngsters from Khayelitsha, they had given invaluable
practical skills to the youngsters and put their hours back into the
community.

The overwhelming response from the community and the students prove that
this was definitely the right step towards transformation. As the new
students start to take up this year’s community service, I wish them great
success and encourage such initiatives to extend to other institutions and
professional fields.

Empowering our people is not only the government’s job, but also the
responsibility of every citizen. I thank you.


                            ZEERUST MUNICIPALITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B E PULE (UCDP): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is now almost
twelve months since the Lehurutse community in the North West have been
struggling to get drinking water for their households.

Attempts by the community, especially in Welbedacht, to get an explanation
of what exactly the problems are have fallen on deaf ears.

I had personally facilitated a meeting between the mayor of the Zeerust
Municipality and the concerned group, and we agreed that councillors from
all parties should be present when the community is given an explanation.

The ANC councillors allegedly decided to convene a community meeting alone,
which was said to have been very poorly attended, and it was addressed
against the will of the people, of whom there were few. The other
allegation was that the number of police who were there made the whole
exercise a very tense one.

Indications are that there are fraudulent activities that are being covered
up. Pipes were laid on a farm of which the wells became dry even before the
pipes functioned to take water to the people. The farmer is alleged to have
been paid approximately R18 million for those dry wells and underground
water on his farm. Water that is supplied from trucks is put into tanks
that are not covered, and this is a recipe for health hazards.

The report of the forensic investigation of the Botshelo Water Supply by
Gobotho has not been made known. The behaviour of both the Zeerust
Municipality and the central district council can no longer be tolerated as
they take the community for granted.

The UCDP hereby requests the Minister of Water Affairs to investigate, as
people were told that they would have water by 14 February 2005. [Time
expired.]




                        IVORY COAST PEACE SETTLEMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms E NGALEKA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC works for the maintenance
of world peace and the settlement of international disputes by negotiation,
not war. We strive to promote peace and friendship amongst all peoples.
This is what guides us in our engagement in the region in Africa and
elsewhere in the world.

The leadership of the Ivory Coast arrived in the country on Sunday for
peace talks. They were hosted by President Thabo Mbeki, as the African
Union-appointed mediator. The Ivory Coast has been in a state of civil war
since September 2002, when there was an attempted military coup. Since that
action, the country has been divided into two parts, north and south.
Thousands of people have died and millions of people were displaced from
their homes.

The ANC welcomes the agreement signed by all parties to immediately end all
hostilities and end the war in their country. This is another shining
example of Africans solving their own problems. I thank you. [Applause.]




                             ZIMBABWE ELECTIONS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): The DA wants to bring to the urgent attention of
this House the head of the African Union observer mission’s fierce
criticism of the Zimbabwe election as further proof that the ANC have
wilfully ignored the true reality of a fatally flawed political event.
[Interjections.]

The head of the mission, Kwadwo Afari-Gyan, is alarmed by the high number
of people who were either assisted to vote or turned away from the polling
stations, disenfranchised. The US embassy in Harare has also issued
detailed criticism of the election, including concerns about irregularities
in the voting process and the lack of transparency in tabulating the votes.
These sentiments have been echoed by the International Crisis Group who
point out that the election environment in the months leading up to the
poll precluded any possibility whatsoever of the elections being free or
fair. There is no doubt that the elections were a carefully managed façade
to mask the death of democracy in Zimbabwe.
The ANC’s apparent collusion with and acceptance of Zanu-PF and its
disregard for the democratic rights of Zimbabwean citizens must and will be
treated with the utter contempt it deserves. [Interjections.] [Applause.]


                             ZIMBABWE ELECTIONS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE (Azapo): Madam Deputy Speaker, the elections in
Zimbabwe have come and gone. The people of Zimbabwe have spoken, and have
expressed their free will in choosing their elected representatives.
[Applause.]

Azapo wishes to congratulate the people and government of Zimbabwe for the
peaceful and exemplary manner in which they went about choosing their
elected representatives. [Applause.]

Further, Azapo takes joy in the fact that not a single person was reported
injured and that no one lost their lives during the period of the
elections. [Applause.]

Azapo takes this opportunity to congratulate all SADC, AU and South African
observers who took time to assist the people of Zimbabwe to exercise their
democratic right. [Applause.]

Azapo therefore urges the people of Zimbabwe to stand firm in defence of
their sovereignty and independence. The defence of the sovereignty and
independence of Zimbabwe is a goal Azapo shares with the government and
people of Zimbabwe. I thank you. [Applause.]

                         DEATH OF ADOLICAN SANDAMELA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S A MSHUDULU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC has learnt with
sadness about the untimely death of young Adolican Sandamela who died four
days after having undergone a routine operation in Kopanong Hospital.

Adolican Sandamela, who was four years old, went to hospital with
tonsillitis. At the time of going to hospital, he was fine, could walk,
talk and play like any other child of his age. Immediately after the
operation, he was transferred to Sebokeng Hospital with no medical reports
from Kopanong Hospital. This made treating him difficult. It is alleged
that, for about two days, doctors from Sebokeng Hospital tried very hard to
secure the report from their colleagues at Kopanong Hospital, but to no
avail. It is also alleged that, on the third day, a concerned doctor from
Sebokeng Hospital, called again, and he was given the report over the
phone. By that time, the boy could not be saved. The boy passed away on the
following day.
On behalf of the ANC, I would like to call on the Portfolio Committee on
Health to follow up on this matter to ensure that such incidents do not
happen again. I thank you. [Applause.]

   AGREEMENT BETWEEN BANKING ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH AFRICA AND DEPARTMENT OF
                                   HOUSING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA welcomes the agreement
signed between the Banking Association of South Africa and the housing
Ministry.

However, the Minister’s statement that bad credit records would still need
to be defined suggests that she has still not learned from past failures.
It is essential to provide home loans for lower-income earners, but it is
just as important to ensure a transparent and objective system to screen
applicants to avoid bad debt, and for people to understand that if they
default on their loans, they will lose their homes.

Servecon Housing Solutions, for example, was established to try to improve
the viability of non-performing housing debt. It failed after three years,
because beneficiaries failed to honour their obligations.

The Housing Minister cannot solve the housing crisis by redefining bad debt
and then passing the buck to the private sector. If she wants to absolve
home owners of their responsibility to pay back loans, then she will have
to stand surety for those loans. Can she afford to do that?




                                 CABLE THEFT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP has previously expressed
its concern about the alarming rate of cable theft in the country. The
IFP’s worst fears have now been confirmed with the announcement that the
value of the theft of electric cables for the year was in excess of R33
million.

Attention is also directed to the senseless cutting of traffic light cables
in order to cause accidents for the benefit of tow truck operators.

We are of the opinion that this R33 million is but the tip of the iceberg,
and that this destruction and sabotage of cables is probably resulting in
ten times more than the mere economic loss of the cables, particularly if
one looks at the downtime and the loss of production and communications
resulting from these thefts.


The following measures can be considered: Firstly, declare cable theft and
the destruction of infrastructure an act of sabotage and punish
perpetrators accordingly. Secondly, outlaw the dealing in second-hand
cables and the substances from cables. Thirdly, only the utilities such as
Eskom and Telkom should be authorised to melt down and recover copper and
basic materials from cables and similar products. I thank you.





                APPLICATION OF LICENCES BY FISHING COMMUNITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr D A A OLIFANT (ANC): Mev die Adjunkspeaker, die ANC verwelkom die
aankondiging deur die Minister van Omgewingsake en Toerisme, Mnr Martinus
van Schalkwyk, op Dinsdag 5 April 2005 dat die aansoekgelde vir
langtermynlisensies van bestaande vissergemeenskappe verminder gaan word.

Tans betaal alle bestaande vissersgemeenskappe vanaf Alexanderbaai in die
noordweste van die Weskus tot in die noorde van KwaZulu-Natal dieselfde nie-
terugbetaalbare aansoekfooie van R6 000 as kommersiële maatskappye in die
vissersbedryf.

Sommige vissergemeenskappe poog die hele jaar om hierdie geld bymekaar te
kry net om uit te vind aan die einde van die dag dat hulle aansoek
onsuksesvol was.

Die nuwe inisiatief beteken dat die koste vir aansoeke met 83% verminder
word.

Toe die Vryheidsmanifes in 1956 deur die ANC aanvaar is, en ons dit nou
weer hierdie jaar herdenk, is ‘n onderneming aan die mense gegee dat
wanneer die mense se demokratiese regering aan die bewind sou kom, die
rykdom en erfenis van Suid-Afrika aan alle Suid-Afrikaners teruggegee sou
word.

Hierdie is ‘n verdere voorbeeld van die ANC-regering se verbintenis om
hierdie onderneming suksesvol te bereik. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr D A A OLIFANT (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the
announcement by the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Mr
Martinus van Schalkwyk, on Tuesday 5 April 2005, that the application fees
for long-term licences of existing fishing communities will be reduced.

Currently all existing fishing communities from Alexander Bay in the
northwest of the Western Cape to the north of KwaZulu-Natal, pay the same
non-refundable application fee of R6000 as commercial companies in the
fishing industry.

Some fishing communities spend the whole year trying to raise these funds,
only to be told at the end of the day that their applications were
unsuccessful.

This new initiative will mean that the application costs will be reduced by
83%.

When the Freedom Charter was adopted by the ANC in 1956 - and we are
celebrating its anniversary once again this year - an undertaking was given
to the people that when the people’s democratic government comes into
power, the wealth and heritage of South Africa would be given back to all
South Africans.

This is a further example of the ANC-led government’s commitment to
successfully achieving this undertaking. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                            MINISTER’S RESPONSES


                         ALLEGED CORRUPT COUNCILLORS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I
will not respond to the unsubstantiated allegations of corruption and
rumours from the hon member from the UDM concerning the Free state and
Mpumalanga. I do believe that if the hon member has clear evidence on
whatever she alleges has been done by councillors or whoever, the Ministers
are here. The Minister of Social Development, who has been dedicated in his
efforts to fight corruption in his department, has an open-door policy and
the hon member is welcome to come forward with evidence.

Of course there will be opportunities. This is an election year and there
are people who are going to play to the gallery of the media.

I also want to say that I agree with the hon member from Azapo that the
people of Zimbabwe have spoken. I think the elections in Zimbabwe were
indeed peaceful and free. I do believe that as Africans we have the
opportunity to take control of our lives and our destiny.

I have never been invited to go and observe elections in the United States.
I know that there were elections of which the results were quite
questionable, and indeed the United States government and embassies were
very silent. In fact their silence on the results of those elections was
deafening.

I also want to declare that Africa is not a zoo for people to come from all
over the world and watch how we hold our elections. The South African
government has said that we will look at the concerns of the opposition,
the NGOs and so on, in Zimbabwe, and we will do so with all the political
parties in that country. We were not prepared to prejudge these elections.
We were able to go and observe them and come out with a verdict, together
with the countries of Southern Africa.

I want to say to the hon member from the IFP that, yes, I couldn’t agree
more with him with regard to the targeting of our police in the country. We
must do all we can to protect and defend our police. Thank you. [Time
expired.]


                             TRUMAN PRINCE ISSUE


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, I cannot but agree with
my colleague here. Regarding the issue of Truman Prince, quite obviously
there is a problem. I think you should allow the ANC to continue with its
own processes without any interference.

If you were listening, you would have heard quite clearly that the
provincial secretary of the ANC has given the council as well as Mr Prince
at least some time to come and appear before the provincial disciplinary
committee. And the council must be given a chance to make its decisions
without any influence whatsoever, especially from those people who we know
very well where they come from. So I think the more you keep quiet, the
better for the processes and the better for everybody. [Applause.]

On the question of what my colleague has just spoken about, such as the
issue of food parcels, I would really like the honourable lady from
Mqanduli - I think the hon member comes from Mqanduli or something -
[Interjections.]

Abekho abantu abanje ngalo eMqanduli? [There are no people like her at
Mqanduli?]

I am sorry then. I would like her to come and substantiate her allegations
because she heard me say, one week ago, two months ago, even yesterday and
this morning, that there is a problem with regard to the way in which
tendering has been handled. I want her to come back and tell me which
member of Parliament, Minister, Premier, councillor, or whoever was
responsible, then we will take the necessary action.

My colleague has put it very well, that elections are coming and the only
time one has left to say whatever one wants to about the elections in
Zimbabwe is this week and next week. You are not going to boost your
influence or your votes if you are not able to substantiate your
allegations.

Zibambe ntombazana, zibambe. [Kwahlekwa.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Hold your horses,
girl.] [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, you are reminded that Extended Public
Committees will start in 10 minutes.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 14:34.


