---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 September 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-09-06
---

TUESDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2005
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

           CHANGES IN PARTY MEMBERSHIP AS RESULT OF FLOOR-CROSSING

                               (Announcement)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon members, before we
proceed with today’s business, I wish to announce the following party
membership changes, which have occurred as a result of floor-crossing.

Mr S Simmons has, on 1 September 2005, left the New National Party and
joined a new party, called the United Party of South Africa.
[Interjections.] Order!

Mr L M Green has, on 1 September 2005, left the African Christian
Democratic Party and joined a new party, called the Federation of
Democrats. [Interjections.]

The following members have, on 1 September 2005, left the New National
Party and joined the African National Congress: Mr M C J van Schalkwyk, Mr
C H F Greyling, Mr F Beukman, Ms C B Johnson and Mr J Schippers.

Mr J J M Stevens has, today, left the United Democratic Movement and joined
the Democratic Alliance. [Interjections.]

Mr L K Joubert has, today, left the Inkatha Freedom Party and joined the
Democratic Alliance. [Interjections.] Order!

The following members have, today, left the Inkatha Freedom Party and
joined a new party, called the National Democratic Convention: Mr M V
Ngema, Mr B C Ngiba and Dr G G Woods. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I need some clarity, in
relation to this floor-crossing. Can you clarify something for me, sir?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I can try, hon Chief Whip.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, my understanding is that there
is a pact between the DA and the IFP that they do not accept members from
each other. [Laughter.] This is public knowledge and it has been publicly
stated. Has the nation been misled or what is happening? Can you please
clarify this?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Chief Whip, that is a
matter that the Chair would not like to express itself on.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, having granted the Chief
Whip so much latitude, perhaps you will give me a little latitude as well
to say that he is obviously behind the times on this as on most other
things. [Interjections.] There was an agreement which existed at the time
of floor-crossing two years ago, and more particularly at local government
level.

There is a very good relationship which exists between the IFP and the DA,
and in particular between our leaders. That relationship, as far as we are
concerned, will not be disturbed at all. My leader was in touch with Dr
Buthelezi before this happened.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, Mr Gibson. That will
suffice. [Interjections.] Order, Chief Whip!


                       ACHIEVEMENTS OF DEAFSA IN 2005


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the House —


   (1)      notes that the International Week of Deaf people will be
        celebrated once again from 5 to 11 September 2005;


   (2)      recognises that the Deaf Federation of South Africa, DEAFSA,
        would like to make use of this opportunity to ensure that South
        African society is aware of its achievements during the past year;


   (3)      notes that one of the highlights in 2005 was the registration of
        Unit Standards for South African Sign Language as an additional
        language at the South African Qualifications Authority, as well as
        the pending registration of the Unit Standards for SASL Home
        Language (General Education Training and Further Education and
        Training);


   (4)      acknowledges that DEAFSA and the South African Translator’s
        Institute, SATI, have established a joint accreditation process for
        SASL interpreters to ensure that a quality service is delivered;


     5) congratulates DEAFSA on being chosen as the host for the first ever
        International Sign Language Interpreting Conference that will meet
        in the Western Cape from 31 October 2005 to 2 November 2005; and


        (6) calls on all South Africans to support DEAFSA and ensure the
        success of the conference.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.

                            NATIONAL ARBOUR WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House—


   (1)      notes that 1 to 7 September is National Arbour Week;


   (2)      further notes that this week serves as a means to mobilise our
        people and make them aware of the importance of planting and
        preserving indigenous trees for the future of our country;


   (3)      recalls the significant role played by trees in stabilising
        topsoil, safeguarding the water table and purifying the air;


   (4)      further recalls that indigenous trees are an integral part of
        our ecosystem, providing food and shelter to hundreds of animal
        species; and


   (5)      calls on all South Africans to join hands with environmental
        activists in efforts to preserve our indigenous plants for future
        generations.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.

                             MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS



               NEPOTISM CLAIM AGAINST MINISTER BALFOUR SLAMMED




                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M S MOATSHE (ANC): Chairperson, an unfortunate tendency has developed
within certain sectors of society, through which our political leadership
is continuously vilified by those who have political axes to grind with
this government. As the ANC we have confidence in the integrity of Minister
Ngconde Balfour, who fully understands and respects the Constitution of the
country and the recruitment policy of the ANC-led government. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                   PRESIDENT MBEKI’S COMMISSION OF INQUIRY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H ZILLE (DA): Chairperson, the ANC is very quick to suggest a commission
of inquiry when it needs to deal with tensions in the Tripartite Alliance.
But it is a different story altogether when issues of national importance
need to be investigated.

The ANC government has consistently dismissed all calls to open a
commission of inquiry into the arms deal and the Oilgate scandals. Instead,
we are treated to whitewashed reports that exonerate the government of all
wrongdoing without interrogating the facts.

The ANC must assure the public that it will not spend taxpayers’ money on a
commission of inquiry into President Mbeki’s alleged conspiracy against
former Deputy President Zuma. Such an investigation constitutes a profound
misuse of public funds. South Africans are far more worried about failed
service delivery, unemployment and corruption than a jockeying for power
and position within the ANC. [Applause.]


                    PROMPT POLICE ACTION WELCOMED BY ANC


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M SOTYU (ANC): Chairperson, on Sunday, 28 August 2005, a group of
people from the Mangaung community, in Bloemfontein, raised their concerns
about a woman who had allegedly been set alight by her husband. The
community wanted the man not to be granted bail, as they believed that
vigilante actions could take place as a result of him getting bail.

We called the local police station in Kagisanong, and within three minutes
the police were there. They listened to the community’s concerns and
addressed the community. The police satisfied the community to such an
extent that they dispersed very happily.

We are proud to inform the House that the suspect has been denied bail and
we would like to congratulate the police in Kagisanong, particularly
Constables Mothethe and Phalatsane from Kagisanong police station together
with Inspector Ramoseli from the flying squad, who arrested the suspect and
we want to thank them for prompt, quality service.

This is an example for all police members and stations of the type of
service that we expect in every corner of our country. Together, and with a
positive approach, we will overcome crime in this country. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                            PROBE INTO SABC BIAS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): Chairperson, the UDM notes with interest the outcome
of the SABC probe into its failure to broadcast footage of supporters of
the former Deputy President jeering the new hon Deputy President of the
country. The incident was not broadcast and immediately sparked concern
that this was a political agenda on the part of the SABC.

This impression was further deepened when the SABC spokesperson claimed
that the SABC cameraman had not arrived in time to capture footage of the
incident. When e.tv aired the footage showing clearly that an SABC
cameraman was, in fact, present during the incident and had recorded it,
the unmistakeable whiff of a cover-up could no longer be ignored.

Whilst we applaud the courage and swiftness of the SABC CEO in appointing
an inquiry into the matter, we remain concerned about the implications of
the entire saga. Firstly, we still do not have facts about the extent, if
any, of an attempted cover-up. Secondly, the perception of political bias
at the SABC is not based solely on this incident and has not been laid to
rest.

In this respect, we would urge the SABC to immediately institute a full-
scale investigation into the possibility of a cover-up. That the original
incident was not broadcast is bad enough. That members of the public
broadcaster may have deliberately sought to deceive the public about the
matter is a complete betrayal of the public broadcaster’s mandate. The SABC
must . . . [Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]


                             VRYBURG BY-ELECTION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V C GORE (ID): Chairperson, the DA has once again sunk to new depths in
the selection of their candidate for the upcoming by-election to be held
tomorrow in Ward Three, Vryburg, in the North West Province - a Mr Bashier
Gafoor.

Purporting to be a practising Muslim, he is running an illegal shebeen,
selling liquor to under-age children, and thus exploiting the community he
wishes to represent. In addition, not only does he supply illegal alcohol,
he also operates an illegal gambling machine from the same premises.

At a meeting held on Sunday, 4 September 2005, addressed by the hon
Patricia de Lille, the community told her about the devastating effects of
this house of sin in Vryburg. The hon De Lille has also been to the illegal
shebeen where she was able to confirm the illegal selling of alcohol to
minors.

There is also an allegation that the DA member, a Mr Van Tonder, paid Mr
Gafoor a R5 000 bribe in order to stand for the DA. Once again the DA has
shown that it will stop at nothing in scraping the bottom of the barrel in
the choice of their public representatives. [Interjections.]

The ID has also laid a charge against the person concerned and urges the
voters in the Vryburg by-election not to support the DA. I thank you.

      MATATIELE AND CEDARVILLE DISTRICTS TO FORM UMZIMBUVU MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Chair, according to the Government Gazette of 19 and
26 August it appears that plans are in place to excise the Matatiele and
Cedarville district from KwaZulu-Natal, and form the Umzimbuvu Municipality
as part of the Eastern Cape. The ACDP would like to express our concern
that the people of the area, including the Maluti rural area, are strongly
opposed to this move, and object to the apparent railroading of this
proposal without any consultation with the people that will be affected.

Although it has been the desire of most people in the affected area, since
1994, that one municipality be formed, there is a strong objection to the
municipality being part of the Eastern Cape. This proposal will not only
subject residents of Matatiele to the conditions faced by the poorer and
largely underserviced areas of the Eastern Cape, but will also add an extra
burden on these residents to travel about eight hours to reach the
administrative offices in Bisho. These residents currently travel four
hours to the administrative offices in Pietermaritzburg.

These last few months we’ve witnessed the repercussions of a lack of
service delivery. Can we really afford another disgruntled, underserviced
community? The people of Matatiele community have been vocal in their
opposition to this proposal, but are concerned that this is not being taken
into account.

The movement of hundreds of people into an area that is underserviced,
without adequate consultation with them, could equal the displacement many
have endured in the past. The ACDP believes that if government wants to
alleviate what Minister Sydney Mfumadi calls “an administrative nightmare”,
then it must clearly demonstrate how these changes will in fact impact on
service delivery. Thank you. [Time expired.]


                              PEACE IN BURUNDI


                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr O E MONARENG (ANC): Chair, the ANC-led government will continue in its
efforts to work for peace on this continent. The swearing-in of President
Pierre Nkulunziza marks an end to the era of conflict. The world observed
this important milestone in the efforts of the people of Burundi to bring
about peace in their country.




The democratisation process in Burundi gives hope to the people of the
Democratic Republic of Congo that peace in their country is within their
grasp. Peace in Burundi also communicates the message to the people of
Sudan that they too will live in peace. Peace in Burundi means that the
people of the Great Lakes Region will be able to choose a developmental
path that is grounded on the concrete circumstances of their region.

We in the ANC, together with the people of the continent and the world, are
happy to be celebrating another achievement of the human spirit. I thank
you. [Applause.]


                   UNTRUTHS SPREAD BY THE LEADER OF THE ID


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M SWART (DA): Chair, the least we can expect from leaders of political
parties is that they verify and quote facts correctly and not mislead the
public. The hon Patricia de Lille repeated her recent parliamentary
statement in front of approximately 70 journalists, namely that the current
mayor of George is the highest paid mayor in South Africa at R1 million per
annum. She also commented to a journalist that I, in my capacity as the
previous mayor of George, received a severance package of R2 million when I
was elected to Parliament.

Both statements are totally devoid of truth. The salary of a mayor is
determined by the national Minister of Local Government and Provincial
Affairs and is published in the Government Gazette. The mayor of George is
remunerated at the same level as other mayors of grade four municipalities,
and his salary is not even R300 000 per annum.

No provision is ever made for severance packages for counsellors, and the
statement that I received a severance package in some or other form is
untrue. I call on the hon De Lille to refrain from broadcasting untruths
and to start practising her politics in a responsible and honest manner. I
have instructed my attorneys to institute legal proceedings against Ms De
Lille for defamation of character. [Interjections.]

Mr V C GORE: Hon Chair, on a point of order: I would like you to make a
ruling on the following. It is an established practice within this House
that if a member wishes to bring any allegations of improper conduct on the
part of another member to the attention of the House they should do so by
way of a substantive motion, comprising a clearly formulated and properly
substantiated charge.

It has also been ruled previously that members should not be allowed to
impute improper motives to other members who cast personal reflections on
their integrity, or verbally abuse them in any other way. I ask you to make
a ruling on this point.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, we will look at the
content of the statement, and we will look at your point of order and we
will give a ruling on it at the next sitting of the House.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, on a point of order: Ms De
Lille made the allegation in this House. She was not pulled up by the
Chair, she was not told to move a substantive notice of motion . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Mr Gibson, I am ruling you out of
order on the basis that I have expressed what the Chair will do, which is
in keeping with the practice of this House. We will look at the statement
and we will come back to the House with a ruling on the next sitting day.


                          BLACK CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE (Azapo): Chairperson, today, 6 September 2005, is the
start of Black Consciousness Week, a week dedicated to the commemoration of
the death in detention, as well as the ideas, of Steven Bantu Biko. It is
now 28 years since his death in detention.

Azapo invites all people of our land to take time to remember the
contributions Biko made in order to bring about our young democracy. There
is no doubt that if Biko was alive he would be pleased with the fact that
black people are now in charge of their political destiny, with a very
significant number of women beginning to advance to positions of power as
well. He will see the advancement of women as an indication that his dream
of a nonsexist and egalitarian society is emerging.

He will, however, be deeply concerned that racism is still alive and
kicking in our society. At the same time he will be dismayed by the fact
that the poor of our society are still struggling to make a living, and
that the economy is still in white hands.

Steve Biko’s thinking ability had a remarkable grasp of conditions and
circumstances under which the poor live. For this reason, the nondelivery
of essential services to the poor . . . Time expired.] [Applause.]


                FLOOR-CROSSING BY NNP MEMBERS TO ANC WELCOMED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof A K ASMAL (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC welcomes the move, to the ANC,
by former members of the NNP. This is recognition of the ANC as a broad
church, a home for all. These members will join us in developing a national
consciousness as a national movement, a national consciousness about what
it means to be a South African.

The dissolution of the NNP is a further illustration of how much we have
moved away from the monstrous racism that many of us lived through. From my
personal contact with these members, I can say that they reflect the basic
assumptions of our Constitution, which must be the guiding light: equality,
freedom, dignity and social justice.

Therefore, the ANC knows that they care for the fact that there are people
who are marginalised in our society. They will find that we debate and
argue issues, unlike other parties, and we discuss. We come to a situation
quite alien to many of the former political parties and, I should say,
judging from the moves from some parties, to present parties too.

So the ANC in the House welcomes their move, recognises then that we can
build a society rich in diversity, but united for a particular purpose:
Freedom. Thank you. [Applause.]


                    HIGH MURDER RATE IN THE WESTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R JANKIELSOHN (DA): Chairperson, the Western Cape continues to have the
highest murder rate in the country with a ratio of 59,9 murders per 100 000
of the population. At the same time, the province also has one of the
highest robbery rates with 293 robberies per 100 000 of the population.

The SA Police Service in the province continues to suffer shortages of 541
detectives, 1 290 crime-prevention personnel and 171 vehicles. The
Bellville South and Athlone police stations are particularly problematic.
The Bellville South station has shortages of 60% of detectives and 12% of
visible policing personnel. Athlone has shortages of 33% of detectives and
22% of personnel for visible policing. Areas such as these will only win
the war against crime when the SA Police Service in these areas has the
required resources to prevent crime and detect and punish criminals.

If the Deputy President, with her fully staffed component of bodyguards,
becomes a victim of crime, how can residents in areas such as Athlone and
Bellville South feel safe in their homes when their police stations are
understaffed to such an extent? Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]


  OLD MUTUAL AND DEVELOPMENT BANK COMMENDED ON INVESTMENT IN INFRASTRUCTURE
                           PROJECTS IN RURAL AREAS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms E NGALEKA (ANC): Chairperson, South Africa’s mammoth task of eradicating
poverty, unemployment and underdevelopment cannot be a challenge that
should rest solely on the shoulders of government. The task of erecting a
sustainable bridge between the first and the second economies demands that
all economic role-players join forces to build a solid and durable economy.

It is in this context that the ANC commends the Old Mutual Assets Manager’s
announcement recently to invest in infrastructure projects in the rural
parts of our country. The private-sector money administrator has joined
forces with the Development Bank of Southern Africa to launch a R500
million fund to be co-invested in development projects in poor provinces
such as the Eastern Cape, Limpopo and the North West.

As the President correctly said in the state of the nation address, success
in the growth of our economy should be manifest to the extent that the
marginalised in the wilderness of the second economy are included and are
at least afforded sustainable livelihoods.

We are hopeful that this move will bolster rural development and further
pull the poor closer to the mainstream economy. We congratulate both these
institutions on this bold initiative and hope that more companies will take
their cue from this. I thank you. [Applause.]




                           CAPE TOWN MUNICIPALITY




                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N J NGELE (ANC): Chairperson, during the first 10 years of our freedom
and democracy the ANC-led government built an unprecedented 1,6 million new
houses, accommodating around 6 million people, and transferred title deeds
to many more. However, we acknowledge the fact that many of our people are
still homeless and others are living in squalid conditions.

The City of Cape Town municipality has decided to grant more than 15 000
tenants title deeds. They have been renting council flats for more than 20
years. One excited tenant, Mr Nicholas Blaauw of Heideveld, who is 67 years
old, had this to say about the initiative: “I never thought this day would
come. Finally this flat will become our home.” He had lived in the flat for
more than 35 years.

The following areas will be the immediate beneficiaries: Kewtown, Hanover
Park, Manenberg, Bellville South and Diep River.

The ANC salutes the initiative taken by the City of Cape Town municipality
to better the lives of our people, and further urges other municipalities
to investigate the possibilities of such initiatives in their areas. Thank
you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]


                            MINISTERS’ RESPONSES



                FLOOR-CROSSING BY NNP MEMBERS TO ANC WELCOMED


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, I think it is important that today we
acknowledge that this window period of floor-crossing marks the culmination
of the negotiations that the ANC and the NP started whilst some of the
members of the ANC were prisoners and others were in exile.

The two parties – the ANC and the NP – opened a dialogue that over the
years produced a negotiated settlement and a Constitution that today is the
pride of all of us. Subsequent to that, the two parties persisted, in spite
of the difficulties, to provide an example to the population of our country
that a joint effort must continue to produce better days, stability for our
nation, and so on.

Therefore, ultimately, the dissolution of the NNP and the joining of the
ANC by the majority of its members, signal the advancement of our country
towards a genuine national and patriotic nation. [Interjections.] Beyond
that point, I think it is important that although there are those who may
not yet have joined I am quite sure that in the period that lies ahead,
increasing numbers of those who stayed behind will follow suit.

The nations of our region, the nations of our continent, have taken very
seriously the example of the NP and the ANC in starting a negotiation to
eliminate conflict. Today the nations of our continent are saying that
there can be no resolution of conflict, of problems, without the
participation of South Africa, without drawing from the experience this
nation has had.

I think it is proper therefore that we say that this negotiation laid the
foundation for peace on our continent. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]


  ALLEGED SABC COVER-UP, HOUSING AND ROLE OF SA POLICE SERVICE IN THE FIGHT
                                AGAINST CRIME


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, the hon member of the UDM should
have stopped at congratulating the CEO of the SABC for having initiated the
probe that he did with independent experts. He should also have noted the
report by Prof Berger and colleagues who assisted him. That report found
that, in fact, there was no cover-up but that, certainly, the SABC needs to
improve with respect to co-ordination in the corporation.

However, if the member had stopped at congratulating the CEO, we would
absolutely agree, because he acted as he needed to do, and certainly showed
that he deserves to be in the position he occupies at this time. So there
is actually no political capital to make out of this one.

With respect to the housing needs and government’s response, particularly
regarding the action by the Cape Town city council, certainly, this is part
of the achievement of programmes that government has set out to accomplish,
in terms of our contract with the people to ensure that their development,
housing and other needs are indeed satisfied.

I am sure that the hon member from Azapo would agree that providing for
housing needs and basic services is part of achieving the ideal that Steve
Biko lived for and eventually sacrificed his life for. It is for that
reason that we work so hard to ensure that the ideals espoused are
achieved; and we do so through educational empowerment as well.

Finally, we welcome the comments members have made with respect to the SA
Police Service. Any thinking member of Parliament knows that we are doing
as much as we can to ensure that we do erode the instances of crime in our
country; and that, indeed, the conduct of the constables mentioned, from
the Free State province, exemplifies the kind of Police Service that our
government has worked so hard to build. I thank you. [Applause.]


                   COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY AND TRANSPARENCY


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Chairperson, I want to comment on the
commission of inquiry issue which was mentioned by the DA because, perhaps,
the hon member has decided to forget that it is us here who actually took
the bull by the horns to constitute an inquiry a few years ago around the
issue of the arms deal. The report on that issue was actually tabled in
this Parliament. [Interjections.]

Yes, it was temporary, according to the DA. That’s what you are saying. We
are surprised, because that report concerning those chapter 9 institutions
was actually approved here by this Parliament. It is good for you to note
that the ANC, which is leading this government, actually believes in
conducting and forming commissions. That is the strength of the ANC because
it believes in transparency and frankness, which is what we have taught
you. And the ANC believes in conducting its business in the open.

All reports about whatever it was that we have investigated in the past
have been placed before you in this Parliament, and those reports were
debated here. That’s a culture which we have introduced in the country and
which was foreign to you. It’s a culture which you have never practised and
never introduced in this country, hon Sheila, during your time as Minister
for Justice and Constitutional Development. I thank you. [Applause.]


           LEGAL PROCESSES REGARDING CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPALITIES


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I
would like to respond to the concern raised by the hon member from the ACDP
with regard to cross-boundary municipalities. I would also like to urge the
member not to instigate or raise people’s anger by misleading them or
giving them wrong information.

The information is quite clear that there are legal processes that are
going to take place around cross-boundary municipalities. You also said,
right so, that it is a proposal on the table and due processes will take
place where public hearings will take place. All those affected areas, not
only Matatiele, can participate and come forward in the public hearings to
state their cases as to why they cannot be moved to one area or another.

What I would like to urge the member from the ACDP to do is that he should
go to Matatiele and encourage all the affected parties to participate in
those public hearings. I thank you. [Applause.]


          INTERPARLIAMENTARY UNION TOPIC: MIGRATION AND DEVELOPMENT


                                  (Debate)

Mr R COETZEE: Chairperson, I think I should just clarify something. The ANC
can have as many investigations into its own affairs as it likes, it just
can’t do them with taxpayers money. That’s called the separation of party
and state and I would have thought that the Minister and the Cabinet would
understand that distinction. [Interjections.]

As the world continues to globalise, so migration – legal and otherwise –
increases. Perhaps the key insight into the future of migration is that it
is impossible to stop people from moving across borders in a world where it
becomes easier and easier for almost everything else to exist in a
borderless global community.

Inherent in this reality are both opportunities and threats because, on the
one hand, for those of us who regard borders as essentially artificial
constructs, a vision of a world in which people, as well as information and
capital, move with maximum freedom is exciting and compelling. On the other
hand, such a world is only possible where there is consensus on certain
values, respect for human rights, commitment to democracy, and love for
individual freedom. That is also possible only in a world economy, which is
free enough to grow and absorb new entrants into expanding labour markets.

What renders migration fraught is a clash of values, as exemplified most
tragically in the recent bombing of trains and a bus in London a few months
ago by the British-born descendants of migrants. What also makes it
complicated is competition for resources and jobs, which is something that
contributes enormously to xenophobia in our own country every day.

So, to find a policy course through the treacherous waters of international
migration is not easy, but it is essential. South Africa is both a
destination for migrants and the place of their origin, especially skilled
ones. We must draw on our wide experience in our contribution to the debate
at the Interparliamentary Union in October.

Our challenge is twofold. First, we must find a way to deal with the
millions of people, mostly Africans, who flock across our borders. Some
people think it is politically dangerous to be what is sometimes called
“soft on immigration”. But that is really just a way of trying to
accommodate xenophobia. The fact is that people come to South Africa out of
desperation and hope. Human beings everywhere want the same simple things -
basic security and the opportunity to take care of themselves and their
families.

Quite a few years ago I took a harrowing train trip into Mozambique, where
I saw first-hand the most destitute people I have ever laid eyes on. After
a week in that country, I arrived back in Nelspruit and saw that town
through the eyes of an illegal immigrant. It seemed grand, impossibly
wealthy, and flooded with opportunities.

The fact is that our country's approach to illegal immigration is a
hopeless failure and a farce. Millions and millions of illegal immigrants
live here. Only a tiny fraction are caught, sometimes abused, and then
shipped - probably temporarily – back to their countries of origin. Many of
them return a few months later.

I am not saying this as a wanton criticism of the government, because I
think it is a difficult problem to deal with. And I am not suggesting that
anybody has a perfect answer because I don’t have one either. But I do
think that this House needs to have an honest and open conversation about
what to do about a problem that our current policies quite simply do not
address; and to do so in a humane manner that respects people and human
rights.

We need also to deal with the problem of skilled migrants who leave our
shores for opportunity elsewhere. Everyone knows how the brain drain is
undermining our health system, for example. Indeed, a lack of skilled human
resources is the number one problem facing our health system today. Today I
don’t have time to deal with the health system, but my party has done so on
numerous occasions. I would simply say that one easy way in which to
counteract the brain drain is to make it easy for skilled people from
abroad to set up shop here in our country.

I know two people from other countries – two of many thousands – who were
educated at our universities at enormous expense to our taxpayers and who,
once they had graduated, could not get permission to stay and work in South
Africa. So today both of them are contributing their skills – learnt here
at our expense – to the people of Great Britain. And that is a waste.

We need urgent and rational action on the part of the government to sort
this mess out. Frankly, it's not that difficult to do. We mustn’t obsess
about control. What we must do is to say to the skilled people of the world
that this is a place where they can come and ply their trade, apply their
skills, employ our people and make them richer. We should open our doors to
those people.

The resolution that will serve before the Interparliamentary Union in
Geneva later this year is largely rational. I think it’s sensitive to the
plight of immigrants and I am sure that my party’s representative will
support it. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, apparently, the migration we are talking
about does not include the migration of members of Parliament from one
party to another.

This is of course a very serious subject, which cuts across the borders of
practically all countries in the world, with implications for the world as
a whole - migration and development. It is therefore also very appropriate
for our Parliament to discuss this matter.

Regarding the meaning of the term “migrant”, I find it surprising that it
apparently has no universally accepted definition, despite the fact that it
is a widely publicised phenomenon that has been occurring for a long time.
The UN has however proposed that a long-term migrant be defined as follows:
“A person who moves to a country, other than that of his or her usual
residence, for a period of at least twelve months”.

We know by now that migratory laws are a worldwide reality and create
different and mostly serious implications for the international community.
The phenomenon has escalated in recent decades. Escalation can be seen from
the fact that in 1965 there were only 75 million migrants, while just 20
years later, in 1985, this figure had reached a staggering 105 million. We
Africans have not escaped this phenomenon, and according to estimates by
the UN, the total number of international migrants in Africa rose from 9
million in 1960 to 16 million in 2000.

A study conducted by the University of Cape Town revealed that over 233 000
South Africans emigrated permanently to five countries between 1989 and
1997. This figure of 233 000 South Africans emigrating is disputed by many
others who allege that it is causing confusion to refer to formal emigrants
only, and the real migration figure is hidden. They are saying that up to
two million people have left South Africa, but have not yet migrated.

There are many causes for migration, such as political instability, loss of
confidence in the future of a particular country, continued poverty, lack
of economic prospects, human rights violations and discrimination in the
country of origin.

I shall now briefly deal with the challenges we are faced with in this
respect. A recent report by the International Labour Organisation contains
a list of ten challenges that international migration currently entails.
Included on the list are the manifestation of xenophobic hostility and the
exodus of well-educated professionals – the brain drain.

Those two topics are currently very relevant to South Africa. Xenophobia is
present in South Africa, as some people see foreigners as people out to
steal their jobs and take the food out of their mouths. Foreigners are
therefore sometimes targeted and seen as unwelcome, especially in the face
of the fact that we suffer from a huge unemployment problem.

Since the beginning of the 1990s there has been an increased migration of
skilled and highly skilled workers leading to a brain drain from some
countries, including South Africa. Developed countries and those with
ageing populations will try to attract the most skilled, trained and
experienced workers who can add value to the economy and have a positive
impact on the economic development of their countries.

While the migration of workers has many benefits for the developed
countries, South Africa, as well as most other developing countries, faces
an enormous drain of human resources. There are clearly many challenges
facing us with regard to migration and development. This is a growing
phenomenon that requires a comprehensive and coherent strategy at an
international level, which is currently lacking.

Although there are many international initiatives addressing migration,
they should be receiving more international attention than they are
currently getting.

In conclusion, we as parliamentarians have an important role to play in
highlighting this important issue and its many challenges, as well as
achieving the integration of the required laws and public policies. Thank
you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Chair, it is often stated that we live in a global
village. One of the characteristics of this global village is that people
move around it, exploring different opportunities to enhance their quality
of life. In many ways this movement of people enriches our village by
exposing all of us to different cultures and perspectives on life.

There are certain worrying trends which need to be addressed in this
movement, though. Sixty percent of global migrants reside in the more
developed countries and only 40% in developing countries. Developing
country migration is also mainly between these countries, rather than from
developed countries. It is therefore an unfortunate reality that most
people tend to migrate towards economically-developed centres, in many
cases, taking with them the skills that are desperately needed in our own
countries.

In South Africa there is much talk of the so-called brain drain, where we
lose many skilled people to developed countries. In some cases these people
are only temporary migrants, looking to expose themselves to a new culture
and return a few years later.

This kind of migration can be enormously beneficial to South Africa, as
these migrants return with new skills and global experience and in some
cases even foreign currency that can contribute to our economy. This kind
of migration should be encouraged, but at the same time we need to ensure
that we also build a sense of national pride and create the right
incentives to prevent many of our skilled compatriots from becoming
permanent migrants.

We should also be looking at making it easier for those foreigners with the
willingness and skills to contribute to building our new society. I have
met many foreigners in South Africa who have fallen in love with this
country and are looking for any way possible to stay longer and help us in
our reconstruction and development efforts.

It is therefore worrying that the Department of Home Affairs has currently
issued a directive that states that no new applications for exceptional
skills can be processed, because they have not yet worked out the precise
quota. This issue needs to be urgently addressed if we are to encourage our
skilled foreigners to stay and build our society.

Finally, I wish to address the important issue of refugees in South Africa.
The majority of these refugees are single, young men who have fled
intolerable situations in their own countries. I have met refugees who are
educated as doctors, teachers and agricultural scientists, who are being
forced to work in menial jobs such as car guards. Although they are
educated, they struggle to convert their qualifications through Saqa,
depriving them of a meaningful income and South Africa of their skills
base.

This issue must be addressed and we need to create a far more enabling
environment to allow genuine refugees into the mainstream of our society.
In this way we can actively promote a true African Renaissance. I thank
you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairman, the ACDP endorses the IPUs’ concerns as set out in
its draft report on the consequences of the brain drain. In the first
instance, active ways must be sought to halt migration of skilled workers
and skilled citizens, particularly in the field of medicine - as the
situation in South Africa pertains. We need to encourage health care
workers to stay in the country by providing improved service conditions,
better salaries and incentives, especially in the rural areas.

Whereas the ACDP also welcomes the fact that even the contributions of
those who have already left the country may not necessarily be lost to us,
rapid technological advancement means that the relaying of information back
to the country of origin becomes a useful mechanism for the transfer of
knowledge and skills.

Furthermore, migrants who return to their country of origin can make a
meaningful contribution to socioeconomic upliftment. We in the ACDP believe
that we must provide some form of incentive, whether tax or otherwise, to
encourage our expatriates to return to help build the nation.

The influx of migrants into South Africa can also mean that the pool of
talent that has exited the country can be replaced with similarly qualified
personnel. We believe that harnessing the talents and expertise of new
arrivals to the country can address shortages created by the brain drain.
We do, however, need to have a look at the red tape in applications for
work permits and the costs involved for skilled migrants.

We in the ACDP are also extremely concerned about the vulnerability to
trafficking, human rights violations and xenophobia that migrants,
particularly women, in South Africa and other nations, are exposed to.
According to the draft IPU report, women today move with greater ease and
are freer with regard to their family responsibilities and the authority of
men.

It is estimated overall that 48% of migrants are women. The report goes on
to state that female migrants deserve special attention, as they are more
often victims of human rights violations, sexual and labour exploitation
and often receive lower wages than male migrants.

On the other hand, whilst fully acknowledging the special vulnerability of
women migrants and abuses women are more prone to suffer, the draft report
also points out that migration can contain an element of empowerment of
women as it offers the possibility of financial independence and a new
status for such women within their families and society.

The ACDP urges parliamentarians, who will attend the debate in the IPU, to
adopt a clear and focused stance with regard to the brain drain and other
issues we have raised.

On the one hand, let us do everything in our power to keep our skilled
citizens in the country, and on the other hand, let us devise channels for
the transfer of knowledge and incentives for the return of those
expatriates who have left; and in so doing, attempt to fill the gaps by
providing opportunities to migrants in our own country. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, we in South Africa are no strangers to
migration. The majority of our population was brought to South Africa over
many decades, to work in the fields. That’s how we have proudly become the
rainbow nation. However, from the report it is evident that migration is a
process that has not slowed down in any way over the years, and, as we
know, migration comes with its own benefits and hazards.

We have lost many of our professionals to countries abroad, and we have an
influx of people migrating to South Africa from whom we can benefit through
skills and fresh knowledge. The loss of resources to maintain and provide
for our local citizenry can be compensated by such foreigners. This
provides a strong argument against xenophobia and the insecurities and
fears of locals.

The MF feels that while there should be leeway for immigrants, we do
however support certain protective measures, not only for the local
citizenry, but also to ensure the security of such immigrants.

We are a democratic country that adheres strongly to the values and
principles of human rights. Noting this, we will not be tolerant of any
contravention of our national Constitution or the exploitation of any
person.

The MF supports this IPU report and wishes the matter to be further
addressed with our neighbouring African states. A person should have
freedom of movement. Human rights and the laws of any country that one
enters need to be adhered to and honoured.

The “brain drain” and “brain gain” resulting from migratory trends are
driven by the search for better pay, better working conditions and greater
opportunities for career advancement, and also the chance to get ahead in
receiving countries. Migrants who return home, temporary or permanently,
can contribute to the development of their countries. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms H C MGABADELI: Chairperson and the House, before turning to the report
by the IPU, I think it is appropriate to provide some perspectives and
thoughts on this issue within the context of so-called First World and
Third World migration, for if we do not address the context, we will run
the risk of concentrating on international First World migration and thus
neglect the issue of the development of Third World migration.

Migration, according to the Collins Gem Dictionary, means “move from one
place to settle in another, a journey between different habitats”. I will
dwell on what we call intercountry migration, its causes and development.
Intercountry migrations are largely caused by the foreign introduction of
economic means of production that defies those of the aborigines. This
arrogant introduction of foreign means of production is then confronted by
different kinds of resistance from the would-be labour force.

In order to force labour to yield the monetary reward in the form of wages,
all sorts of legislation was put in place to ensure that migration took
place under duress. People faced poverty and arrests due to these laws, so
they left their areas of birth and moved to cities and towns where the
capitalist mode of production was in operation, and this became the order
of the day.

Some of the laws that institutionalised migration in the Republic of South
Africa were, for instance, the hut tax that was introduced by Sir
Theophilus Shepstone in Natal and the poll tax for every man over the age
of 18 years, which was introduced by the colonialists in Natal in 1906. The
labour tax, introduced by Cecil Rhodes in the Cape, was known as the Glen
Grey Act of 1894. It forced people in the Cape to pay R1 every year unless
they could prove that they had worked for wages for three months. They knew
that if you were not employed and your source of survival was not cash, you
would borrow this R1 until you became bankrupt.

The second measure was the written passes to undertake any kind of journey
in the Cape, which was in existence long before 1828. It was called the
Caledon Code and Ordinance 49. Another measure was an employment Act that
formalised the imperial state’s full regulation of the migrant labour
economy, a practice that Grey had already introduced in British Kaffraria.

Based on the above, and many other measures, we therefore cannot just talk
of such migration as if it had been free movement. It was forced and it was
a process whose phases are still continuing. We always wonder when people
talk of 11 years as a long time to undo the results of these tax laws that
I have mentioned, whose purpose was to deal the black citizens a heavy blow
for generations to come.

These types of migration ended up inviting other neighbouring countries to
succumb and South African mines and industries became the answers. In the
meantime, there was no development in the areas from where these migrant
labourers came. The regime of the day had no intention to develop such
areas, for fear of resistance by labourers to selling their labour power
far from their homes, and money became the key to getting whatever a person
needed.

If we as parliamentarians think of running away from this background and
cloud intercountry migration with other issues, we will fail to come
forward with proper development designed to redress the past, thus halving
poverty and achieving the UN millennium goals as a whole, including our own
South African Vision 2014.

I am coming to the international migration, which the IPU report speaks
about. Migration has always been a feature of human life. Moving from place
to place in search of means of subsistence or to escape a strong foe, men
and women, since time immemorial, have spread over the greater part of the
earth’s surface. Within recorded history, human migration has transformed
the entire aspect of lands and continents, and the racial, ethnic and
linguistic composition of their inhabitants.

Why then do we now, as a globe, need to say that migration is a problem,
while it was not a problem in the past for a few just to take over other
people’s land, wealth, dignity, etc? It is a problem because there are few
or no proper systems in place to control this outstanding feature of human
life, if it has to be budgeted for.

The IPU has to review, strengthen and establish laws and systems that
control this human feature. Failure to do this, will lead to some
superpowers creating scenarios that do not exist in order for them to be
able to invade other countries and create wealth for themselves, thus
migrating to such countries on a so-called “official permit to bring about
peace and stability”.

If such control measures are not in place with regard to international
migration, coupled with a calculated, well-planned approach to the economic
development of the areas that were left underdeveloped due to colonisation
and the exploitation of Third World countries’ wealth, etc, we shall
forever have to occupy our minds with terms such as xenophobia, brain
drain, feminisation of migration, increased number of migrant children,
etc.

We need to look at this within the context of the causes and challenges we
are faced with. As a globe, across the lines of First and Third Worlds,
first and second economies, etc, we are faced with sophisticated challenges
based on this migration and development.

With regard to animal migration, due to the environmental situation,
generations to come may not know some of the animal species we have now,
due to the unprofessional migration of people who have the skills to breed
animals; not spending time on nature, the environment and sustainability;
diseases that are carried because animals are not quarantined, and that
sometimes remain undiscovered at the time of migration; and opportunities
that result from migration.

Even when well-controlled systems are in place, a number of opportunities
exist, including the following: exchange of skills, exposure to different
cultures, exposure to different ways of life, economic boosts by outsiders
during conducive months, summer for summerweather lovers and winter for
winterweather lovers.

As regards interethnic relations, we are faced with a number of threats,
which the document from the IPU describes, but not as threats. If there is
continued noncommittal by different parliaments to set up proper systems or
control measures with regard to migration and the causes of such migration,
long-term sustainable development will always be an unreachable dream.

The following are some of these threats: one, lack of analysis of the
different root causes of migration; two, lack of comprehensive approaches
and coherent migration policies at different levels; three, nonexistence of
a political united challenge internationally to deal with migration in a
sustainable way; four, vulnerable groups such as women, children and people
with disabilities can easily become perpetual slaves of sex, labour,
exploitation, etc; five, humanitarian agencies which are not monitored by
anyone can easily become the messiahs in times of panic by migrants - the
damage remains unrecorded as some of these humanitarian agencies are also
involved in illegal activities; six, discrimination against unknown
unintroduced foreigners will yield negative results in times of tensions;
seven, lack of protected human rights of all stakeholders; eight, a soft
approach by the UN to its member countries which, though signatories to the
UN, failed to sign the 1990 International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of all Migrant Workers and Member Families - it is said that
only 25 out of 191 states are signatories, so really, we need to take this
seriously; nine, lack of legal and regulated methods for migration; and
lastly, the lazily addressed economic gap between rich and poor and the
serious structural deficiencies of the developing countries. If we continue
reasoning so lazily on dealing with this gap, it will really be a threat to
us.

I just want to take all of us back a bit when it comes to the white
population in South Africa. We in the ANC have not forgotten that, after
the fall of the Soviet Union, Pik Botha and other apartheid leaders went to
Eastern Europe to recruit white migrants to come and live in South Africa
in order to increase the white population. One wonders what legal
monitoring devices were put in place with regard to this expansion beyond
recognition from which we are still suffering.

I thank you. Go and think as parliamentarians about the delegation that is
going to come from this Parliament. Let us stop howling, because when you
are outside South Africa, you become so soft. All these countries challenge
you and one feels embarrassed when you do not howl as you do here. Enjoy
this warmth, and the delegation that is going to be elected should sit
together and stop thinking you are this and that. Study and go out with a
united voice from the Parliament of South Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOUSING - OVERSIGHT VISIT
                             TO GAUTENG PROVINCE





Ms Z A KOTA: Chairperson, Ministers, comrades and colleagues, I greet you
this afternoon in this important debate. Our committee is honoured to have
women of substance in its portfolio committee. These achievers are Mildred
Ramakabanisia, who received the order of Chief Albert Luthuli, and Mama
Ngele who received the award by the Tshwane Municipality.

This event was celebrated on 24 August at the Ministerial residence. We
thank the Minister of Housing for opening doors to the portfolio committee
that evening, but on a sad note, on behalf of the portfolio committee we
wish the Minister’s spokesperson Sandile Dikeni a speedy recovery. He was
involved in a car accident. He graced that occasion by reciting a poem, so
we wish him a speedy recovery.

In this debate we wish to bring to this House the experiences of the
Housing Portfolio Committee on their visit to Gauteng. We are here to share
a wealth of information with the House in order to improve the lives of the
people for the better.

It has also became very clear during that visit that housing delivery in
Gauteng is on track, and that the leadership of the MEC of housing, Comrade
Nomvula Mokoanyane, does have a positive impact on fast-tracking housing
delivery.

What was also clear was that the co-ordination of the three spheres of
government was invisible, and it was committed in implementing the vision
of the Freedom Charter. It is clear that houses are delivered in Gauteng
with great speed.

The objective of the visit was to assess whether the breaking of new ground
strategy has indeed taken off in this province, and what the challenges
are, and secondly to look at the provision of basic infrastructure, to
assess the quality of housing units provided, in order to see whether the
government was getting value for money in the provision of houses, and
whether the housing products were indeed designed to bring back their
dignity to beneficiaries, whether the housing units where adhering to the
norms and standards, as stipulated in the housing code.

The purpose of the visit was also to ascertain the working relationship of
the three spheres of government in the delivery process. It was also aimed
at monitoring the involvement of emerging contractors in the housing
delivery process, as well as women contractors.

Access to housing and secure accommodation is an integral part of
government’s commitment to reduce poverty and to improve the quality of
people’s lives. The ANC-led government has delivered more than 1,6 million
houses to more than 7 million people between 1994 to 2004.

During the same period a total of 2,4 million subsidies were approved. I
just want to remind this House of the All Media and Products Survey, which
was conducted by the SA Advertising Research Foundation that was published
by the Sunday Times in 2002.

If we recall, in that survey it is stated that it was aimed at measuring
the change in the quality of life, since the democratic order was
installed. It became clear that since 1994 the government housing
programme, has improved the quality of life of many South Africans, and
that 60% of South African households own their homes.

There has been growth in the total number of homes. The number of home-
owners has grown to more than 77%. The most important thing is that in
terms of the delivery, the ANC government is giving houses to the very
poor.

The Minister of Housing, Dr Lindiwe Sisulu, unveiled the comprehensive plan
for the development of integrated sustainable human settlement in September
2004. As we know the core principles of that strategy are the following:
accelerating delivery of housing as a key strategy for poverty alleviation;
utilising the provision of houses as a job creation strategy; ensuring that
property can be accessed by all as an asset for wealth creation and
empowerment; leveraging growth in the economy, combating crime and
promoting social cohesion; using housing development to break barriers
between the first economy residential property boom, and the second economy
slump; utilising housing as an instrument for the development of
sustainable human settlements in support of spatial restructuring; and
diversifying housing products by placing emphasis on rental stock.

What is meant by sustainable human settlement? It means that housing
delivery can become a catalyst for creating sustainable human settlement.
Through housing, people can have access to water, electricity, sanitation,
clinics and bulk infrastructure.

In fact, the housing challenge ceases to be just a question of the number
of units delivered each year, but that housing delivery and habitation are
translated into a vehicle to achieve multi goals and outcomes over and
above the requirements for shelter.

Sustainability in housing and human settlement can be understood in terms
of four pillars, which support sustainable development. We state that
projects should address environmental challenges, they should generate
economic empowerment, they should enhance social capital, and they should
build institutional capacity.

The visit to Gauteng, therefore, helped the committee to understand to what
extent the province was aligning itself to the breaking of new ground
strategy as unveiled by the Minister.

On the first day of the visit we paid a courtesy visit to the national
Department of Housing in Pretoria, where we were welcomed by Mr Dlabantu,
the now deputy director general, as the Minister and the DG were busy with
the Iran delegation.

We received a briefing on the MTEF and several programmes of the
department. MEC Nomvula Mokoanyane hosted us over breakfast in a hotel the
following day. She briefed us at the official department. The committee was
taken around Gauteng for a visit to a number of projects.

The ANC members will deal in detail with these projects. We then proceeded
to visit housing institutions, namely the NAHFC, the NHBRC, and the Social
Housing Foundation. All these institutions and the department said to us
that they are aligning themselves with the strategy. It was very clear from
the report that they were meeting the targets in line with the strategy
itself.

When we visited the projects, it was clear that the project managers in
those projects were women. That was very positive in Gauteng. We have also
found out that, especially in places like Bekkersdal, women where involved
in the housing delivery process, particularly in the developing of the
economy.

We also welcome what the MEC has done in this month of August, by
delivering title deeds to elderly women in Orange Farm. We have also noted
the delivery of housing for the month of August in Protea Glen.

Ndifuna ukuthi ke nangona besindwendwele eRhawutini besingezo ndwendwe nje,
kodwa besibonisa into yokuba u-ANC uyazakha izindlu jikelele eMzantsi
Afrika. Besibonisa ukuba amandla alo mbutho anjani na ekwakheni izindlu,
singulo rhulumente wesininzi nowentando yabantu. Olo hambo lwaseRhawutini
lubonise ukuba urhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC unenkathalo ngabantu kwaye
uyazakha izindlu. Baninzi abantu abafumene izindlu nabafumene imisebenzi
ngethuba lokwakhiwa kwazo.

Okona kubalulekileyo kukuba apho kwakhiwa khona izindlu kubekho iivenkile,
izikolo, iikliniki kunye namaholo ukwenzela ukuba abantu babe nobomi
obungcono. Urhulumente akanakwakha zindlu eyedwa. Kuyafuneka ukuba
bancedisane naye oongxowa-nkulu, imibutho yabahlali kunye nabantu. Sicela
ukuba wonke umntu abe negalelo ekwakhiweni kwezindlu kuba ekwakheni ezi
zindlu, sakha noluntu.

Sifuna wonke umntu athi: ‘Nam ndibe negalelo ekuvezeni impilo engcono
ebantwini endihlala nabo.’ Xa ndiza kuhlala phantsi, kubalulekile ukuba
ndiyicacise phandle into yokuba siyi-ANC siyayixhasa into yokuba izindlu
zakhiwe kufutshane neendawo abasebenza kuzo abantu. Ikwabalulekile into
yokuba izindlu zakhiwe phaya ezidolophini. Xa kusakhiwa izindlu, . . .
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to let you know that when we visited Gauteng, we were not
just visitors but we were there to prove to people that the ANC is
committed to building houses for the whole of South Africa. We, as the ANC,
were showing how powerful we are and how committed to providing housing for
the people. The visit to Gauteng proved that the ANC-led government cares
about its people. Many people received houses and jobs through the
government housing project.

It is important that housing development is placed where there are shops,
schools, clinics and city halls in order for people to access services that
would better their lives. Government alone could never succeed in achieving
its goal of providing housing for everybody. We appeal for every other
person’s support and contribution because in the process, we are building a
community and a nation.

We would be happy if everybody could say: ‘I made my contribution towards
the betterment of other people of my community.’ It is important, before I
take my seat, to mention that the ANC supports the view that houses should
be built closer to workplaces and where there are social amenities. It is
also important that housing development is done closer to the city. During
this process . . . ]

. . . inxenye yalo naluphina uphuhliso kufuneka ibe nesiqingatha
esingamashumi amabini ekhulwini esibekelwe izindlu zabanemivuzo ephantsi
ngoba ibalulekile into yokuba siqale ukumanya uluntu lwethu abangekho
zidolophini, phaya koomaBishop’s Court ukuze ibe ngoongxowa-nkulu bodwa
abahlala kwezo ndawo. Nabantu bethu mabakwazi ukuhlala kuzo. Siyaphinda
siyagxininisa ekubeni xa kusenziwa uphuhliso nokuba kuphaya emabaleni
egalufa, amashumi amabini ekhulwini . . . (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[A portion of every development should consist of at least 20%, which is
geared for low-income houses, because it is critical that we begin to
integrate our communities and not leave the cities and towns and urban
areas such as Bishop’s Court for the affluent people. Our people should be
able to live in these areas. We would like to emphasise that 20% of the
proceeds of development of areas such as gold courses, . . . ]

 . . . should be put aside to build these low-income houses so that . . . .


 . . . abantu bafikelele kwezi ndawo. Masimbone urhulumente eyiphelisa into
yokuba ilokishi ibezindawo ezihluphekileyo lo gama ezidolophini kukuhle
kakhulu. Ngako oko ke urhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC uyayivuma into yokuba
abantu bethu ngoku mababuyele ezidolophini.

Mabaye kuhlala kwindawo ezikufutshane nemisebenzi yabo. Yiyo loo nto
singulo rhulumente we-ANC sibambisene neemibutho yabantu. Sizama ukuba
abantu bethu babuyele kundalashe apho babehlala khona kooma-District Six,
nakooma-Kensington, ukwenzela ukuba kweli xesha sikulo sibonise ukuba
asinguye laa rhulumente wocalucalulo kodwa singowentando yesininzi. Sifuna
ke ukugoba umqolo. Enkosi [Laphela ixesha.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[ . . . people can get access. Government should stop treating townships
like poor areas whilst concentrating on making urban centres more
beautiful. The ANC-led government encourages people to live in urban areas.

They need to live closer to their workplaces. It is for that reason that we
work closely and in collaboration with civil society and community
organisations as the ANC-led government. We are keen to prove that we are a
democratic government by allowing people to go and establish their homes in
areas such as District Six and Kensington, where they used to live before
the forced removals. We are committed to that. Thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

Mr A C STEYN: Chairperson, the report we are supposed to be debating today
deals with the committee’s very first oversight visit and it occurred
almost one year ago. It started off with a visit to the offices of the
national Department of Housing in Pretoria, where we were given an overview
of the various programmes of the department.

For me, the highlights of that particular visit were - perhaps due to the
fact that I am familiar with the various programmes of the department - the
major upgrading and renovations that were in progress at the department’s
offices, and the state-of-the-art communication and IT systems that were
either being installed or had already been completely installed.

The conference room we used on that particular occasion had already been
completed and it took the best part of 30 to 45 minutes for the officials
to find somebody who knew how the new equipment operated before we could
get started. I trust that those teething problems have been resolved and
that all the new equipment will contribute towards greater efficiency in
the department.

Day two kicked off with a breakfast meeting with the MEC and we had a
meeting with the standing committee at the Gauteng legislature. This was
followed by a visit to Alexandra Township after a briefing on the Alexandra
Renewal Project. This project, which started off as a presidential pilot
project some years ago, and was once considered a flagship project in
Gauteng, is unfortunately being dogged by controversy, which has tainted
what could have been a benchmark project for South Africa.

The reasons for this are varied, but primary amongst them, I believe, is
the lack of leadership. This project has probably had half a dozen or so
project managers since its inception, some skilled and others clearly not
up to the job.

However, one of the challenges raised with the committee by the MEC as well
as other role-players and spelt out in the report was the lack of co-
operation and participation by other provincial departments – so much for
all the talk about integrated development within government departments!

The other major challenge was the lack of funding from national level.
Perhaps it is appropriate that I therefore take this opportunity to
formally request that a tiny portion of the funds earmarked by government
for Zimbabwe be channelled to this very worthy project, in order to improve
the working conditions for the people of South Africa.

It was encouraging to meet women contractors on site and simultaneously
very disappointing to learn that some administrative shortcomings that were
identified some two years prior to our visit had still not been sorted out.
I refer here, of course, to the fact that a major problem with this project
has been late payments to contractors and other service providers. This has
led to emerging contractors and other SMMEs involved in the project being
unable to fulfil their financial obligations as one particular woman
contractor testified. In this instance, the MEC agreed to take this matter
up and it would be interesting to know if this chronic problem has been
resolved.

The lack of consumer education is often mentioned as a stumbling block in
the delivery of services. Beneficiaries of government’s social programmes
are generally not aware of their rights or obligations related to such
benefits. As an MP from Gauteng it was therefore with pride that I
attended, together with the committee, the launch of a consumer education
programme, which coincided with our visit.

On day three we were introduced to another redevelopment project in
Gauteng, the Bekkersdal Urban Renewal Project. This project was still very
much at its planning stage and it appeared that closer co-operation between
departments was indeed taking place on this project. Our committee was once
again fortunate in that our visit coincided with the opening ceremony of
the Bekkersdal information hub. However, community members expressed
concern over the slow progress made with regard to housing delivery
concerning this project and lack of employment opportunities specifically
for community members.

Day four was spent visiting social housing projects within the boundaries
of the Ekurhuleni and Johannesburg metropolitan councils. What was
interesting was that one of the projects hailed by Ekurhuleni as a success
story appeared to be occupied largely by beneficiaries not meant to benefit
from this subsidised housing.

We had the opportunity to physically inspect some of the units. Judging
from the appliances and other furnishings, the occupants were clearly in a
higher income bracket than what was required. This was also evident from
the vehicles in the residence parking areas – some of those were of German
origin. I wonder if this could be the reason that this development is a
success story.

Some residents had a much higher income than the maximum required to
qualify and this therefore leads to a much lower default rate. However, if
this situation is not monitored, controlled and rectified, the flip side is
that the more deserving tenant is denied access to state-subsidised
housing.

There are a number of recommendations at the end of this report. In
hindsight, it would have been fitting for us to remark on the progress made
regarding these recommendations in this debate, almost one year later.
Perhaps, hon Kota, the committee should review all recommendations made to
date and follow up on their implementation. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mmz D C MABENA: Sihlalo, aboNgqongqotjhe abahloniphekileko, malunga
aqakathekileko wePalamende, kulithabo kimi njengelunga le-ANC ukuba nezwi
ngomma onomhlane obanzi nonebele elimunyisa woke amaSewula Afrika, ngitjho
i-Gauteng province. Lapho kunetjhuguluko elinengi empilweni zabantu ekade
batlhaga ngaphasi kombuso wegandelelo.

I-Alexandra ngenye yeendawo lapho kusabonakala khona umtlhago ngebanga
lombuso omdala. Izindlu ezakhiwa ngurhulumende wakade ziyawa ngombana
abantu abanandawo, nokufuna umsebenzi babona kugcono ukwakha imikhukhu
endaweni enye nenye evulekileko ngenkolweni, duze ne-Jukskei River, London
Road, lapho kulahlelwa khona iinzibi e-S’tswetla nalapho kukhanjwa khona
nca nendlela.

Umthetho-sisekelo weSewula Afrika isigatjana 26 Act 108 of 1996 uthi woke
umuntu kulengabanda yakwethu unelungelo lokuba nomrhoswana wakhe ocalekako.
Umbuso weGauteng province ukulingisa ubutjhapho begandelelo weza ne-
Alexandra Renewal Project, ebukufanele ithathe itjhumi leminyaka kodwa
wazibophelela ngokuthi izayiqeda ngo-2009, kwabakhona neengibe endleleni.
(Translation of Ndebele paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D C MABENA: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members of Parliament,
it’s a pleasure for me as a member of the ANC to say a word about the
Gauteng province which is the engine of the economy and has the power to
feed all South Africans. There are remarkable changes in the lives of
people who were afflicted by poverty under the previous government.

Alexandra is one of the areas where poverty is still prevalent because of
the previous government. Houses that were built by the previous government
are falling apart and people do not have a place to stay. When searching
for employment they find that it is better to build a shack where they find
a vacant piece of land which close to the schools, near to the Jukskei
River or London Road, at e-S’tswetla dumping site and on pavements.

Section 26 of the Constitution of South Africa, Act 108 of 1996, stipulates
that everyone has the right to adequate housing. To rectify the damage
caused by the apartheid government the Gauteng government launched the
Alexandra Renewal Project, that was supposed to be completed in the next
ten years but the government committed itself to completing the project in
the year 2009. Noticeable challenges have been encountered in the process.]

Some of the challenges included the following: different programmes in the
department were not talking to one another, thus not maximising the impact
with regards to work; inconsistent funding; change of faces from
communities themselves, in terms of community participation; and scarcity
of land. To speed up this process and delivery, the province decided upon
one political head to lead and that was the workaholic MEC for housing in
Gauteng.

In order to accommodate 350 000 people within greater Alexandra, steps that
were taken included the establishment of a consortium that assists small
and emerging local contractors and their capacitation. This consortium also
ensures that they are absorbed into the building labour market.

Abanye sebaba ngabo somakontraka abazijameleko. [Some have become well-
established contractors.]

Another step taken was to ensure that there should be a proper
representation of all the people of Alexandra, young and old.

Ukwakhiwa kwe-London Road bridge kuphilile, abangu 2 000 ababehlala eduze
ne-London Road banikelwe izindlu zabo, abangu 5 500 ababehlala duze ne-
Juskei River basusiwe kuleyo ndawo eyingozi bayiswa eSoweto. [The
construction of the London Road Bridge has been completed, 2000 people who
were living near London Road have been given their houses, and 5 500 people
who were staying near the Jukskei River have been moved from that dangerous
area to Soweto.]

Beautiful parks have been built along the banks of the river and 2 000
trees donated by Trees for Africa have been planted along the river bank
and East Bank townships, and existing dwellings are being upgraded. Other
activities include redevelopment of hostels, development of affordable
rental accommodation and conversion of hostels into family units, that is
Helen Joseph, M1 and M2, where we met Mrs Melita Raseale – a woman
contractor who was on duty.

This programme will improve the lives of 3 286 households and, most
importantly, integrate them into the surrounding areas. There is also a
transit facility that has been developed to accommodate households that are
being relocated out of Alexandra who qualify for housing benefits but whose
houses are not yet ready.

South Africa belongs to all who live in it. There are remnants of pressure
groupings of no particular origin who need not be supported by South
Africans. They always misconstrue the government’s reallocation processes
as forced removals and always try to give this initiative negative
publicity, for example the relocation of people from Alexandra to Soweto.

The Ekurhuleni Metro – which has a population of 744 000, 112 informal
settlements and 122 000 families – has vowed to eradicate homelessness and
informal settlements by 2014. One of the challenges the metro faces is
people who sell their RDP houses and thus increase the housing backlog. The
increase in the rate of urbanisation leads to land invasion and
densification of the existing informal settlements.

Twelve settlements have been redesigned to allow for densification using
the Gauteng province’s community builder programme, which is in line with
the Expanded Public Works Programme. Women, youth and the disabled have
benefited. About 1 400 houses have been delivered and it is hoped that the
programme will eradicate informal settlements within eight years.

Forty-nine disabled persons have been allocated houses with special
facilities and 600 Harry Gwala residents have been relocated to Chief
Albert Luthuli Park Extension 4. Extension 4 consists of 1 514 stands and
will accommodate people from the surrounding informal settlements of Egypt,
Beachfront and Emandleni.

The community builder programme will be used to put up top structures and
it is another tool for job creation and skills transfer. At Nelson Mandela
settlement, work has began on upgrading informal structures in Extension 23
and 24, and 3 312 people in Madelakufa 1 and 2 have been registered at the
metro as approved beneficiaries.

In Freedom Park, 1 054 people have been registered. Vusimuzi hostel in
Tembisa has been converted into family units. Khutsong women’s hostel and
Buyafuthi hostel have been upgraded into affordable rental stock.
Soshanguve hostel, in Tshwane, is 95% complete and the building is ongoing.
Saulsville is 60% complete and 50% of the builders are women contractors.
It has been named as the best practice project. Mohlakeng, in Randfontein
municipality, Kagiso, in Mogale city and Diepkloof, in Johannesburg will
start soon.

Mogale city is currently relocating families to 4 400 stands where the
infrastructure for essential services has been completed in Rietvlei 3. A
total of 963 toilet structures have been completed in record time at
Tsepong proper in the Sebokeng area, and this work was done by a woman
contractor. The installation of top structures will be commencing soon.
During 2004-05 Mogale city delivered 2 300 houses. Other developments are
in Mamelodi Extension 5,6 and 22.

Lastly, the transfer of state-owned houses under the discount benefit
scheme is progressing fairly. Transfers are taking place in all regions of
Gauteng. Because Africon delayed the process, the system is now being done
in-house. There is an 80% success rate in beneficiary education by way of
workshops. Mogale city has incorporated a youth learnership programme into
housing, and 200 youths are undergoing training in building skills and
housing co-operatives. Ngiyathokoza. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Chairperson, hon members, the report that we are
considering today on the provincial oversight visit to Gauteng and other
provinces on the provision of housing has highlighted successes and
challenges. Owing to the fact that we are dealing with more than 40 years
of housing backlogs left by the late National Party, we should not be
allergic to constructive criticism and feedback that we get from these
visits, like the proper allocation of the RDP housing, quality of housing,
nondelivery and other instances.

In Gauteng there are three urban renewal projects, Alexandra, Bekkersdal
and Everton. The nature of these interventions is such that challenges and
difficulties are to be expected and the challenge is not to politically
sweep them under the carpet but to deal with them as they arise as we have
witnessed in the Gauteng province.

The Premier of Gauteng has committed his government that by 2008 all 52
public hostels will be either totally converted into family units or
upgraded into self-contained units with privacy and restored dignity of its
residents. For this financial year the MEC for housing in Gauteng, Ms
Mokoanyane, has committed her department to complete 5 000 units.

While this is recommendable, the only concern to the IFP is the practical
implementation, given the lack of capacity in some municipalities, as was
mentioned by members here. Hostels should be part and parcel of the broader
community and not be little islands. I think the problem here, most
especially with hostel upgrading, is the integrated development strategy.
It is not only the baby of the Department of Housing. I think the
Department of Provincial and Local Government should come in, more
specifically for infrastructure.

The mushrooming of residential areas with no economic development is also a
concern. If you look at Gauteng from Soweto to Everton-Vereeniging, there
is the development of residential areas with no economic development for
people to be able to work around their areas. People in Orange Farm should
be employed in Vereeniging and Johannesburg. Their money is being spent on
transport, more than on other necessities. We think there should be
economic development that accompanies residential development. With these
few comments, we support the report. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N J NGELE: “Kuya kuba kho izindlu, ukhuseleko nobuntofontofo.”
Mhlalingaphambili nabakungqongileyo, bhotani. [“There shall be houses,
security and comfort.” Chairperson and hon members, I salute you.]

As South Africans, we will always be grateful to President Kaunda for the
immeasurable support he provided to our struggle for liberation. Zambia was
our home and as such South Africa is your home. Given the contribution that
Nepad plays in supporting the upliftment of the people of the African
continent, it is not surprising to see such projects, such as the UN
Habitat, initiated by Comrade Kaunda.

Asilo qonga lokubalisa iintsomi eli ndimi kulo. Bonke abantu abangenazindlu
eMzantsi Afrika baza kuba nazo. EPitoli kukho iziza ezingama-760. Yonke
enye into sele yenziwe, abantu baza kwakhelwa.
Siyambulela uMphathiswa wezeZindlu ngokunika abantu isidima ngokuthi
abanike izindlu. Ewe, izindlu ezakhiweyo azikho mgangathweni, kodwa ngenxa
yeqhinga elibizwa ngesilungu ngokuba yi-breaking new ground, abantu baza
kufumana izindlu ezisemgangathweni. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[This podium on which I am standing, is not a platform to tell stories.
All the people who do not have houses in South Africa are going to have
houses. There are 760 sites in Pretoria. All other outstanding issues have
been addressed, and people will be allocated houses.

We thank the Minister of Housing for restoring the dignity of the people by
providing houses for them. Yes, it is correct that the houses that were
erected are not up to standard, however, as a consequence of the new
diplomacy, which is referred to in English as “breaking new ground”, people
are going to get decent houses.]

The housing challenge in this country is immense and is an undeniable
legacy of the previous system of apartheid. Many experiences have been
gained and many lessons learnt. As the ANC we are on the right track as we
are translating the 2004 manifesto into reality. The contract we entered
into with our people to create work and fight poverty is making a
difference in a big way.

Through our struggle as the ANC, we can say today: South Africa is a
democratic country, with a government based on the will of all the people.
The rights of women are recognised and find increasing expression in real
life. We are building a caring nation as the ANC and the dignity of our
people is restored. This is true, as millions of our people renew the
mandate of the ANC to do more on delivery to the poorest of the poor.

The DA may not notice the difference that the ANC is making to the ordinary
people of this country. [Interjections.] Don’t shout at me. I have never
shouted at you. Talk to me. [Interjections.] The DA, I repeat, will not
notice the difference that the ANC is making to the ordinary poor people of
this country, because they have been enjoying the privileges that our
people were denied. And that is true.

Through housing provision, many jobs are created and this is better than
what you gave them - if you ever gave them anything. Through housing many
jobs are created, and this makes a direct contribution to the second
economy. Women are involved in construction companies and this is what we
in the ANC call a better life for all. [Interjections.]

Phendula! Ngowuthula wena! [Respond! You are supposed to keep quiet!]

Women have been marginalised for a very long time, hence the ANC is doing
something concrete about this. Improvements in the quality of life of our
people require that we take measure to increase the volume and quality of
the investment in infrastructure. To make sure that our freedom becomes
meaningful to our people, we must translate the Freedom Charter into
reality. In the past 11 years the ANC-led government has managed to build
more than a million houses, and in this programme, other services like
water, electricity and sanitation were delivered.

As the ANC we have called on our people to join in a popular movement for
reconstruction and development, run on the basis of the traditional African
practices of the Letsima and Vukuzenzele campaigns. In doing so, we are
building more houses to accommodate the poor people of our country, whom
our oppressors had treated as disposable commodities. [Interjections.] Are
you one of them? I didn’t know. I was not aware. Thank you for answering.

It is true by engaging in the people’s contract we are faced with many
challenges, which require a sustained effort over an extended period of
time. In this debate we are showing the projects that the ANC-led
government is engaged in to make the lives of our people better. As the ANC
we are committed to building for women, because we believe that it is
through creating a secure living environment for women that we provide a
home for the young of this country. Ultimately, we are convinced that the
home is where we plant the seeds of the kind of society we are dreaming of.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson, the UDM supports the recommendations in the
report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing, following their oversight
visit to Gauteng province. The need for members to have access to
information on housing to distribute to their constituencies is self-
evident.

As far as the failure of the IDP initiative in Alexandra is concerned, we
find it disturbing that not all departments are taking their roles
seriously. We concur that the matter should not only be raised in this
House but also referred to the interministerial committee.

Often the lack of co-ordination and integration among various departments
is the biggest stumbling block to the implementation of worthwhile
policies. Such an undermining of service delivery is unacceptable and
unavoidable.

The issue of land release remains a problem in the country in general. This
is very sensitive, with many complexities.

In conclusion, the difficulties of high rental and the allocation to
beneficiaries require further attention. Many of the people that should
benefit do not benefit. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr T S DODOVU: Mr Chairperson, hon members of Parliament, during the first
decade of democracy, housing policies have evolved to address the housing
challenges, to build quality housing and to establish compact integrated
cities, which work towards desegregation and high density mixed use
development.

These challenges include the enormous size of the housing deficit, the
proliferation of informal settlements, the failure of the housing markets,
the inability to mobilise mortgage finance as well as the problems
associated with urbanisation and population growth.

In order to ameliorate this situation and address these daunting
challenges, we are proud that our government has put in place the proper
legislative and policy instruments, which are unprecedented in our history.

Maemo a kenyeletsa ho neelana ka disubsidy ho batho ba rona ho etsa hore
matlo ao e leng hore a ahwa ke mmuso wa rona, ke a loketseng batho ba rona,
le ho thusa batho ba batlang ho ikahela matlo. [These include the granting
of subsidies to people to make housing affordable to them, and to assist
those who would like to build their own houses.]

These instruments also include the establishment of housing institutions
like the National Housing Finance Corporation, Thubelisha Homes, Servcon
Housing Solutions, the Social Housing Foundation, the National Urban
Reconstruction and Housing Agency, as well as the National Home Builders
Registration Council. These institutions are important because they
facilitate much-needed capacity development within the housing sector, and
they also act as secondary housing market and wholesale facilities for the
housing finance system.

During its visit to the Gauteng province, the Portfolio Committee on
Housing had the opportunity to interact with some of these housing
institutions. In addition to these measures, the ANC-led government has
adopted the Urban Development Framework and the new housing strategy called
“breaking new ground”, which is a plan that seeks to build settlements for
good human habitation and to indeed build communities in these settlements.

Our visit to Bekkersdal, as part of the parliamentary oversight role, has
reinforced our conviction that the people, once empowered, can make an
important contribution to the improvement of their own living conditions.
The degree of openness and friendliness with which we were received by the
Bekkersdal political and community leadership, reflected a sincere and deep-
rooted wish for the successful implementation of the Bekkersdal Urban
Renewal Project.

The Bekkersdal Urban Renewal Project should be seen in the context of the
epic battles that the community of Bekkersdal has waged in the destruction
of the system of apartheid and colonialism. The people of Bekkersdal, under
the able leadership of Thomas Letlhake, A T Thubela and Jackson Nkuna, made
an immense and immeasurable contribution in destroying the vicious doctrine
of race supremacy.

With a budget of about R1,2 million, the Bekkersdal Urban Renewal Project
seeks to resettle close to 18 000 families who live in informal
settlements. It seeks to eradicate the bucket system, which is a health
hazard to the communities, and it seeks to expand the skills capacity of
the people. Most importantly, the renewal project seeks to create job
opportunities in the wake of job losses because of declining mining
activity in the area.

Once the Bekkersdal Urban Renewal Project is successfully implemented, it
will integrate the town of Westonaria to negate the apartheid-induced
segregation, fragmentation and inequality. It will focus on integrated
planning, rebuilding and upgrading of Bekkersdal Township and its informal
settlements.

The Bekkersdal Urban Renewal Project will improve housing and
infrastructure. It will alleviate environmental hazards, encourage
investment in Bekkersdal, and increase access to finance, social
development, and the building of habitable and safe communities. This
project will indeed maintain safety and security, and design habitable
urban communities.

When the portfolio committee visited Bekkersdal, it realised that the
promotion of economic development was an important cornerstone of the urban
renewal project. In this regard, the project aims at enhancing the capacity
of Bekkersdal, to build on the local strength to generate greater local
economic activity, to achieve sustainability, to alleviate poverty, to
increase access to informal economic opportunities, and to maximise direct
employment opportunities, and the multiplier effect from implementing the
development project.

To this end, our visit coincided with the opening of the Bekkersdal
information hub by the MEC for housing in Gauteng, Ms Nomvula Mokoanyane.
This information hub already serves as a resource centre for the community.

Notwithstanding the good work done in this regard, there are, however,
weaknesses in the implementation of the project, and these need immediate
attention. These weaknesses include the slow delivery of the project, poor
co-ordination and communication between the municipality and the provincial
government, lack of skills and the lack of clarity on the roles and
responsibilities of different stakeholders.

It is of paramount importance, therefore, to put measures in place to
address these challenges. In the memory of Thomas Letlhake, A T Thubela,
and Jackson Nkuna, and in recognition of the immense contribution that they
made, the Gauteng government and the Westonaria municipality has to be
seized with the resolutions of these issues, and successfully implement the
Bekkersdal Urban Renewal Project. Municipalities like Merafong,
Potchefstroom, Makwasi Hill, Ventersdorp and Klerksdorp, can learn from
these experiences and emulate the example of the Bekkersdal Urban Renewal
Project.

There are many deficiencies in the analysis of the DA in terms of how they
are moving with these particular issues. In dealing with these complex
matters, the DA has unfortunately chosen the path of pandering to populism,
by attempting to discredit, undermine, and ridicule the good work that the
ANC government is doing in this regard.

The DA always projects a picture of might and arrogance. Partly, it is the
face of most oppressors in human history, partly it is to conceal that they
must know that their strategy in the long run is doomed. Sooner or later,
the DA will explode. The collapse of their strategy will unfortunately be
enhanced by its own contradictions.

Our priority in the circumstances should be to attend to these housing
challenges, despite what the right-wing parties like the DA are doing by
broadcasting propaganda, unashamedly based on gross falsification.

By directing these vitriolic attacks and laying these unfounded charges,
they merely want to pose as the sole genuine representatives of the people.
These hostile inventions directed against the ANC are created so that the
DA can be seen to represent the genuine progressive agenda, while the ANC
is bent on betraying the cause of the revolution, by not providing adequate
housing to the poor.

The hon member of the DA, unfortunately, should not go around carrying the
notion in his head that the DA has a special responsibility to be a
competent watchdog over the ANC government, thinking that we will sit in
helpless surrender, leaving us as nothing but instruments in the hands of
whoever is controlling us. We have a responsibility to defend the ANC
against this onslaught of the DA, because we are on course to ensure that
we direct all our efforts in terms of making sure that we succeed. Thank
you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr T LIKOTSI: Deputy Speaker, the housing report as tabled here raises a
broad debate on the challenges faced in this respect. We appreciate
attempts made by government to address this matter, although at a snail’s
pace.

This brings us to the question of considering the type and quality of
houses we build. The Gauteng province is the worst affected province in
terms of badly built houses, both in nature and quality. It is the province
with the most and the worst informal settlements a person can think of. A
few examples of this are houses in Duduza, Orange Farm, Bram Fischer, etc.

This challenge of housing must be tackled head-on if we are to live a
nonviolent life in our areas. I want, without any fear of contradiction, to
agree with Minister Lindiwe Sisulu that the municipalities and provinces
are failing the nation in the low pace of housing delivery, and that
housing must be a national competency. This may improve the acceleration of
human settlement and entrench the principle of accountability. There is a
vast difference between quantity and quality. We choose quality.
[Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the report and its recommendations
display the committee’s observations and concern about the development of
housing and enable the department to identify successes and loopholes in
its delivery.

We are especially glad that these visits also sought to monitor the
involvement of women in the housing delivery process. In view of this, it
is felt that the recommendations made could greatly benefit housing in the
Gauteng province.

We find it necessary that the suggested housing brochures be made available
to us, so that we may return to our constituencies with the necessary
information as to successes, the targets being met and loopholes being
addressed. This would allow for transparency and confidence in delivery.
The speeding up of land release is also supported. The MF supports the IDP
issue regarding stakeholders being taken up by the House.

As far as the funding issue in Bekkersdal and Alexandra is concerned, we
agree that it needs to be speeded up so that delivery is made possible. The
MF supports the follow-up visit to Bekkersdal, noting the committee’s
pending issues in the area. We firmly agree that the necessary skills need
to be localised for housing in the area.

Further, we acknowledge the portfolio committee’s note on the poverty trap
with regard to Bekkersdal, and we feel that this needs to be addressed
urgently as we want to get out of poverty, not back into it. I thank you.

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Deputy Speaker, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, comrades
and hon members, since 1994 over 370 000 houses have been built in Gauteng.
Today over 90% of households have access to water; 80% have access to basic
sanitation; 73% have access to electricity; and 80% have access to weekly
refuse removal.

In addition, during the period 1994 to 2003, 295 000 stands were serviced
and 277 000 houses were transferred. By June of 2004, the living conditions
of some 2,5 million people had been positively enhanced through the housing
delivery programme in Gauteng. This was the situation in October 2004 and,
today, almost a year later, there has been considerable progress in
delivering housing and basic services.

The Gauteng department of housing has taken the necessary steps to ensure
that the housing delivery programme in the province is in line with the
“breaking new ground” strategy announced by Minister Sisulu in 2004. It has
also committed itself to ensuring that no informal settlements exist in
Gauteng by 2014.

This clearly indicates the advances that have been and will be made in
improving the living conditions of Gauteng residents. It also tangibly
demonstrates the care and compassion that our government has as it
continues to improve the living conditions of all South Africans.

It is against this background that the statement by the leader of the IFP,
the hon Buthelezi, and I quote, “that many sections of society had a
greater empathy with the poor during the apartheid era than the ruling
party has now”, are indeed strange, to say the least.

Under the apartheid rule of the then National Party, forced removals took
place, displacing countless thousands of people - the majority of whom were
African. Separate development took place through the Group Areas Act. At
times the then National Party demolished more houses than it built.
Township areas were far removed and lacked the necessary infrastructure and
facilities that help to create a vibrant and sustainable society. This does
not represent an empathy with the poor – it represents the exact opposite.

When the Portfolio Committee on Housing visited Gauteng last year, the
Brickfields housing project in Newtown was under construction and Cosmo
City was in the final planning stages. Today, Brickfields is complete, and
construction work has started on Cosmo City. Both of these developments
represent the ANC commitments made in its 2004 election manifesto to
provide more subsidised housing and to introduce medium-density housing
closer to places of work.

The Brickfields housing project in Johannesburg will provide much-needed
rental accommodation units within the city centre. In addition, Brickfields
also forms part of the efforts of government to stop the decay of inner
cities and, in turn, create vibrant cities where people, both rich and
poor, can live and work.

The decay of the inner city of Johannesburg started in the 1980s and was
allowed to continue under the leadership of the then DP, which is now the
DA. It is the ANC-governed Johannesburg Metropolitan Council, together with
the Gauteng provincial government, which has taken steps to clean up the
mess left behind.

The first beneficiaries will move shortly to Cosmo City, which is situated
near Johannesburg in the area of Randburg. Cosmo City is one of the nine
human settlement projects announced by Minister Sisulu, which forms part of
the “breaking new ground” strategy. It will comprise some 5 000 low-cost
homes, together with bank-financed homes, rental housing, social housing
and medium-density housing. Cosmo City will not just comprise rows of
homes, but will include all the necessary infrastructure such as roads,
water, sanitation and electricity, as well as the necessary social
infrastructure such as schools, clinics, sports facilities, police stations
and community centres.

There is an air of excitement amongst the beneficiaries who come from the
Zevenfontein









                                              and River Bend informal
areas. They have been waiting patiently for the past seven years, whilst
local residents’ associations have tried to do everything in their power to
stop them from having the same rights as they do, namely security of tenure
and the right to have access to adequate housing. Both Brickfields and
Cosmo City give realisation to one of the demands of the Freedom Charter,
namely that “There shall be houses, security and comfort”.

Lawo maqembu angazihlanganisi nomgubho woMqulu weNkululeko asahamba
ngendlela endala futhi awanandaba nabantu abahluphekayo. [Ihlombe.] [Those
political parties that do not involve themselves in the Freedom Charter
celebrations are operating in the old order and don’t care about poor
people. [Applause.]]

At the opening of the Brickfields development, President Mbeki said the
following, and I quote:

  We have, among others, an urgent challenge of bringing to a stop the
  prorich housing development strategies that ensure that the best located
  land that is close to all the best facilities is always available to the
  rich; a situation where the best land is allocated especially to create
  gated communities and golf estates, while the poor can only access dusty,
  semideveloped land far away from modern infrastructure.


This statement echoed the statements by Minister Sisulu during her budget
speech in this House on 17 May, when she said that all housing developments
not subsidised through state funding should allocate 20% of the development
to affordable housing.

There are some in this House and most notably the DA who have been most
vocal in their opposition to the statement of the President, and yet in the
Portfolio Committee on Housing have not indicated any view in opposition to
what Minister Sisulu announced. Again, they clearly demonstrate their lack
of empathy for the poor. Through their opposition, they are saying that the
poor, the majority of whom are African, should forever be relegated to the
outskirts of city centres and not be allowed to integrate with the rest of
society. [Interjections.] It is true.

Whilst we have made advances in improving the living conditions of millions
of South Africans, we are still faced with the challenge of reducing the
estimated backlog of some two million housing units. Whilst we have the
correct policies and strategies in place, it is in the implementation phase
where we must focus our attention. This entails the commitment of all role-
players, including officials who work in the different spheres of
government, to ensure that the delivery of housing is increased, that a
quality product is produced and that delays are minimised.

I-ANC iyobenza njalo ikhuphula abantu baseNingizimu Afrika. Ngiyabonga
kakhulu. [Ihlombe.] [The ANC will continue to uplift South African people.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Mrs M M MADUMISE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move on behalf of the Chief Whip
of the Majority Party:

      That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORT AND RECREATION ON
 OVERSIGHT VISIT TO LIMPOPO, MPUMALANGA AND GAUTENG, AND OVERSIGHT VISIT TO
                          FREE STATE AND NORTH WEST

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, during the course of
the year the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation undertook seven
visits to the provinces. During this debate we will focus on the visits to
Mpumalanga, the North West, Limpopo, Gauteng and the Free State. We are in
the process of completing the provincial visits. We will soon be going to
the Eastern Cape, and we will complete the visit to the Western Cape.

The purpose of these ongoing visits is to measure the readiness of
provinces in preparing for the 2010 Soccer World Cup, and to ascertain
whether moneys paid by the department to federations in the form of
transfer payments reach the clubs they are intended for. The committee also
focused on assessing the condition of facilities built by the department
through its Building for Sport and Recreation programme and their
accessibility to local communities.

A key objective of the department is to promote the participation of all
South Africans in local and international sport and recreation programmes
through its own programmes and that of associated organisations. To achieve
this objective, the department introduced a major national mass-
participation programme called Siyadlala.

The committee conducted in loco visits to centres where the programmes are
implemented and was exposed to well-organised events where we met excited
participants and volunteers who conduct the programme on behalf of the
department. Thousands of citizens from all age groups are participating,
and they commended the government for taking this initiative. However, the
department must attend to certain challenges, which we encountered and
which impact negatively on the programme. This issue will be dealt with
later in the debate.

Another focus area for the committee was to meet with local sports councils
and federations. Concerns must be raised about the lack of support sports
councils get from municipalities where they are often viewed as an
unnecessary nuisance. This leads to a breakdown in communication between
the sports councils and authorities on reaching a common understanding on
matters affecting sport. As a result, scarce resources are often
misdirected to programmes and projects, which do not have the necessary or
desired impact on local communities.

The national and provincial departments need to pay specific attention to
the serious capacity problems experienced by sports councils. The need
exists for the department to develop and implement capacity-building
programmes to address this situation. The delegation met with several local
sports administrators who work from the boots of their cars to run
programmes with no back-up support.

The membership of sports councils is also an area of concern in that very
often citizens from established federations and advantaged communities fail
to participate in decision-making processes affecting their lives. We
therefore need to reiterate the need for all people, irrespective of their
race and social status, to become part of these community forums.

Recently we witnessed the establishment of the SA Sports Confederation and
Olympic Committee, Sascoc. This is in line with the recommendations of the
ministerial task team, as endorsed by Cabinet in 2003. Sascoc is operating
already as an NGO to serve as an umbrella body for high-performance sport
and includes affiliates from all sports federations and macro bodies.

The committee had an initial meeting with Sascoc and its president, and a
few problems were raised during this infancy stage of its operations.
Similar problems were raised during the oversight visits to provinces in
which stakeholders brought to our attention the uncertainty which prevails
at grass-roots level with regard to the future role and responsibility of
Sascoc in provinces and the role and impact that it will have on local
sports forums.

Federations and other sports bodies expressed concern about the lack of
information and direction from the umbrella body. We must guard against
Sascoc becoming a distant structure that takes decisions without the
necessary consultation and popular support.

The leadership of Sascoc must pay particular attention to the widely held
belief that small federations with a dismal transformation record are now
in control of the body and pay little attention to devise strategies to
address the slow pace of transformation in certain federations. It is
noteworthy that none of the major federations serve on the executive
committee of Sascoc and, as a result, it is at the mercy of the whims of
the small federations, which dominate the leadership.

The past 12 years have highlighted the need for overarching policy and
legislative formulation for sport. Such legislation will guide all macro
bodies, national and provincial federations and clubs on the need to
transform sport by making it accessible to all South Africans.

The absence of such legislation has created the space for federations to
emerge with conflicting agendas and timeframes on the future of sport. The
aim must be to provide equal opportunities for all South Africans. Only
then we will experience deep transformation.

Study tours to provinces have also allowed members of the committee to
interact with teachers from all communities. The level of uncertainty on
the future of school sport amongst them is a source of concern. The future
role, function and existence of the United School Sport Association of SA
have been under the spotlight for the past few months, especially in the
light of the shift in the strategic focus of the Department of Sport and
Recreation and the Department of Education to reassume responsibility for
school sport.

There is little doubt that Ussasa has played a major role in the arena of
school sport. The appeal of the school sport movement must reach all
communities, and teachers in service of the department must lead the
process.

We therefore call on the department to tap into the capacity and experience
of Ussasa in implementing the new school sport dispensation. Vast
experience and knowledge are available from this dedicated pool of
volunteers. The department also needs to share its new vision with
provincial departments and should embark on road shows to popularise the
new structure and its operations.

During previous Budget Vote debates, the portfolio committee raised the
concern that major federations should guard against channelling the bulk of
their resources to the professional side of the sport at the expense of
amateur competitions and development programmes. Federations ignored the
advice, and what is this situation looking like today? Everywhere we went
people complained by saying that development funds to promote the sport in
disadvantaged areas had been slashed, while resources had been directed to
support professionals.

Sponsors who funded development programmes have terminated their
sponsorships. Amateur unions bear the brunt of the budget cutbacks and, as
a result, hundreds of administrative staff, ground staff, coaches and
talent scouts, 90% of whom are black, have either lost their jobs or will
lose their jobs very soon. Fewer games are being played by amateur teams at
grass-roots level, and clubs from disadvantaged areas are underfunded to
such an extent that they cannot complete their league fixtures.

In conclusion, we need to express our gratitude to the various MECs in the
provinces, the heads of departments, the provincial federations, mayors,
councillors and local sport structures for the open, frank and transparent
discussions that we had during our interactions with them in the provinces.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S J MASANGO: Deputy Speaker, our oversight visit started in Limpopo, and
I must say that it actually has given us an idea of what is happening in
sport in different provinces. There are quite a lot of challenges facing
this country on the issue of sport.

Something that I think we should change as a portfolio committee is that we
should decide which municipality we want to do an oversight visit on. This
should not be a provincial department decision. I don’t think it is good
that the provincial department decides for us which municipality to visit.
This decision should be the committee’s prerogative.

I think one of our objectives is to check if information and communication
from national and provincial departments reach the officials at local
level. In some, if not most, instances the questions directed at local
officials were answered by provincial officials.

I remember in one province we had to stop the provincial official from
answering questions directed at the local officials. The local officials
didn’t have a clue about what was happening on the ground. This is a sign
of a lack of communication from the top downwards.

The MEC for sport in Limpopo mentioned funding as a problem in advancing
sport in the area. From our interactions with some of the members on the
Lottery Fund, it was found that it was absolutely impossible to get funds
from the Lottery if you didn’t have financial statements for the past two
years. The question is: How can you have financial statements if you didn’t
have money in the first place? This is a barrier for rural areas.

One should appreciate the Ngoako Ramatlhodi Multipurpose Centre, which, if
completed, looked after and maintained properly, will be one of the most
beautiful indoor game centres in the country. I recommend this because it
is not in Gauteng, not in the Western Cape, but right there in the rural
province where facilities of this magnitude are not available.

I am appealing to the Minister of Sport and Recreation to reconsider
whether it is in the best interests of sports-loving people to hand over
such a facility to the local municipality to maintain it. We all know what
most municipalities are capable of when it comes to service delivery and
maintenance.

Ussasa is promoting sport from local school level up to national
competition level, but one of the challenges has been the funding of
individual children who are excelling in a particular sport and who are
from poor families. A child has to be from a richer family to compete up to
provincial and national level.

This is not good for our country, and it is not in line with the vision of
the Sport and Recreation department. We must point out that this is
happening in the rural areas where parents can’t even afford a school
uniform. I think the national department should address this problem as a
matter of urgency.

When it comes to mass participation, the challenge that remains is funding.
In almost all the areas we visited where mass participation is taking
place, there is a lack of equipment in order for children to play. I
remember the chairperson of the committee instructing the provincial
officials to buy balls for the children as they were using torn and wrapped
plastic balls.

As much as too little is being done to build facilities, it is unforgivable
not to maintain those already in existence. The Charles Mopedi Stadium and
the surrounding buildings are neglected and in a chaotic state. This sports
facility is one of the best in Qwaqwa. It is neglected purely because the
provincial government thought it was the responsibility of the local
government to maintain it, and the local government thought it was the
provincial government’s job. The more the condition of the stadium
deteriorates, the more costly it is to bring it back to its original
condition.

Another point of concern is that sports facilities are being built without
taking into consideration whether there is another sports facility in
existence nearby that is not being used and sometimes not maintained. This
is also a waste of resources.

Sports facilities are there for sports development at local level. If they
are not used, then what purpose are they serving? The stadium at Glenmore
in Mpumalanga was used once and that was for a musical festival. We don’t
build stadiums for the local council to make money out of them, nor for
music festivals, or political rallies, but for the development of sport in
that specific locality.

Again, let’s bring sports facilities to where people are staying. Most
people don’t have the money to travel long distances for training.
Therefore it is crucial that facilities are accessible to the community.
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M M DIKGACWI: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, hon Deputy Ministers and hon
colleagues, the misallocation of sports and recreation facilities in South
African society constitutes one of the cruellest legacies of apartheid.
This continues to inhibit the development of and access to sport in these
communities.

The Municipal Infrastructure Grant does not assist the cause to enhance
sport as a vehicle in transforming the previously disadvantaged. For
example, we are told that the white clubs have leases from the
municipalities for at least 99 years and only pay R10 a month. This
therefore means the prerogative to make the facilities available depends
solely on the discretion of that white club.

Furthermore, in the Model C schools which are now dominated by black and
coloured kids, the facilities are being ignored and not maintained as they
were when such schools were occupied by whites only. Surely, hon members,
we have a problem, and this problem does not end here. There are these
social clubs like Rotary and the Lions, which also own facilities and are
asking exorbitant amounts to rent them out, which automatically excludes
our people. We need to encourage municipalities to include sport facilities
in IDPs, and to ensure that they are accessible, and appropriate to women
and people with disabilities.

Sport and recreation’s role is to address the government’s objective of
building a nation united in action for change. I am convinced that sport in
this country is ideally located to play a significant part in this context.
However, in order for sport to fulfil such a role, transformation of sport
should be at the heart of it.

The reality facing us is that unity in sport 11 years down the line can
only be consolidated through transformation. Codes of sport might be
united, but whether they are united in action for change is a moot point.
We were often confronted by ordinary sportsmen and sportswomen questioning
whom the main beneficiaries of unity are. This raises a host of
possibilities, but the undeniable fact is that a sizeable part of the
sporting fraternity is still not enjoying the fruits of unity.

In response to this the delegation explained the principles of sport
integration and key aspects of sport transformation, particularly that of
moving away from the culture of separate sports facilities for different
race groups. It was pointed out that it is not possible for the government
to build facilities for exclusive use by schools or communities. The
government’s approach is to integrate sport facilities so that both the
schools and the communities can utilise them. Communities are therefore
encouraged to work together and share available resources.

The biggest problem identified by the delegation was the lack of
communication amongst sport structures and also between sport structures
and local government. The problems regarding the use of facilities and
payment for needs are to be discussed by the structures and the
municipality.

A number of problem areas have been identified with regard to the delivery
of service and facilities. This includes unequal access to facilities, and
the fact that areas on the outer limits of the urban areas are not as well
catered for as other areas, while the quality of facilities and service
varies across the city.

The abolishing of the Building for Sports and Recreation Project that has
been replaced by the MIG, that is the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, is
not working for us, because the same grant is mostly used for other social
needs instead of the sport facilities that it was meant for. Local
government and Sport and Recreation SA must indeed review this, as it is
not working for us.

Insufficient security at facilities leaves them open to abuse and misuse.
Inadequate maintenance budgets lead to poor upkeep of facilities.
Government must finish up their projects and not leave without having
finished building them. In KwaZulu-Natal, for instance, the Mpolweni
Stadium is an embarrassment because it has not been completed after three
or four years.

Services provided do not take into account the requirements of users,
including cultural, linguistic and age-related needs. Operating hours do
not necessarily meet the needs of users. The challenges are endless.

Nangona kunjalo abadlali abamnyama bayaphumelela kukubi, kumuncu, kukrakra
kunjalo. Usathana akangekhe abenamandla okubulala italente yabantu
abayinikwe nguThixo. Nditsho naba sinabo oosathana abahamba ngenyawo
behleka, bahlala nathi kodwa abafuni ukuba abantwana bethu baphumelele.
Qhude manikiniki! Makudede ubumnyama kuvele ukhanyo! (Translation of Xhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Nevertheless, black players triumph over unfavourable conditions. Evil
forces did not succeed in suppressing their talents. I am also referring to
the evil forces amongst us who pretend to be part of us but have bad wishes
for our children. Let the struggle continue! Let there be light!]

Sport and recreation has the potential to contribute significantly in
addressing national issues of social importance such as sport against
crime, the physical health of the nation, creation of employment
opportunities, etc. The long-term objective of the portfolio committee is
to continue to keep providing oversight in order to ensure that sport and
recreation is a vehicle for social change and creating a better life for
all.

The disaster of Bafana Bafana is an embarrassment, to say the least. The
overall shaking up of the leadership of Safa is of high priority and
government must intervene. Bafana Bafana needs a scenario of motherland or
death. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Deputy Speaker, hon members and Ministers, the provincial
oversight’s visit has identified many positive elements in the different
provinces and municipalities in sport and recreation programmes and on
development and transformation. Several sports events of mass participation
were held, and the provinces provided assistance to organisations and
deserving athletes, and the provision of facilities is still a big
challenge. In almost all provinces that we visited there is a sport academy
that offers training, but there is a lot of capacity and financial support.

Notwithstanding the positive elements there are a number of challenges and
difficulties that are still faced by the provinces, among others that the
provincial sport and recreation departments are severely underfunded as a
result of problems such as provision, maintenance, upgrading of facilities
and the prevention of vandalism, which cannot be properly identified.

Historically disadvantaged areas and particularly the rural areas and
communities are neglected. Poverty and unemployment negatively impact upon
the ability of these communities to pay for transport costs to reach
distantly located sports facilities and to fully participate in sport and
recreation.

The trend of leasing out sport facilities to the private sector by local
municipalities negatively impacts upon community access to facilities, as
they are either prevented from using these facilities or unable to pay the
high fees required for entry. Many of the best sport facilities are still
located in the formerly white areas usually out of reach of the communities
most in need of them.

The hon Minister for Provincial and Local Government gave an undertaking in
this House that the Building for Sport budget, which is now part of the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant, will be ring-fenced to make sure that
municipalities use this budget for sport facilities, but this has not
materialised. It emerged in all the provinces that we have visited that
there is no budget for sport facilities in municipalities, because this
money has not been ring-fenced to make sure that municipalities use it for
sport facilities. The IFP supports the report as a true reflection of what
we saw in the provinces.

In order for the country to avoid the Burkina Faso massacre, I think it is
high time that the Treasury looked seriously at funding sport in this
country. We support, as the IFP, the call for the country to legislate on
sport issues and not leave sport development and transformation in the
hands of the so-called sport administrators. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs D M MOROBI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, Deputy Ministers and
members of Parliament, the Portfolio Committee On Sport and Recreation
undertook an oversight visit to provinces. I will be addressing this House
on our findings on two issues, which are mass participation and women in
sport.

In Blouberg Municipality our engagement with them involved their programme,
the utilisation of the MPC. They outlined their programmes. The co-
ordinators are committed people, and their purpose is to target young
people and the games played include basketball, athletics, indigenous games
and others. By then the O R Tambo games had already started. The
municipality was preparing the under fourteens for the SA Commonwealth
Games Association. The facility lacks equipment and as a result mass
participation is minimal.

The Jakkalskop Multipurpose Centre was built by NGO sports outreach coaches
in 2001. The communities of the area were fully involved as they
participated during the erection of the facility. The sports council was
invited to the opening of the centre. The community clubs utilised the
facility by playing handball, netball and other games. Young people are
kept safe from criminal activities by engaging in sport. There is a serious
need for security fences and burglar gates. A shortage of water also
prevents the digging of boreholes.

The delegation was invited by the MEC for sport in Gauteng to attend the
Masakhane games in the Germiston Stadium. The purpose of the games was to
identify talent from wards, districts and provinces. The Masakhane games
are part of the South African games, and each province has its own team.
The delegation was impressed by the representation of demographics. The
participants were also delighted that presentations were made to the
winning teams.

There is the Ratanda Multipurpose Centre in the Sedibeng District, which is
my constituency. The communities in this area are proud of the facility, a
sure sign of ownership. The delegation was impressed by the facility as it
serves its purpose. The participants were given an opportunity to share
their views and challenges with the delegation.

In Stanza Bopape in Mamelodi their recreation centre was packed  with
participants. Young people, middle-aged people, the elderly and disabled
people were doing aerobics to keep themselves fit and healthy, and others
played indoor games. The facility is fully utilised daily. The leader of
the delegation, Mr Khompela, allowed them time to share their views,
challenges and experiences. They raised interesting issues. They want to
have exchange programmes and compete with other provinces. The Mamelodi
Care for the Aged accommodates frail and sickly elders who also need
transport to take them to the centre.

In the Free State, Maluti a Phofung, the hubs are in rural areas. Co-
ordinators organised youth to demonstrate activities played like soccer,
handball and some indigenous games, even though there are no facilities. A
hall is used for gymnastics. Teachers and local communities showed
enthusiasm as they exercise for good health and to improve their shape.

It is crystal clear that we still have a massive shortage of women to be
exposed to sports. A question asked by the delegation was  whether women
were not interested in becoming coaches. The response was that women
preferred their spouses to sports. However, gradually more women coaches
and referees are trained. Even in the parliamentary sports committee there
are very few women. [Laughter.]

Bomme, ha re so qete ho itseka. [Ladies, we are not yet through with the
struggle.]

Ngoako Ramahlodi is a new multipurpose centre, which is still in
construction. Of the 110 people employed, 30 are women. Due to the nature
and the stage of construction more women will be employed in the second
phase. They are looking at empowering women in glass fitting, steel fixing
and others. One woman is trained as a construction supervisor. Our
Constitution does not discriminate against people with disabilities. They
are also included in all these sports.

In Limpopo, people with disabilities participated in a sports event in
Sweden. They were the pride of the province. Ngoako Ramahlodi’s MPC has
railings to accommodate wheelchairs. They are disability friendly.

Our finding is that women’s sports are not active in most provinces. Mass
participation programmes also address social programmes in communities.
Where there are no facilities, especially in the rural areas, lovers of
sport use open grounds. Talent is identified.

The committee has made recommendations, of which I will mention a few,
namely that the national department should maintain the facilities, see to
it that the facilities are accessible to the communities and also to
disabled persons. Recreational activities such as those performed at Stanza
Bopape and Maluti a Phofung should be encouraged in all the provinces. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Speaker, the PAC accepts the report of the committee
as a true reflection of their oversight visits to the said provinces.

Maemo a mabala a rona a dipapadi a mabe. Bana ba rona ba ntse ba bapala
mobung, ha bana ba makgowa bona ba bapala mehlweng kapa thefong. [The
condition of our sports fields is appalling. Our children are still playing
on sandy sports fields that are unsuitable, whereas their white
counterparts are playing on lawns or turf.]

For us to proudly say we are free, a drastic change to the inequalities of
the past must be effected without any form of doubt or hesitation. The PAC
may agree to the processes of transformation, but other things need
paradigm shifts by those who are in power. We must enforce new ways of
thinking on leaders, which may restore the dignity of human beings and
destroy a class society from its roots.

Mabala a dipapadi a moo ho dulang batho ba Afrika ha a lokiswe, ho fedisa
botlokotsebe metseng ya rona. Ke a leboha. [Sports fields where Africans
live are not renovated, to stop the crime in our locations. Thank you.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF proudly applauds the Portfolio
Committee on Sport and Recreation for their oversight in the areas covered
in their report. It appears from the report that the portfolio committee
carried out thorough research into the situation in these areas and left no
stone unturned. With such determination, the MF is confident that sport and
recreation will effectively reach every corner of South Africa and the
sector will be the democracy it belongs to.

Sport in South Africa is a great part of the spirit of our nation and the
MF would love to strengthen the spirit by ensuring the delivery of the
necessary facilities in all areas, poverty stricken and affluent. We have
always felt that recreation and sporting activities serve as a great
deterrent, for our youth, from being absorbed into crime and drugs. Also,
participation in sport caters for healthier living.

The MF acknowledges that, in both reports of the Portfolio Committee on
Sport and Recreation on the various areas, similar intentions were carried
out, which appropriately attended to the sector issues in those regions and
concerns regarding the 2010 soccer world cup.

Having noted the findings of the portfolio committee after its numerous in-
depth meetings with the necessary stakeholders in the various regions, the
MF agrees with the recommendations made by the portfolio committee. We
strongly agree that Sport and Recreation SA has a crucial role to play in
these. Also, the necessary hon premiers, MEC: of sport and recreation and
the respective Ministers in the various provinces play a vital role in the
effective and efficient infiltration, development and advancement of sport
and recreation in their areas.

The MF supports the recommendations made and feels that their
implementation will greatly benefit sport and recreation in these areas. I
thank you.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

Maloko a Palamente a hlomphehileng haholo, re a leboha hore kajeno tjena re
fumane monyetla wa hore re tlalehele Palamente le setjhaba sa rona sa
Afrika Borwa ka mosebetsi o moholo wa Palamente, wa ho tsamaya re lekola
kamoo mosebetsi o ntseng o tsamaya ka teng.

Dintho tseo re di boneng diprofensing tseo re tsamaileng ho tsona, naha ka
bophara, ke dintho tse tshwanang kaofela ha tsona. Ke ntho tse kang tsa
hore batho ba rona ba Afrika Borwa ba hloka mabala a dipapadi moo ba leng
teng.

Empa ho na le dintho tse ntle tse etsahetseng, tse entsweng ke mmuso ona wa
rona. Ke leboha ha o le teng, Letona, hore ke tle ke bue taba tsena mme o
tle o kgone ho di utlwa hantle, ka ha re tla lakatsa hore o di lokise
hobane re a kgoptjwa ha di sa loke.
Re ile ra etela KwaZulu-Natal. Ha re kgutla teng, re ile ra sheba direkoto
tsa Palamente mme ra fumana hore ka 2003, Komiti ya Palamente e neng e
etetse moo, e ile ya fumana ho thwe ho na le setediyamo se qetilweng ho
ahwa, Empolweni. Ha re kgutla teng, ka 2005, re fumane ho se setediyamo se
jwalo.

Ha re tlalehela Palamente ditaba tse kang tseo re re, ka kopo hle, re batla
hore ha re kgutlela mono, bathong bao ba nang le tshepo e phahamisitsweng
ke rona, ba tle ba kgone ho bona hore, ha re bowa sekwele, ho na le taba eo
re ileng ra e fetisa ho lokisa maemo ao a neng a le teng ka nako eo. Ke seo
re se kopang seo.

Empa, re batla ho leboha hape-hape, bakeng sa Lotto. Modulasetulo wa
Lefapha la tsa Kgwebo le Indaseteri, wa mphato Ben Martin, re a buisana le
yena hobane mmethe oo o o fumanang bakeng sa ditekanyetso tsa hao tsa tsa
dipapadi, ke nnete ha o motle haholo ho ka etsa ntho tsena tseo setjhaba se
di lebeletseng kaofela. Re buisana le yena ka hore ho ka ba molemo ha re ka
eketsa mmethenyana ono ka 20%, ho potlakisa kaho ya mabala a dipapadi le
matamo a bana a ho sesa, ho tlisa bophelo bo botle le hore bana bana ba
tloswe kgakgauwaneng ena ya ho sebedisa dithetefatsi. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Hon members of Parliament, today we feel honoured to have been granted
this opportunity to report on the huge task carried out by Parliament in
its role as an oversight instrument to Parliament and to the nation as a
whole.

During our visits to the provinces, we observed that the same problems were
common throughout the country. They included, among others, the shortage of
sports fields.

However, there are many positive developments that have taken place in
sport in this country. I am very grateful for the Minister of sport’s
presence in the House, and for him to have the information first hand
regarding the problems in sport. We hope that he will solve them quickly
because we do not wish to fail our people.

On our return from KwaZulu-Natal, we scrutinised parliamentary records and
discovered that the parliamentary committee, which visited the place in
2003, reported that there was one complete stadium at Empolweni. But,
surprisingly, on our visit in 2005, we did not find a stadium.

We report these developments with the hope that some measures will be taken
to meet the high expectations of the people of Empolweni so that when we go
back there they do not accuse us of making empty promises. That is all we
ask.

We are thankful for the financial support from the Lottery. We are also in
constant contact with the director-general from the Department of Finance,
Ben Martin, for financial assistance because the funds allocated for sport
are insufficient, and therefore cannot meet national expectations. The
discussions with the director-general are aimed at persuading him to
increase our budget allocation by about 20% in order to fast-track the
building of stadiums, swimming pools and to produce youth free from the
scourge of drug abuse.]

We really appreciate the idea of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, but we
just want to draw the attention of the Minister and the hon House to our
concern. This is a good concept, we appreciate it and we accept it.
However, I don’t think it’s correct that you should have abandoned your
programme, which was called Building for Sport, before we could see the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant running.

The problem that we are encountering around the question of the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant, as the portfolio committee, is that your programme,
Building for Sport, has built 144 sporting facilities throughout the
country. However, with the advent of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, we
have only built four in the country. It’s a loss.

What happened to the 140? It used to be 144. There is nothing wrong with
the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, but it’s a new concept, where
municipalities are putting facilities for sport at position G, which is not
a priority to municipalities.

We have interacted with the Integrated Development Plans of municipalities
throughout the country. I can confidently say to this House that only four
municipalities throughout the country have sport as one of their
priorities, and are building facilities for our children to go and play in.
That is a challenge that exists in the country.

We urge, again, that there should be a way for us to request a
reinforcement of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, so that it should
target, exactly, the building of these facilities, because the Minister has
raised a lot of expectations for everybody in the country. You went to
Oudtshoorn over the weekend and raised hundreds of people’s expectations by
saying those kids must play. Where should they play, because you are unable
to build facilities? It’s a humble request from our committee; saying that,
whilst you are looking for the running of the Municipal Infrastructure
Grant, let us use this alternative vehicle, which is a running vehicle, at
the same time.

The question of the memorandum of understanding in sport and recreation is
a problem throughout the provinces. We have met with the chairpersons of
all provinces, and others do not even know about the memorandum of
understanding. The memorandum of understanding has become the affair of the
two national departments in Cape Town.

In provinces, chairpersons and everybody else did not know, but the
question of that memorandum of understanding clearly places physical
education at school level and it is the Ministry’s responsibility to deal
with sport. People do not understand that. Those who are responsible for
the provision of sport have not been given this kind of information for
them to understand what the new challenges and the new things are, which
are beginning to enhance and broaden the mass participation of learners
everywhere around the country.

The other problem is the legislation. One thing that we are seized with, as
a portfolio committee, is the governance of sport in the country. It is
chaotic, it has collapsed and it’s a disgrace. I think I agree with the
comrade who says that we should call for these hon ladies and gentlemen in
both the SA Rugby Football Union and the SA Football Association, and also
in the United Cricket Board, please to pack their things and go for healthy
sport in this country, because this is anarchy. [Interjections.]

I’m coming to that point. Minister, you can’t do that because this House is
saying that sport should be a sacred thing, which you do not touch. You
must be a passive spectator. There should be pillaging and plundering,
because there is no law that gives you powers to call people to order if
there is anarchy.

Up until such time, I think we must be able to bite the bullet. We have
gone to France, we have gone all over, and those countries are running
sport through the law. Where there is no law, there is anarchy and this is
the anarchy that we see.

Around the question of 2010, throughout the provinces, I’ve heard you
saying to many people . . .

 . . . Musani ukungxama ngokwakha amabala amaninzi ngoba izakuba sesa se-
Korea/Japan. Nguwe wedwa olifundisa abantu elo lizwi. Le komiti yalapha
ekhaya ekufuneka iququzele ihleli zava ezi-ofisini. Abatsho ebantwini
ukuba, ‘Kha nime kancinci nantsi into esiza kuyenza.’ Ngoba bathi kuthi . .
. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[ . . . refrain from quickly building many playing fields or this country
will be like Korea/Japan.  It is you alone who preaches that message to
people. The committee that is supposed to co-ordinate this is sitting and
relaxing. They are not saying to people, ‘Please exercise patience because
this is what we are going to do.’ They say to us . . . ]

You see, we have the 2006 German World Cup responsibility, so we must not
do anything. However, we have a problem, as a portfolio committee. When you
give people information, you don’t do anything else. You just give them
information to prepare them, so that they must know that, tomorrow, after
the 2006 world cup in Germany, there is something that we are going to do.

Let us give our people information because, wherever they are, they are
looking for the excitement that was caused by Madiba when he raised that
trophy of the 2010 Federation of International Football Associations World
Cup, and that excitement is going down. Let us stay with that momentum and
be able to give people information.

We appeal that the Local Organising Committee should be able to have a road
show and inform municipalities and everybody else about what these
challenges are and why we are slowing down in building stadiums and all
those other things. There should, at least, be information given to those
people.

In the municipality of Steynsrus, in the Free State, if you build a high-
powered facility, the revenue base for that municipality would only be R25.
They would not be able to cut the grass, they would not be able to replace
glass, and they would not be able to do anything else. Now, the committee
makes a recommendation that, whilst we have this wish to see that even
small municipalities are benefiting around the issue of stadiums, it should
be the responsibility of the national department to look after the
facilities until municipalities have reached a healthy level of being able
to maintain that stadium.

We understand the issue of the competency of all stadiums being given by
the provincial and local government to municipalities, but what about the
capacity of revenue? We went to Montshiwa, in the North West. The stadium
there was renovated at a cost of R4 million and, in the second round, it
was renovated at a cost of R8 million.

You can go and see for yourself, there is no stadium there. That is because
that municipality is so small that it cannot maintain a facility of that
size in Montshiwa. So, whatever we do, I think we must have a better
interaction with the provincial and local government, in relation to how we
should deal with small municipalities, giving them just the basic
facilities.

There is a problem throughout the country. Not a single province can say to
you there are no leases of stadiums. Not even here in Cape Town, where we
are. In Mangaung, the Vodacom stadium doesn’t belong to the municipality.
It belongs to the Cheetahs. In Durban, a volleyball team pays R8 000 for a
game, per day, because they can’t access that facility, as it has been
leased to other people.

We must be able to challenge, head-on, the demon of leases throughout the
country, and see what we can do with the leases in this country. They are
impeding people’s access to facilities. [Applause.]

Everywhere, there are leases given to big sporting codes, and when our
teams go to play there, like Celtic, they pay R15 000. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We move:

      That the report be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on oversight visit to Limpopo, Mpumalanga and Gauteng accordingly
noted.

Report on oversight visit to Free State and North West Provinces
accordingly noted.

   AWARDS GIVEN TO DEPARTMENT OF SPORT AND RECREATION BY SA INSTITUTE FOR
                      GOVERNMENT CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, it is with a
sense of pride that we share some information in this hon House this
afternoon. Saica, the SA Institute for Chartered Accountants, has a system
by which they award prizes to government departments, nationally and
provincially. In fact, they have two categories.

In the category where the national departments had to compete with all the
provincial departments they had a whole list of criteria against which they
measured those departments. I would like to just mention some of these
criteria, there is a whole list, but the two criteria that stand out are
the way in which the department is managed and then obviously the audit
report of the department for that past financial year.

Now, in that first category of the national departments and the provinces
and provincial departments, the Department of Sport and Recreation was
awarded first prize. We were number one there, and amongst the national
departments, the Department of Sport and Recreation is also number one. So,
we are the winners in both those categories. It fills us with pride, and
may I say to hon Minister Mfundisi: Thank you so much for your leadership.

We want to thank our team. We grilled them with questions, but they will
see that from those tears came a lot of good work. To the director-general,
the chief financial officer and the whole department: Congratulations on a
job well done.

There will be a time arranged for a professional group of the institute to
hand over the prizes to the hon Minister. But having listened to the debate
this afternoon, I want to conclude by saying one thing: We obviously agree
with a lot of things that have been said and shared this afternoon. But
give us time and money. With the management and the will there is under the
leadership of the Minister of Sport and Recreation, we will not only
transform sport in this country, we will be number one in the world like we
are regarding these prizes of Saigca. I thank the House for their
attention.

The House adjourned at 16:55.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                         THURSDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


            i) Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29 – 2005] (National Assembly
               – sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
               published in Government Gazette No 27984 of 31 August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 2 September 2005.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly (floor-crossing)

    Membership status of the following members has in terms of Schedule 6A
    of the Constitution (floor-crossing) changed as follows:


      ▪ Mr S Simmons has, on 1 September 2005, left the New National
        Party (NNP) and joined the United Party of South Africa (UPSA), a
        new party in the National Assembly.
      ▪ Mr L M Green has, on 1 September 2005, left the African Christian
        Democratic Party (ACDP) and joined the Federation of Democrats
        (FD), a new party in the National Assembly.
      ▪ Mr M C J van Schalkwyk has, on 1 September 2005, left the New
        National Party (NNP) and joined the African National Congress
        (ANC).
      ▪ Mr C H F Greyling has, on 1 September 2005, left the New National
        Party (NNP) and joined the African National Congress (ANC).
      ▪ Mr F Beukman has, on 1 September 2005, left the New National
        Party (NNP) and joined the African National Congress (ANC).
      ▪ Mr J Schippers has, on 1 September 2005, left the New National
        Party (NNP) and joined the African National Congress (ANC).
      ▪ Ms C B Johnson has, on 1 September 2005, left the New National
        Party (NNP) and joined the African National Congress (ANC).


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
        Council (ARC) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 88-2005].


2.    The Minister in The Presidency

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Media Development and
        Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 118-
        2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

       National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on the South
    African Police Service (SAPS) Station Monitoring Tool, dated 31 August
    2005:


    The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security having developed a
    monitoring tool for the South African Police Service (SAPS) Stations
    reports as follows:



    A.      Introduction


    The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security held a strategic
    planning workshop in February 2005. The Report of the Workshop adopted
    by the Committee on 23 February 2005 identified the need to develop a
    standardized questionnaire (monitoring tool) for oversight visits of
    police stations to ensure more effective and coordinated policing
    oversight.


    The Committee established a subcommittee to oversee and input into the
    establishment of this tool. The subcommittee consists of Members from
    the various political parties represented in the Portfolio Committee.


    B.      Purpose


    The purpose of this questionnaire is to:


      •  Facilitate  effective  oversight  by  the  various   parliamentary
        committees responsible for Safety and  Security  over  policing  at
        station level.
      • Provide these committees with useful independent data with which to
        make recommendations to improve the functioning of policing.
  • Compare successes and problems between stations and provinces.
  • Measure progress at police stations over time.
      • Ensure more effective collaboration in oversight functions  between
        the Portfolio Committee on Safety  and  Security  of  the  National
        Assembly, the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
        Affairs of the National  Council  of  Provinces  and  the  Standing
        Committees within the various provincial legislatures.


    C.      Who should use the questionnaire?

     The questionnaire should be used by:

      • Members of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Safety  and  Security  when
        undertaking station visits as part of their constituency work.
      • The Portfolio Committee on  Safety  and  Security  when  undertaking
        station visits as part of the committee programme.

    In addition, the questionnaire may be used by:
      • Members of the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
        Affairs when undertaking station visits as part of  constituency  or
        committee work.
      • Members of the Standing Committees of  the  Provincial  Legislatures
        when undertaking station visits as part of constituency or committee
        work.
      • Any Member of Parliament when undertaking station visits as part  of
        constituency work.



    D.      Conclusion


    The questionnaire will be launched in parliament on a date to be
    announced. All members are encouraged to attend. Bound copies of the
    questionnaire are available in the office of the Clerk of Papers.


    The committee presents this report to Parliament for approval of the
    questionnaire.


        Report to be considered.


                          FRIDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly
     1. Membership of the following members of the National Assembly has
        been terminated with effect from 31 August 2005:


        Diko, M; Mdaka N M.


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Government Notice No 806 published in Government Gazette No 27878
        dated 5 August 2005: Determination on interest rate for purposes of
        paragraph (a) of the definition of “official rate of interest” in
        paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, tabled in terms of the Income
        Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Municipal Infrastructure
        Investment Unit (MIIU) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 72-
        2005].

3.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

       a) Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
          Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in
          International Business Transactions, tabled in terms of section
          231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

       b) Explanatory memorandum to the Organisation for Economic Co-
          operation and Development (OECD) Convention on Combating Bribery
          of Foreign Public Officials in International Business
          Transactions.

4.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Bala Farms (Pty) Ltd for 2004-
          2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 133-2005].


5.    The Minister of Labour

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Sector
          Education and Training Authority (CETA) for 2004-2005, including
          the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
          2004-2005 [RP 85-2005].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
          Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2004-2005,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 97-2005].

       c) Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
          Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
          (CTFL SETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 87-2005].


       d) Report and Financial Statements of the Primary Agriculture
          Education and Training Authority (PAETA) for 2004-2005, including
          the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
          2004-2005 [RP 106-2005].


       e) Report and Financial Statements of the Diplomacy, Intelligence,
          Defence and Trade Education and Training Authority (DIDTETA) for
          2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 100-2005].


       f)  Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
          Sport Education and Training Authority (THETA) for 2004-2005,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 104-2005].


      g) Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education
         and Training Authority (BANKSETA) for 2004-2005, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-
         2005 [RP 84-2005].


      h) Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail Sector
         Education and Training Authority (W&RSETA) for 2004-2005,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 105-2005].


       i) Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government, Water
          and Related Sector Education and Training Authority (LGWSETA) for
          2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 95-2005].


6.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum for 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 141-2005].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship Institution
        for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 128-2005].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Freedom Park Trust for 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005.

     d) Report and Financial Statements of Blind South Africa (Blind SA)
        2004-2005, including the report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


     e) Report and Financial Statements of Performing Arts Centre of the
        Free State for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

                          MONDAY, 5 SEPTEMBER 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 10B – 2005] – Act No 7 of
           2005 (assented to and signed by President on 08 July 2005).


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Agriculture  and  Land  Affairs.  The  Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred  to  the  Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for
             2004-2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
             Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 54-2005].

    3.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Council for
             Educators (SACE) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2004-2005,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2004-2005.

    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:
          a) Report of the South African Law Reform Commission on the Repeal
             of the Black Administration Act, 1927 (Act No 38 of 1927).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Sector Education and Training
       Authority for Secondary Agriculture (SETASA) for 2004-2005,
       including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 107-2005].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training and
        Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority (ETDP
        SETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Accounting
        Services Sector Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2004-
        2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 83-2005].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
        Education and Training Authority (INSETA) for 2004-2005, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
        2004-2005 [RP 93-2005].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare Sector
        Education and Training Authority (HWSETA) for 2004-2005, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
        2004-2005 [RP 92-2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS


       National Assembly


 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security  on  Oversight
    Visit to Western Cape Regarding  Service  Delivery  and  Implementation
    Action Steps of the Firearms Control Act 12 to 14 June 2005,  dated  24
    August 2005:





   INDEX


   1. Introduction
   2. Delegation
   3. Term of reference
   4. Beaufort West Police Station
   5. Laingsburg Police Station
   6. Touwsriver Police Station
   7. De Doorns Police Station
   8. Debriefing Session and Recommendations
   1. Inadequate Number of Bulletproof vest
   2. Equity at Police Stations
   3. Language policy
   9. Recommendation

    The Portfolio Committee on Safety and  Security,  having  conducted  an
    oversight visit to the Western Cape (Overberg) Province from 12  to  14
    June 2005, reports as follows:

 1.  INTRODUCTION

    The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security undertook a visit  to  4
    police  stations  in  the  Western  Cape   Province   (Beaufort   West,
    Laingsburg, Touwsriver, and DeDoorns). The purpose of the visit was  to
    investigate service delivery and  whether  or  not  the  implementation
    action steps (distribution of  official  documents,  training  of  SAPS
    personnel, technical  support,  accreditation,  etc)  of  the  Firearms
    Control Act and its Regulations are completed and whether  or  not  all
    national police  stations  which  have  been  identified  as  ready  to
    implement this Act, are indeed ready for implementing this Legislation.




 2. DELEGATION

       1)   Ms MM  Sotyu  (ANC)   -  Committee  Chairperson  and  leader  of
           Delegation
       2)   Mr AM Maziya (ANC)
       3)   Ms A Van Wyk (ANC)
       4)   Mr S Mahote (ANC)


       5)   Mr N L Diale (ANC)
       6)   Mr A H Gaum (NNP)
       7)   Mr R King (DA)
       8)   Mr R Jankielsohn (DA)
       9)   Mr JC Michaels (Committee Secretary)
       10)  Mr V Mfuniselwa (Committee Assistant)


    The following people were also in attendance, Area Commissioner Daniels
    and his team of Zone Commissioners, Director Zabo at the Ministers
    Office, ICD Western Cape Head and his team and Representatives from the
    Western Cape Department for Community Safety.


 3. TERMS OF REFERENCE


    The Delegation had to investigate  and  report  to  Parliament  on  the
    following:


           • Whether or not the implementation action steps (distribution of
             official  documents;  training  of  SAPS  personnel,  technical
             support, accreditation, etc) of the Firearms  Control  Act  and
             its Regulations are completed, and whether or not all  national
             police  stations  which  have  been  identified  as  ready   to
             implement this Act, are  indeed  ready  for  implementing  this
             Legislation.
           • Service delivery at selected Police Stations as  identified  by
             Members of Parliament


    Based on its observations and  discussions  that  were  held  with  the
    relevant stakeholders, the Committee had to make recommendations.


 4. BEAUFORT WEST POLICE STATION


    Management  of  the  Beaufort  West  Police   Station,   led   by   the
    Superintendent, briefed the Committee as follows:


    The Beaufort West police station serves a 124 176km  geographical  area
    with a population of 37 107. There  is  Satellite  police  stations  in
    Merwerville and Nelspoort, and additional police  stations  in  Neville
    and Nelspoort. Beaufort West is divided into 10 Sectors although sector
    policing is still in its growing phase. The  station  currently  has  3
    uniformed police and 2 civilians performing duties in relation  to  the
    Firearms Control Act. For the first 6 months of this year  the  station
    processed 38 Firearm license renewals  and  3  new  applications.   The
    police station has 207 staff  members  and  a  total  of  42  vehicles.
    Priority crimes at the police station include business and  residential
    burglary, and aggravated and common robbery. Special  projects  include
    Nature conservation & education in cooperation with the Karoo  National
    Park, awareness drive (pamphlet distribution) on  sexual  offences  and
    establishment of sub-forums for the  CPF  (Community  Policing  Forum).
    Both the CPF and union representatives indicated that they have a  good
    working relationship with the station management.


    Committee members  raised  concerns  about  the  inadequate  number  of
    bulletproof  vests  and  the  availability  of  a  Designated  Firearms
    Officials at the station while training is provided to staff working at
    the Firearms licensing division. The committee  further  expressed  its
    concern about the police station’s ability to deal with the  public  in
    any language. Other concerns that were raised are:


           • The number of illegal shebeens
           • Lack of attention to social crimes
         • The number of vacant post and equity at the Police Station.
         • The use of crime kits at crime scenes e.g. Finger print  &  Rape
           Kits


    The station management responded  by  saying  that  the  issue  of  the
    inadequate number of bulletproof vests  is  in  the  process  of  being
    address by the Provincial head office. English  is  the  main  language
    used  by  police  members  when  addressing  the  public   and   taking
    statements. However the language  issue  remains  a  challenge  at  the
    police station. The police station  management  admitted  that  illegal
    shebeens are a problem and this leads to the high incidents  of  social
    crimes. There is however a plan in place to deal with this matter.  All
    vacant post will be filled sometime soon since most have  already  been
    advertised. The appointment of females  however  remains  a  challenge.
    Crime kits are frequently used at crime scenes and sent to the forensic
    laboratory in Beaufort West.


5.    LAINGSBURG POLICE STATION


    The Station has a new Station  Commander  who  was  redeployed  to  the
    station. The policing area consists  of  9642  square  kilometers.  The
    estimated population is 5 920. The Police station has 46 staff  members
    (of which 7 are civilians), and a total of 8 vehicles. The station  has
    one designated police official (DPO) who’s responsible for dealing with
    all matters related the new Firearms Control Act. Five new applications
    for firearms licenses have  been  processed  since  January  2005.  The
    police management has a good working relationship with both the  Unions
    and the CPF. There is, however, a lack of trust between  the  community
    and the police. The committee was told that the police station is still
    in need of vehicles, office space and bulletproof vests.  The  priority
    crimes at the police station include Assault GBH, Assault common, theft
    and burglary (residential & business).


    Committee members enquiries related to the:


  • Percentage of crimes that  are  committed  by  individuals  from  other
    areas.
  • Kind of vehicles needed
  • Extent to which bulletproof vests are a problem
  • Low conviction rates
  • Use of crime kits by police members
  • Shooting ranges at Laingsburg
  • Staff shortage and
  • Steps taken to improve relationship with the community.


    Drug related crime is minimal and problems with individuals from  other
    towns are none existent. The police station presently has 6  functional
    vehicles, 4 of which have done more then 200 000kms, thus worsening the
    problem of breakages and vehicle shortages.  There  is  a  shortage  of
    bulletproof vests but the Provincial Head office already confirmed that
    more would be allocated in the near future. The staff  shortage  exists
    due to members continuously being transferred.  However,  65  uniformed
    new police recruits will be appointed  in  the  near  future.  The  low
    conviction rate is due to  individuals  withdrawing  cases.  Accredited
    shooting ranges are in Beaufort West  and  Ladysmith.  Crime  kits  are
    extensively used at crime scenes. Laingsburg has  been  prioritized  by
    the Department of Public Works for additional office space.

    6.      TOUWSRIVER POLICE STATION



    The Touwsriver Police precinct includes Middeldorp, Mount Crescent,
    Schoemansville and Steenvliet, with a population of 8 500 people. The
    Police station has a staff complement of 43 (34 Uniformed members and
    10 Civilians) and 7 vehicles. One senior member of police has received
    training on the new Firearms Control Legislation. The Station
    management has a good relationship with the CPF and the union
    representatives at the police station.


    The Committee was told that serious crimes, crimes against woman &
    children and organized crime are prioritized and is decreasing.
    Detectives’ case loads are on average 95 per month and most of them are
    assault cases, which are withdrawn before it reaches court.   There is
    an increase in crime during off seasonal periods, due to an influx of
    people. The office operating hours (8:00 – 17:00) of the clinic
    contribute to the increased number of death cases. Crime kits are
    extensively used and sent to Worcester for analysis. Bulletproof vests
    have been applied for and should be allocated in the near future. Staff
    shortage is negatively effecting social crime prevention.

      7.    DE DOORNS POLICE STATION



    The Police station serves an area of 483 square kilometers, with a
    population of 146 029 people. The human resource component consists of
    51 members, and there are 9 vehicles. Six senior police officials are
    currently undergoing training on the Firearms Control Act. An awareness
    campaign was held soon after the launch of the act in order to
    sensitize the community about the new Act. Special projects at the
    station include training of community members as reservist and for
    neighbourhood and farm watch. The police station is in need of
    additional office space, and quad bikes are needed for patrols and
    crime prevention operations in the informal settlements. Priority
    crimes at the station include murder, rape and drug dealing. Management
    at the police station has a good working relationship with the unions
    and CPF.
    There are 24 detectives at the police station and they deal on average
    with 24 new cases a month. The Designated Police Officer appointed to
    deal with Firearm licenses does not have a vehicle. The police station
    is awaiting the new bulletproof vests that were issued.

      8.    DEBRIEFING SESSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS



    The delegation held a debriefing session with the SAPS Provincial
    Management. The debriefing was based on the information received and
    concerns raised during the separate meetings that were held at
    different Police Stations. The session focused specifically on:


  • The inadequate number of bulletproof vests,
  • Equity at police stations,
  • Language policy and
  • Recommendations on the way forward.


    8.1     Inadequate number of bulletproof vests


        Mr Daniels (Commissioner for Overberg Area) said that the  shortage
        of bulletproof vests is a national problem, which emanates from the
        supplier that’s unable to keep up with the  SAPS  demands.  However
        this problem is being attended to.


    8.2     Equity at police stations


      The Committee expressed its concerns with regard to the low number of
        females  at  police  stations,  in  particular  those   in   senior
        positions. Mr Daniels gave the Committee his  assurance  that  this
        matter will be attended to.
8.3   Language policy


         The committee agreed that this is a matter, which will be taken  up
        at a different level since
         this policy is not determined by the Provincial Police Management.


    9.      RECOMMENDATIONS


    The Portfolio Committee recommends that:


  • The status of Beaufort West police station is reconsidered.
      • The Department of  Health  and  Social  Development  are  consulted
        regarding the operating hours of the Clinic at Touwsriver.


    Report to be considered.


                          TUESDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


          i) Precious Metals Bill [B 30 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
             75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 27929 of 19 August 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 7 September 2005.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly (Floor-crossing)


    Membership status of the following members has in terms of Schedule 6A
    of the Constitution (floor-crossing) changed, as follows:


      • Mr J J M Stephens has, on 6 September 2005, left the United
        Democratic Movement (UDM) and joined the Democratic Alliance (DA).
      • Dr G G Woods, Mr M V Ngema, Mr B C Ngiba and Ms M M Mdlalose have,
        on 6 September 2005, left the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) and
        joined the National Democratic Convention (NADECO), a new party in
        the National Assembly.
      • Mr L K Joubert has, on 6 September 2005, left the Inkatha Freedom
        Party (IFP) and joined the Democratic Alliance (DA).




2.    Membership of Committees


      The following changes have been made to the  membership  of  Portfolio
      Committees, viz:


        Housing:
        Appointed: Khumalo, Rev M S
        Discharged: Cupido, Mr H B


        Public Works:
        Appointed: Cupido, Mr H B
        Discharged: Khumalo, Rev M S


        Water Affairs and Forestry:
        Appointed: Cupido, Mr H B


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for 2004-
          2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector Education
          and Training (Services SETA) for 2004-2005, including the Report
          of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005
          [RP 78-2005].

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
          Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2004-2005, including the
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
          2004-2005 [RP 170-2005].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
          Biodiversity Institute for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


       c) Report and Financial Statements of The Greater St. Lucia Wetland
          Park for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.


       d) Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for 2004-
          2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

