---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 March 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-03-15
---

TUESDAY, 15 MARCH 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers and meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.


                        ATTACK ON WARDERS AT HOSPITAL


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

That the House –

    1) notes with sadness and shock that a prison warder, Mr J Horne, was
       killed and another warder was seriously injured yesterday after four
       armed men opened fire on the four warders who had brought a prisoner
       to Groote Schuur Hospital for treatment;


    2) further notes that the fact that the attack took place at the
       hospital’s outpatients reception and put the lives of many innocent
       bystanders in danger is totally unacceptable;

    3) sends its heartfelt condolences to the family of Mr Horne and wishes
       the injured a speedy and full recovery;


    4) urges any individuals with information to assist the police in their
       investigations so that they can bring the individuals guilty of this
       inhumane crime to book; and


    5) calls upon the Minister of Correctional Services to launch an
       investigation into this incident in order to avoid similar attacks,
       and the unnecessary loss of life, from occurring in the future.


Agreed to.




                        COMMONWEALTH DAY ON 14 MARCH


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion as it stands printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief
Whip as follows:

    That the House -


     (1)    notes that -


         (a)     the Commonwealth  Parliamentary  Association  has  observed
              Commonwealth Day on 14 March;


         (b)     the event entails a two-day  international  celebration  in
              London, from 14 to 15 March,  with  the  theme  ``Education  -
              Creating Opportunity, Realising Potential''; and


         (c)      this  theme  reflects  the  Commonwealth's  commitment  to
              education by promoting efforts to  achieve  universal  primary
              education, eliminate gender disparities,  improve  quality  in
              education, use distance learning to overcome barriers, support
              education in difficult circumstances and mitigate  the  impact
              of HIV and Aids in education;


     (2)    acknowledges the contribution of the Commonwealth  Parliamentary
         Association   in   strengthening   parliamentary   democracy    and
         interaction among members of Commonwealth parliaments; and


       3) joins the rest of the Commonwealth parliaments in observing  this
          event and wishes the participants fruitful celebrations.
Agreed to


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                           (First Reading Debate)

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, the Budget offers a unique opportunity each
year for parties represented in this Parliament to debate their alternative
economic policy perspectives and through this to lay claim to the support
of the electorate.

Perhaps, conscious of the difficulty in getting media attention in the
context of the series of budgets that have been widely welcomed, the DA in
the past few years has tried to jump the gun and released what it calls an
``Alternative Budget’’ on the eve of the Minister’s Budget’s Speech. This
year’s offering, it would like us and the electorate to believe, is a
``comprehensive, costed policy platform’’ to raise growth and create
conditions for ``large-scale job creation.’’

I am afraid, though, that in presenting these proposals the DA has once
again let its slip show. Points 5 to 7 in the press release of this year’s
``Alternative Budget’’ are a call to abolish capital gains tax, estate
duties and donations tax.

Now I ask: What on earth do these kinds of proposals have to do with
improving economic growth and promoting job creation? These are taxes on
actual or inherited wealth in the hands of wealthy individuals and are
aimed at transferring into the fiscus what is in fact, by international
standards, a modest proportion of funds that would otherwise be spent on
luxury second homes and the like. Calling for the abolition of such taxes
is nothing other than special pleading on behalf of the mink and manure
brigade in the wealthy suburbs. By giving prominence to such demands, the
DA has once again shown that its policies are driven not fundamentally by
concerns to reduce poverty and unemployment, but rather by a concern to
represent the backward instinct of the rich and privileged in resisting
obligations to make an equitable contribution to development and growth in
this country.

But let us for the sake of debate put that point aside and look at the
growth model that underlies the alternative budget of the Official
Opposition. The essence of their argument is that if the rich are, in their
terminology, unshackled and allowed to get richer still, this will generate
a few more crumbs to trickle down to the poor. What they don’t understand
is Public Finance 101. Without critical public goods and services provided
by government departments and public institutions, there will be no
economic growth and job creation.

Public goods and services, they fail to recognise, must include programmes
of infrastructural development, public investment and the provision of
social security, as well as the more traditional services of safety and
security, health and education.

There is also a need, in our context, for public goods and services to
address manifest market failures – such as the inability of the market to
provide sufficient skills development, micro-credit, etc. Taxes are
necessary to raise revenue to fund such programmes.

While the present Budget offers reasonable and thought-through tax
reductions targeted at improving the investment climate, particularly for
small business, the Official Opposition’s proposals call for swinging cuts
costed by ridiculous suggestions to close down departments or institutions
like the Umsobomvu Fund and replace public services with the issuing of
vouchers for services that frankly are not provided for in the market. This
is not, I contend, a real programme for job creation and poverty
alleviation; rather it is special pleading on behalf of the rich and
privileged dressed up as something else. But enough of the pseudo-budget!
Or is it the pseud’s budget?

Let me turn to the real Budget and highlight a few points in the report of
the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the hearings it held on the
macroeconomic dimensions of the Budget, which was published in the ATC of 9
March 2005.

I need to report to the House that the portfolio committee’s hearings have
indicated that there is a broad consensus among economists and informed
commentators that the National Treasury is correct and that we are on
course for economic growth above 4% for the MTEF period. Minister Manuel,
the debate on growth projections this year appears to be about tenths of a
percent. That growth during the course of the MTEF will be above 4% appears
to be agreed. This, we should note, means that we are on track and we are
entering a phase, that will see the highest level of sustained economic
growth in this country for more than three decades.

I need also to report that while most commentators agree that there are a
number of international and domestic factors underlying this improved
growth performance, prominent among them - all agree - is the record of
sound economic management by this ANC-led government.

Also pleasing to report is that we are now seeing as a result of this
growth net positive job creation. Jobs are now being created in this
economy, although - we need immediately to record - not at a pace
sufficient to absorb all new entrants into the labour market and most of
the jobs that are being created are at higher skills levels.

Having said that, there are a number of features of our present higher
growth trajectory that in the view of the portfolio committee need careful
attention and reflection. The growth we are experiencing now is largely
consumer and demand-led. While this has generated broad-based growth
reaching across all sectors of the productive economy, the response has
been somewhat uneven across these sectors. In particular, while the
performance of the tertiary sector and within that of the financial
services sector, has surged, manufacturing, although growing, has been a
relative laggard. This is linked to a further feature of our current growth
trajectory. The consumer boom is drawing in imports, not just of machinery
and equipment, but now also of consumer goods.

We no longer face the kind of balance of payments current account
constraint that dogged every effort of the apartheid regime to sustain
growth above 3% because we are now experiencing a net positive inflow of
foreign portfolio investment. While this is a welcome sign of international
confidence in the South African economy, it is also something we need to be
cautious about because we know that short-term foreign investment is
notoriously volatile.

Arising from this diagnosis, our key challenges can be identified as the
following: There is a need to raise the growth rate to yet higher levels;
we have to make the higher growth trajectory more sustainable by addressing
real economy constraints, and we need to make the growth path more
employment - creating and pro-poor, in a context where much of our
unemployment problem can be recognised as structural in nature.

I want to argue that, contrary to what the DA appears to think, we cannot
have the first growth without simultaneously addressing the other two
challenges. This is so for the simple reason that many of our key
constraints to growth arise from real economy and developmental
deficiencies. The micro-economic reform programme formulated some years ago
pointed out how our economic infrastructure upgrading, including ports and
transport systems, was key to improving the performance of the South
African economy. What we also know now is that addressing this will not
happen without significant public investment. Likewise, skills shortages
are a major constraint requiring a major effort to raise the skills of
millions of black people whom apartheid sought to confine to the sphere of
cheap unskilled labour. In a similar vein, the domestic market needs to
expand by unleashing possibilities for large numbers of our people to
engage in sustainable livelihoods. Again, none of these will happen without
a public programme.

I need to report a high degree of consensus in the portfolio committee
hearings that an expansionary fiscal stance and a responsible loosening of
the deficit target is appropriate to these challenges, and that the real
increases in expenditure provided for in this Budget are widely welcomed.
Particularly pleasing are the increases announced for infrastructure
investment - much of which is off-budget – for skills training, for land
reform, for micro-credit and for an extension of the social security net.

The majority of members of the committee were also supportive of the shift
away from the provision of costly tax incentives - which have yielded
relatively little by way of additional investment – in favour of improving
the overall climate for investment in this country. Particularly welcome
here is the new tax dispensation for small business, including raising the
tax threshold and the new simplified procedures for VAT payments. But I
want to emphasise again that for many trapped in what the President has
called the “second economy”, expenditure programmes are just as, and indeed
even more, important.

I want to give just one example: SMMEs with a turnover of R35 000 or less
will not pay tax and will now be able to file for VAT three times a year
instead of every two months. This is great news for small and medium
businesses and for some in the category “very small” who have been paying
taxes, but it won’t be much to many more very small micro enterprises that
have always been and will remain outside the tax net, whether legally or
not. For them more important than a tax break would be gaining access to
the R100 million budgeted for the Apex Fund this year or the R600 million
to R1 billion budgeted for the agricultural micro-credit scheme across the
MTEF period.

The infrastructure development programmes for state-owned enterprises
mentioned in the Budget, which are mostly funded off- budget, are also
critical in overcoming bottlenecks in the real economy as well as
stimulating job creation.

The report of the portfolio committee contains 16 specific recommendations.
They cover a number of issues. I do not have time to go into them now, but
I hope the executive will respond to them more fully in due course. I would
like, though, to mention just one, which, I believe, is pertinent to our
work in Parliament as we move from the First Reading of the Budget to the
individual Budget Vote debates. Recommendation 10 says, and I quote:

  The Committee notes that the Budget puts in place necessary conditions
  for improvement in the quality of social service delivery by Government,
  but whether such improvements are realised depends on the quality of
  implementation.


  The Committee recognises that Parliament has a key role to play in
  exercising oversight of implementation, and therefore urges all portfolio
  committees to develop systematic approaches to reviewing the strategic
  plans, budgets, quarterly performance reports and annual reports.

What this recommendation is saying is that it is not just up to the
executive but also a responsibility for us in Parliament to ensure that
implementation takes place. The onus of this responsibility will
particularly fall on us on this side of the House together with a few other
more constructive parties. We know, for example, that if a portfolio
committee uncovers that a particular Seta is not functioning well, those on
this side of the House will call for its abolition in order to release
funds to finance further tax cuts for the rich. It will be up to the rest
of us to find a real solution.

In the short time I have available I want to address another topic. While
the Budget is critical to the economic performance of this and other
countries, so too is the global economic environment. The year 2005 is the
year when the UN General Assembly will review progress in advancing towards
the Millennium Development Goals, MDGs – the main one of which is to halve
the number of people living in extreme poverty by the year 2015. A
considerable body of research has established that while these goals are
indeed achievable, on the present course the number of poor people in
Africa is set to increase rather than decrease from 315 million to 404
million by 2015, while the achievements of the MDGs will be delayed by at
least a century.

In this context we are seeing a global movement calling for the world to
“make poverty history” and for a new “big push” to achieve the MDGs.
Minister Manuel has been part of a very important initiative - the
Commission for Africa. This, among other things, called for a complete debt
cancellation in a context where the debt of sub-Saharan Africa, minus South
Africa, stands at $186,7 billion, compared to a gross geographic product of
$217 billion, and where debt repayments continue to exceed aid flows. It
also called for steps to ensure that developing countries can expand
exports; and that additional resource transfers to Africa amounting to at
least $25 billion take place.

Again, we as parliamentarians need to find ways to become part of the
global movement pressing for such demands. I am pleased to see that
tomorrow we will be having a debate on the International Parliamentary
Union’s deliberations in this regard.

I would also like to indicate that the African Caribbean Pacific-European
Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly, at which I have the honour to represent
this Parliament, will also be adopting a declaration on the Millennium
Development Goals at its next meeting in Mali next month.

May I end with a commercial: Tomorrow at lunchtime, Minister Manuel will be
holding a briefing on the work of the Commission for Africa, and I think
it’s important that we all attend! We have been invited to do so.

The ANC will support the First Reading of the Appropriation Bill. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Speaker, hon Minister of Finance, this may well be
the kiss of death for the Minister, but the DA will be supporting the
Budget. [Interjections.] We support this Budget because it is both
redistributive and expansionary while keeping within the prudent deficit
level of 3% of GDP.

We now have a stable macroeconomic environment from which to address the
problem of growth and the creation of jobs. This is where the DA approach
differs fundamentally from the ANC’s. While the DA believes in an economy
in which every citizen is ensured the opportunity to fulfil his or her
potential, the ANC believes in something called the developmental state.

To answer the interjection Minister Manuel made when we supported the
Division of Revenue Bill, namely that the DA had bought into this concept
of a developmental state, well, the Business Day of 8 March provides an apt
definition of such a state. It describes such a state as a sort of mixed
economy hybrid, anywhere between “leading Western industrial” state and
“banana republic”, in which the state takes upon itself the right and
obligation to intervene in the economy to fix anything it feels isn’t
working properly - a sort of nanny state in which great emphasis is placed
on telling business what to do and where to do it, instead of making it as
easy as possible for South Africans to start businesses, invest and employ
by removing the constraints to business.

The DA rejects this model. We believe that government should focus in the
main on its role as a facilitator of productive economic activity, which
will create jobs. Not only do we need economic growth but also, more
importantly, we need growth that will drastically reduce job-seeking
queues.

Now it is not my intention to get into a sterile debate with the Minister
about the length of those queues. Whether the unemployment rate is 30% or
40%, whether the strict definition or expanded definition should be used,
does not detract from the central fact that there are now more South
Africans without work than there have been in the past eight years. We need
sustained growth of 6% or more, yet Minister Manuel’s own projections for
our developmental economy for the next three years average only 4,1%.

I asked the Minister in the portfolio committee why it was that in a survey
published in The Economist of GDP growth amongst the 25 monitored emerging
markets, South Africa was consistently either at the bottom or close to the
bottom of the list.

He said that he thought we lacked a spirit of entrepreneurship. Well, I
agree, and thus welcome the Minister’s tax break for small businesses.
These developments, together with the undertakings given by the President
in his address to Parliament on 11 February, must surely remove some of the
constraints felt by entrepreneurs in small business.

While the Minister seems to have fulfilled the President’s undertaking in
respect of taxes and levies, we await with interest developments in respect
of “central bargaining and other labour arrangements” which the President
intimated would follow. Herein lies the acknowledgement that government, up
to now, has always dismissed – that our labour laws are an impediment to
growth. Perhaps the Minister of Labour should consult more closely with the
Presidency before he tub-thumps at Cosatu gatherings.

Small business development and labour market deregulation are necessary,
but not sufficient conditions for large-scale job creation. This Budget
should have provided direct incentives for business, both big and small, as
well as households, to employ labour.

We currently grant incentives for capital investments through an assortment
of capital allowances. But what of companies and, for that matter,
households that employ labour-intensive methods and those industries in
which there is less fixed-capital investment required, such as tourism and
service industries? Why don’t we grant them tax allowances that are
calculated not only on the amount invested, but the number of new jobs?
This is the type of bold thinking that is needed.

Another impediment to growth is our rate of investment. Along with a
chronically low rate of foreign direct investment, South Africa continues
to have a savings rate, or domestic investment rate, amongst the lowest in
the world. Singapore’s rate is 45% of GDP, while ours declined to 4,7% in
the third quarter of 2004.

The much-maligned private sector cannot be blamed for this, as their
savings increased to 12% of GDP, while over the same period government’s
contribution was a mere 0,2% rising to a projected 1,1% in 2007. This
underlines the fact that the private sector is the primary vehicle for
investment and sustainable growth.

While we welcome the 1% cut in the corporate tax rate, we maintain that the
rate needs to drop further to encourage greater investment. Our effective
tax rate remains high at around 37%, taking into account the secondary tax
on companies.

In a survey last year KPMG showed that the average effective tax rate for
emerging markets was only 24%. Countries with which we compete directly for
capital investment, namely Malaysia, Mexico and Indonesia, have effective
tax rates of 28%, 33% and 30% respectively.

We believe that the usefulness of the secondary tax cut has to be
reassessed. In addition, instead of ad hoc adjustments to the corporate tax
rate, government should commit itself to a corporate tax rate of, say, 25%
and a time period over which it would be implemented. This will have a
powerful and immediate effect on investment.

Our government’s dramatic failure to confront the HIV/Aids pandemic head-on
is more painfully obvious in this Budget. Only 54% of those targeted to be
on antiretroviral drugs by 2005 are currently receiving them, while the
Budget does not specify resources allocated to the antiretroviral roll -
out this year. In the original Budget operational plan, the total budget
estimate for the programme was R2,4 billion in 2005, yet this Budget only
allocates 64% of that amount.

One of the most pressing impediments and constraints to growth identified
by the IMF in 2003 was South Africa’s low skills level. Instead of
addressing this issue in a bold and imaginative way, the Budget only throws
more money at the Setas. These institutions fell far short of spending
their R1 billion last year, yet are now being given R4 billion in the
Budget before us. They are both inefficient and ineffective. And, I think,
we have to fundamentally change the way we tackle the skills shortage.

Firstly, in the short term, our immigration policy needs a bold approach,
not the inadequate and investor-unfriendly approach of the new regulations.
Secondly, from a fiscal perspective, we believe that R4 billion could far
more cost-effectively be spent incentivising learners through opportunity
and bursary vouchers, and business through full rebates to employers and
employer associations who undertake training in their specific sectors.

Directly related to skills is capacity. While government has budgeted
R92 billion this year on infrastructure spending and a further R230 billion
over the next two years, the Financial and Fiscal Commission noted in its
report to the Finance committee that capital spend across all levels of
government is still significantly lower than existing budgetary resources.
Provinces, for example, spent only 46,4%, on average, of their capital
budgets last year, and there is nothing to indicate that this will change.
The skills and capacity problems, I think, will be exacerbated by the
planned infrastructure roll-out by state-owned enterprises of somewhere
close to R118 billion over the next few years.

This expenditure, along with increased welfare spend, which as a percentage
of GDP has increased by 70% in the past five years, raises the question of
fiscal sustainability. Three figures are particularly concerning in this
regard.

Firstly, the current account deficit is currently at 3% of GDP, but is
forecast to rise to 3,5% of GDP over the next three years. While this
deficit is currently being offset by short-term capital inflows, such flows
are notoriously fickle and a sudden outflow could compromise the balance of
payments, to the detriment of hard-won inflation stability.
Secondly, the alarming downturn in the current balance shows that
government is, once again, borrowing to finance current expenditure. This
trend is precisely what the difficult period of fiscal consolidation after
1994 was designed to reverse, and its resurgence raises concerns around the
sustainability of increased current expenditure, especially that related to
increased social grants.

Thirdly, the public sector borrowing requirement, at 3,9% of GDP, although
lower than the alarming 4,6% of GDP forecast in the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement, presents the possibility of persistent higher debt
levels, the burden of which would fall on ordinary taxpayers who would have
to foot the bill, and on the bond market which would have to absorb the
loans, possibly to the detriment of monetary policy flexibility.
Contributing significantly to the relatively high borrowing requirement is
the fact that no privatisation proceeds are budgeted for this year.

The DA believes that the privatisation programme should be revitalised, not
for ideological reasons, but for reasons of efficiency, service delivery,
debt reduction and extension of share ownership.

The private sector should be leveraged as far as possible in the rolling
out of new infrastructure. This will lower the cost to the state and will
allow a turnaround in a trend of rising government expenditure, which has
grown from 25,7% of GDP two years ago to 27,3% this year. A reduction in
state expenditure will provide space for a looser monetary policy and,
together with the infrastructure investments, engineer a real boost for
economic growth and job creation at a lower cost than the high long-term
borrowing and high tax burden approach.

Such bold reforms will be a clear break from the gradual extension of
government involvement in almost every facet of our economic life. They
will create an opportunity for individuals and businesses to build
infrastructure, create jobs and drive growth.

Now, I agree with the Minister - we can and shall build a South Africa that
truly belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity. But instead
of offering a nanny state to achieve this, we should recognise that every
individual, whether a CEO, a middle manager, a street sweeper or someone in
a job queue, has a unique talent to offer our country. Our responsibility
is to offer that person the opportunity to realise his or her full
capability. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister is commended for the
consistent and balanced way in which budget policy has been conducted over
the last decade or so. Good progress has been made with economic policy
goals of higher stable economic growth, the balance of payments equilibrium
and income distribution.

The concern is that employment creation remains at an unacceptable level.
There is a mismatch between the skills of job seekers and the demand for
skills in the economy. So while economic growth is needed to create jobs,
the skills needed to create growth are not available. Our country faces a
severe skills shortage, but has a surplus of unskilled and semiskilled
labour. Therefore, government encourages labour-intensive investments.

The challenge to raise the level of economic growth needs to be accompanied
by the challenge to increase labour absorption. The rate of growth in
employment has not been sufficient to keep pace with the expansion of the
labour force. The step-up to a projected average growth rate of 4,2% over
the MTEF is certainly likely to be positive for employment growth, but
unlikely on its own to produce a solution to the continuing problem of
unemployment.

The government realises that employment–creating growth is a multifaceted
phenomenon and that it should be tackled over a wide front in the short, as
well as the longer-term in a balanced way. The IFP fully agrees with this
approach. In the final analysis the longer-term option of empowering people
through education and training is probably the only sustainable way to
tackle the unemployment problem in our country.

The IFP applauds this year’s Budget, which provides for a real increase in
expenditure on education of 2,5% this year, and 5,3% and 3,6% respectively
in the next two years. This provision is higher than in the MTEF because of
an additional R1 billion for the recapitalisation for further education and
training colleges, R776 million for the National Student Financial Aid
Scheme and R6, 9 billion to improve salaries for teachers. Another concern
is the low savings rate in our country - particularly by households - the
rapid increase in household consumption expenditure and the related
increase in debt.

The IFP welcomes the Budget for a season of hope. At the same time we are
very much aware of the serious implementation challenges. We agree with the
Treasury that in order to sustain higher growth we need to increase
infrastructure investment, lower the cost of doing business in South
Africa, especially for small business, produce more skilled people and
improve the quality of public service, especially to the poor.

The IFP welcomes the expansionary stance from 2001; the stable tax burden
around 24,1% of GDP in 2004-05, to 3,2% in 2007-08; the deficit of 3,1% in
2005-06, declining to 2,7% by 2007-08. Debt service costs decline from 3,5%
of GDP in 2004-05, to 3,2% in 2007-08 and the significant surpluses in
social security funds. The IFP supports the additional R43, 5 billion to be
received by provinces over the MTEF for provincial priorities, which are
comprehensive HIV/Aids prevention and treatment plans, providing for
security expansion, nonpersonnel inputs into education, post - settlement
support for farmers, infrastructure investment, with a special focus on
labour-intensive projects, and hospital revitalisation programmes.

Tax reform that is conductive or geared to advancing or fostering freedom
of choice is to be supported. There is a noticeable pattern of such reform
in South Africa, which appears to have taken place continuously. Its
considerable influence on increasing service, investment, employment,
productivity and state revenue collection, whilst also helping keep prices
and interest rates down, is very welcome.

There is no quick - fix solution for South Africa’s economic problems. Some
of the few young African artisans are now beginning to look abroad as
placement, after acquiring skills in this country, becomes very difficult.
These young people should be given start-up capital to start their own
businesses.

We support the Commission for Africa report, which calls on the industrial
nations to abolish trade-distorting subsidies to their farmers, which give
them an unfair advantage over poor African farmers, as well as the lowering
of tariffs and other nontariff barriers to African products. And the
developed countries should not demand reciprocal concessions from the poor
African nations.

We are concerned that, according to the report, it is now common cause that
Africa is the only region in the world that will not, as a whole, meet the
Millennium Development Goals or even come close on present trends. We
support the increase in social security. Even the World Bank concluded in a
major 1986 study of World Hunger that a rapid increase in food production
does not necessarily result in food security, that is less hunger.

Current hunger can only be alleviated by redistributing purchasing power
and resources towards those who are undernourished, the study showed. In a
nutshell, if the poor don’t have the money to buy food, increased
production is not going to help them without a strategy for change that
addresses the powerlessness of the poor. The tragic result will be more
food and yet more hunger, and we will be faced with the situation where we
can say: Water, water, water everywhere, nor any drop to drink.

Mr Minister, we do not live in ivory towers, so we very much appreciate the
problems that you are faced with in trying to divide the Budget. In saying
that, we don’t have a quick solution for this country. I might as well just
say that one of the most successful farmers in my area, 40 years ago,
invited me to accompany his daughter who was a teacher at the primary
school. I went there and listened . . .[Time expired.]

Mr S E ASIYA: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. It is an honour and a
privilege for me to participate in this important debate. We are discussing
this Budget in the favourable conditions of macroeconomic and inflation
stability. This factor has created investment opportunities nationally,
regionally and globally.

My contention is that South Africans are fast becoming responsible tax-
paying citizens. Compliance promotes patriotism, which is core to the
advancement of the Reconstruction and Development Programme. There is
recognition of the fact that this is not only the responsibility of the
state, but rather of all of us who are committed to making South Africa a
winning nation.

The SA Revenue Service has come to the party by putting systems in place,
resulting in the estimated revenue increasing by R11 billion, which is more
than the original prediction. This is a significant contribution given the
fact that the estimated Budget tabled in February included huge tax cuts.
This has won the confidence of ordinary taxpayers, who are appreciative of
the fact that their obligation to the state can only help to advance their
own cause and that of developing the economy.

In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, over the 10 years of freedom the ANC-led
government has given individual tax rebates to the tune of
R77 billion, ensuring that people have more money to spend, and perhaps to
save.
The Budget process is a commitment and a constitutional requirement to
effect equitable distribution of national revenue among the three spheres
of government. Distribution is not mechanical or determined by bureaucratic
means.

The Budget is guided by government policies and is designed to use its
resources to address the socio-economic needs of all our people. It is
guided by the priorities identified by the hon President in his state of
the nation address.

Taxation is a social contract between a government and its citizens on how
money is collected from them and redistributed in order to secure a stable
environment.

The manner in which this government has conducted the Budget process has
resulted in the overwhelming majority of citizens declaring that the Budget
and fiscal policies are sound. They have welcomed the forward-looking
approach of revenue collection and the user-friendly style of Sars, which
resulted in defaulters coming forward to honour their obligations. We trust
that Sars will continue to be creative and innovative in order to attract
more defaulters and to extend its net to secure the commitment of those who
still need to be touched.
Bearing in mind that the socio-economic commitment of the state can only be
met if enough revenue is collected, we therefore compliment Sars on its
dedication and on its professional approach to revenue collection.
The business community, the middle stratum, the workers and social welfare
beneficiaries have generally welcomed the redistribution principle adopted
by the government. In this regard I wish to quote the Chamber of Commerce
and Industry of South Africa, for instance, as follows:

       The announced tax changes are poised to support economic growth and
       employment in a manner strengthening the economy. The tax measures to
       bolster small and medium enterprises are welcome.

Business Unity SA, or Busa, indicated that the Budget appears to be
fiscally responsible and disciplined to reduce the public and private
sector interest rate burden, thereby creating space for useful spending.

The federation of unions of South Africa fully agreed with the government’s
approach to lower the company tax from 30% to 29%. They further added that
the increase in government capital expenditure underpins economic growth
and social expenditure to provide a safety net for vulnerable groups in the
economy.

Business confidence is high and employment is growing. Unemployment is
declining steadily and the black middle stratum is growing rapidly.

Business partnerships are being forged between people from the previously
disadvantaged communities, the historically advantaged, the private sector
and the public sector. We accept that in some instances the BEE process is
experiencing challenges. However, this does not mean that the principle
governing BEE is wrong.

Critics from the opposition point to some of the loopholes evident during
the implementation phase to reject the principle of black advancement.
These neoconservatives must be ignored. We must continue to be vigilant and
ensure that correct systems, through trial and error, are in place in order
to secure a culture of best practices.

Instruments such as social welfare grants and the dedicated Public Works
programmes are improving the lives of the poorest of the poor.

Somlomo, uHlahlo lwAbiwo-Mali esixoxa ngalo namhlanje lwamkelekile kubantu
bonke balapha emhlab’uhlangene, nakwiZizwe eziManyeneyo.

Olu Hlahlo lwAbiwo-Mali lusemkhondweni woMqulu weNkululeko kwaye lujongene
nokuphuhlisa amahlwempu. Lukwavule namathuba koosomashishini abakhasayo
kunye nabasaqingqayo ukuze babe nakho ukuthabatha inxaxheba kushishino
oluvulelekileyo.

Abantu okanye imibutho eya kuthi ichasane nale nkqubo iya kuba
ingoobholelecaleni.

Sekela-Somlomo, isininzi sabasebenzi abasebenza emaphandleni, kwizixeko
nasezidolophini nabamkela imivuzo ephantsi bakhetha ukuyeka umsebenzi baye
kwamkela indodla okanye inkamnkam kuba bafumana imali edlula le
bayibilelayo. Loo nto yenza umthwalo ubenzima kurhulumente. Ngoko ndihlaba
ikhwelo kuthi sonke apha, ngakumbi aba bakweli cala lam, lokuba bavuze
abaqeshi babo ngokufanelekileyo. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Deputy Speaker, this Budget Vote has been welcomed by everybody here
as well as in the United Nations.

This Budget Vote is in line with the declarations enshrined in the Freedom
Charter and it seeks to improve the lives of poor people. It has also
opened up opportunities for entrepreneurs and small business people which
would enable them to participate meaningfully in the open economy.

The people and parties who are opposed to this Budget Vote can only be
mavericks.

Madam Deputy Speaker, the majority of people working in the rural areas,
cities and towns and those who receive low wages choose to leave their jobs
so that they can receive pensions or disability grants because the amount
of money they receive is greater than that for which they sweat. This
creates a huge burden on the government. I therefore call on all of us
present here today, especially the ones on the other side, to pay their
employees an acceptable living wage.]

Perhaps the DA should focus on convincing its so-called traditional support
to pay decent wages to workers across the board, from both the urban and
rural areas, rather than producing a nonsensical budget.

In fact, a significant number of DA supporters have complimented the
government on its forward-looking economic and fiscal policy. In short, the
government has honoured its obligation to improve the lives of all its
citizens in a stable and nonracial democratic state
. . .[Interjections.] . . . Keep quiet and listen.

In honouring its social contract new challenges manifest themselves. The
ANC-led government is the first to declare that while we have made
significant gains in the past 10 years, much more still needs to be done.

The DA’s alternative approach pins its hope for economic growth and
alleviation of poverty and inequality on tax reduction. However, it is
silent on the urgency of poverty reduction.

Economic growth involves a time factor and it has essential consequences,
which factor the DA ignores. It is as if economic growth is a fait
accompli.

By implication, the document hints that the ANC-led government lacks the
political will necessary to pursue economic growth. This inference is
shocking beyond imagination.

In conclusion, let it be boldly stated that the South African economy is on
a path to more stable growth during this MTEF period. However, the growth
path that South Africa’s economy is now entering cannot be attributed to
global economic development alone, but also to the domestic economic
policies.

As a result of consistency over the past 10 years, the economic environment
for fiscal policy has changed rapidly. The fiscal policy has focused more
on equitable income distribution through the redistribution of expenditure
and addressing the needs of the poor.

The ANC-led government is honouring its social contract as enshrined in the
Freedom charter.

Enkosi, ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister and hon members, it seems
that the hon Minister of Finance has presented this House with two budgets.
The one is a well-crafted speech, eloquently delivered by a competent
Minister and then packaged and sold by those among the ranks of his spin-
doctors. One might call it the PR budget. The other budget speaks much less
eloquently but much more urgently. It speaks from the real, hard figures
that are tabled with the PR budget. One might call this the silent but real
budget. I shall confine myself to dealing with the latter.

The PR budget talks of increases in social grants and pensions, but the
real figures show that the increases that filter through to the elderly and
the disabled barely keep up with inflation. They receive no real increase.
They languish in poverty while awaiting the pleasure of the Minister.

The PR budget has been widely hailed as being pro-poor, but the silent
reality is that the poor remain in abject poverty, and the Budget
announcements about inflation-linked increases in social grants and
pensions will not change that fact. When I confronted the hon Minister
about this in the committee, his response was that social grants and
pensions couldn’t exceed minimum wage levels for fear of discouraging
people to look for employment. This argument, with respect, is a big, fat
red herring.

The UDM has never suggested that social grants should replace income or
that poverty can or should be alleviated through social grants. That would
be ludicrous. But, pensions and disability grants should be adequate to
allow a person to live with dignity above the poverty line, or does the hon
Minister wish to force the elderly back to work, seeking jobs in
competition with the young? Should the disabled start up their own
businesses or join the queues of able-bodied work seekers who themselves
cannot find jobs?

The elderly and the disabled should not be forced to seek employment.
Pensions and social grants are provided on the grounds of means testing,
and these people cannot be consigned to abject poverty forever on the
grounds that they should rather be searching for employment. Disability
grants and pensions are not about replacing employment temporarily. They
are about alleviating poverty. It is disingenuous to fail to make that
distinction.

The PR budget is hailed for putting money into taxpayers’ pockets. The
silent budget confirms this, but it reveals the bitter truth that while
those who are employed and earn enough to pay income taxes are given a real
after-inflation increase, those millions who are in real need, those who
have nothing, get nothing - so much for government’s commitment to
eradicating poverty.

The silent budget also reveals that, despite tax cuts, the individual
taxpayer still carries the tax can. Personal income tax is still the
greatest single source of state revenue. It virtually doubled during the
nine years to 2004. Individuals’ income tax amounts to 32,56% of total
state revenue from all sources and when VAT paid by individuals is
included, this percentage will be much greater. Against this, companies pay
only 20,13% of total revenue, also excluding VAT.

When I faced the Minister with these facts in the committee – he will
recall this – and argued the necessity to shift the tax burden, the hon
Minister claimed that the volatility of revenue streams from company income
tax was too great for him to rely on increasingly. I therefore tested the
Minister’s hypothesis using figures he published in reply to my questions,
for which I thank him.

One expects the volatility of tax revenue streams to be slightly higher
than that of the estimates that call them forth. Thus it is no surprise
that personal income tax shows volatility of 5,51% against the 5,48%
volatility of the estimates. Similarly, VAT shows volatility of only 2,04%
against the 2,68% volatility of the total estimates.

Company tax shows volatility of 16,63%, which is overshadowed by the
incredible 21,61% volatility of the estimates. This indicates a serious
flaw in the budgeting process. It probably also indicates that the
volatility problem originates more in the Minister’s department than in the
revenue streams of companies. It is a matter that requires immediate
attention, especially since it appears to be the one factor inhibiting a
shift of the tax burden away from households and onto firms.
The poor will not see an improvement in their lives as a result of this
Budget. The poor are beyond income tax relief, but they do pay taxes such
as VAT; they are affected by other taxes, such as fuel levies, when they
travel. So, the second economy is burdened with tax, but receives no
relief, no reprieve and so the gap widens.

This Budget is a sound First World budget. Any finance Minister of any G7
nation could be justly proud of it. But First World solutions will not save
our second economy, nor will it be saved by improvements in the first
economy. It will only develop by the growth of state enterprises and new
strategic industries, enterprises not primarily driven by profit, but by
beneficiation, service and employment. We want to see a budget that gives
the founding of new strategic industries the highest priority.

Now is the time to think out of the box. We will not achieve what we have
to achieve for the people of South Africa by sticking to the budget mantras
of the First World. [Time expired.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Speaker, the Budget that is presented annually can
be seen as a visible expression of the government’s priorities. Various
political pronouncements that are made concerning the government’s plans
are nothing more than rhetoric if budgetary allocations are not made to
realise them.

When drawing up this Budget, there are obviously competing concerns, and it
would be impossible to please all sectors of society. The ID believes
however, that this Budget, despite some concerns, represents a good
balancing act between the demands of the different sectors. We are happy to
see that the government has continued its trend of increasing expenditure
and carving out a greater role for itself in fostering development in South
Africa.

The ID has continually argued that a strong developmental state is needed
to bridge the huge divide still present in our society. In fact, the ID
believes that the state could and should be doing more, and that even
greater expenditure should be directed at our key social sectors such as
health, education and social development. Through its astute financial
management of the economy over the last 10 years, the government has made
available extra resources, which should now be spent on truly improving the
social base of our society.

The ID wishes to commend the SA Revenue Service for the extra revenue it
keeps collecting year after year. The ID maintains, however, that the true
beneficiaries of this increased revenue stream must always be the poor. The
most direct way in which to allocate these funds is through the grant
system. It is therefore unacceptable to the ID that in the context of
increasing revenue streams, the increases in grant allocations have hardly
even kept pace with inflation. The ID understands the government’s concern
that payments for grants are growing, but in a country that suffers from
structural unemployment, and is characterised by extremely high levels of
poverty, grants are often the only safety net available to poor households.
We should be comforted by the knowledge that more people living below the
poverty line are receiving some form of government assistance.

The ID does not believe the government’s argument that grants create
dependency. Poverty creates dependency. Poor people without hope of a job
are often dependent on their neighbours for money or a sole breadwinner in
the household to keep the family afloat. We need to recognise that grants
are playing a huge role in poverty alleviation and, where possible, bolster
them to play it more effectively.

In this regard, the ID would urge the government to start making plans for
rolling out the child support grant to children in the age group 15 to 18
years, as per the definition of children contained in the Constitution.
While this might seem expensive to the government, it in fact represents
only half of the money that was given away in tax cuts this year.

In terms of tax cuts, the ID does support certain tax relief for companies
as contained in this year’s Budget. There are, however, no guarantees that
local direct investment and jobs will necessarily follow corporate tax
cuts. The government should therefore develop a framework similar to the
one that operates in Malaysia where there is direct reward from the fiscus
for positive performance in this regard.

In terms of education, the ID strongly welcomes the extra R6,9 billion that
has been set aside to increase the salaries of educators. This is a sector
that is grossly undervalued, and it is reflected in falling numbers of
young people enrolling to become teachers. Unless drastic action is taken
to make this an attractive profession, we will be faced with a crisis of
teacher supply in this country.

In his state of the nation address last year, the President firmly stated
that by the end of the financial year no child would be taught under trees
or in dangerous structures. It is clear that we have not reached this
target, and the ID is concerned that the needed resources have not been
made available to ensure this target is reached by the end of next year.

Current estimates place the resources needed to achieve this goal at
between R12 billion and R20 billion. The ID would argue that such money
should be made available through a conditional grant to provinces to ensure
that this target is finally met.

The ID also has first-hand experience of witnessing the crisis affecting
service delivery to children. A great number of these services, including
statutory services, are being provided by NGOs and CBOs. Despite this
reality, there does not seem to be any more money allocated through the
equitable share to provinces to allocate to NGOs. It seems that we are
relying on volunteers and people’s altruism to deliver much-needed
services. Services such as home-based care and child support should be run
through NGOs and CBOs, and adequate provision must be made for people’s
salaries. The ID believes that until the state adequately supports those
that support children we will never be able to put the rights of children
first.

In general, the ID supports the Budget, though, and we plead with
government departments to spend their allocations in an effective manner so
that we can truly bridge the divides in our society and create a prosperous
nation for us all. I thank you.

Ms S H NTOMBELA: Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers and hon members, this year
we will be observing the 50th anniversary of the adoption of the Freedom
Charter. As we celebrate this 50th year of the existence of the people’s
document, which forms the basis of the struggle and our vision of the ANC,
we should use this year to reflect on what we have done to ensure that the
visions of the Freedom Charter are realised.

Modulasetulo, mokgwa wa ka ke motho ya atisang ho hopotsa batho bao ekang
ba se ba lebetse hore hana rona re bomang ebile re tswa kae. Afrika ke naha
ya baholo ba rona. Ba ne ba phela ha monate ba na le dikgomo, dinku,
dipere, jwalo-jwalo. Ba ne ba na le naha e ntle e mobu o nonneng, ba lema
ba ja hamonate le bana ba bona. Ba ne ba nyolosa ba theosa, ba tsamaya ka
bolokolohi naheng ya bona. Ba ne ba phela ha monate le ka kgotso naheng ya
bona, Afrika.

Athe, kae-kae, ho na le batho ba ntseng ba shebile ba kenweng ke mona. Ba
rera ho ya qhala botle boo bo Afrika. Tjhee, o tshabe mona le pelo e
telele. Ka 1652, a fihla ngwana wa Lenyesemane, Jan van Rieebeck, le bao a
neng a tsamaya le bona. Ao, ya tloha taba! Ba nka lefatshe la baholo ba
rona ka bonokwane, ba ba tshepisa mahodimo le lefatshe. Ba bang ba shwa ba
ntse ba tseka naha.

Ya ya naha banna, ya ya mehlape le moruo wa baholo ba rona, ya ya Afrika
batho batsho ba phela jwalo ka makgoba naheng ya bona.

SETHO SE HLOMPHEHANG: Ba jwetse!

Mof S H NTOMBELA: Ka selemo sa 1913, taba ena ya ho ikgapela naha ba e
kenya molaong o neng o bitswa Natives’ Land Act [Molao wa Taolo ya Naha] ka
puo ena ya bona ya sejatlhapi. Wona he, ke ona molao wa pele o sehloho wa
kgethollo ya mmala, o neng o bolela hore ba basweu ba nke karolo e kgolo ya
lefatshe, e etsang 87%. Ke ka hoo o bonang motho ka mong wa bona a na le
dipolasi tse pedi ho isa bohlanong. Ba bang ba na le dipolasi diprofensing
tsena kaofela. O fihlele hore motho o na le polasi Mpumalanga, Freistata le
Gauteng. Ha e le batho batsho bona ba fuwa makumane a lefatshe, a etsang
13%, fatsheng la bona, fatsheng la Afrika.
Ke moo he noha e kgolo, kganyapa ANC, e ileng ya hlaha, ya kopanya baruti,
marena le batho bohle ho lwanela naha ya bona. ANC ya tla ka leano la yona
le reng mayibuye iAfrika, izwelookhokho bethu [ha e kgutle Afrika, fatshe
la baholo ba rona]. Ba e lwana empa ya ba hlola. Ho tjhetjha ha monna,
banna, ha se ho baleha, empa e le ho nka matla.

Ba fetisa molao o mong hape o bitswang the Group Areas Act, 1950 [Molao wa
Kgethollo ya Mmala, 1950]. Jo! Batho batsho ba qhalwa jwalo ka mabele, ba
kenngwa lehloyo la semorabe pakeng tsa bona. Basotho ba iswa Qwaqwa, maZulu
a iswa KwaZulu, jwalo-jwalo. Le a tseba he lona hore ntwa ena ya semorabe e
re baketse eng. Ebile ha ke batle le ho bua ka yona haholo hobane re tla
tloha re thonkga maqeba a seng a fodile.

Ka 1955, baholo ba roba ba ANC ba kopana Kliptown ho rala Tokomane ya
Tokoloho, Freedom Charter, ba beha taba ya naha ka sehloohong moralong wa
bona. Empa ba ile ba elellwa hape le hore ba basweu e se e le karolo ya
Afrika Borwa. Ba dumellana, le ha ho le jwalo, hore empa ha e le lefatshe
lona, le tla tlameha ho arolelanwa mahareng a ba sebetsang ho lona.
(Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, I usually like to remind those who seem to have forgotten,
who we are and where we come from. Africa is our native country. Our
forefathers used to live happily here; and they had cows, sheep, horses and
so on. They had a beautiful fertile land, and they planted their crops and
happily ate them with their children. They went up and down, walking freely
in their own land. They lived happily and peacefully in their land, Africa.

It turned out that somewhere there were people who were keeping an eye on
them and feeling jealous. They planned to destroy all that beauty in
Africa. There is nothing like jealousy and greed. In 1652, Jan van
Riebeeck, a white man’s child, arrived with his entourage. Things really
started to happen! They cunningly took our forefathers’ land from them and
promised them heaven and earth. Some of them died fighting for the land.

Off went our land, off went the cattle and riches of our forefathers, off
went Africa, and black people were left living like slaves in their own
land.

An HON MEMBER: Tell them!

Ms S H NTOMBELA: In 1913, taking over people’s land was legalised and
called the Natives’ Land Act, in their English language. This was the first
cruel segregation law, which stated that whites should access the biggest
part of the land - up to 87%. That is why you find them having two to five
farms each. Some of them have farms in all of the provinces. You will find
one of them with a farm in Mpumalanga, in the Free State and in Gauteng,
while black people are only given crumbs of about 13%, in their own land,
Africa.
That is where the big dinosaur, the ANC, came in and brought ministers,
kings and everyone together to fight for their land. The ANC came up with a
programme that stated that Africa, the land of our ancestors, should come
back to its owners. They fought but they lost the battle. Taking a few
steps back does not mean that one is giving up, it only means that one is
drawing more strength.

They passed another law, the Group Areas Act of 1950. Alas! The black
nation was scattered and ripped apart. Tribal hatred was injected into
their midst. The Basotho were sent to Qwaqwa, the amaZulu were sent to
KwaZulu, and so on. You know what this tribal feud has cost us. I don’t
even want to talk much about it because I could end up opening some old
wounds.

In 1955, our ANC elders met at Kliptown to draw up the Freedom Charter, and
concentrated on issues of land in their draft. However, they also realised
that the white people were now also part of South Africa. They agreed that
the land should be shared among those who work it.]

The land shall be shared amongst those who work it.

Ba re Afrika Borwa ke ya batho bohle, ba basweu le ba batsho.

Ya fihla 1994. Ba hodimo ba eba ka tlaase mme ba tlaase ba eba kahodimo.
ANC ya nka puso. Jwale e tlameha ho lokisa taba ena ya naha. Re tshwanela
ho etsa bonnete ba hore naha e se be naha ya batho ba itseng feela.

Melao e netefatsang sena, e ile ya ba ena: Molao wa Karolelano ya Lefatshe,
e leng Land Redistribution Act. Mona  ANC e fetola sebopeho se sebe sa
mobu, se bontshang thuo ya mobu e le ya ba basweu feela. Ka naha re kgona
ho fedisa tlala, ho hlokeha ha mesebetsi le bofuma, ka ha re tla lema, re
rue dikgomo, jwalo-jwalo; mme bohle re tla fumana bophelo bo botle.

Mathata a ntse a le teng ho potlakisa molao ona hore batho ba fumane naha.
Ha re tla tabeng ya moithaopi ya rekang le moithaopi ya rekisang,
borapolasi ba nyolla theko ya mapolasi a bona habohloko, ho sitisa
borapolasi ba bannyane ho reka. O tla utlwa ba ntse ba re mmuso wa rona o a
re thusa, ke ka hoo ba nyollang theko ya mapolasi a bona. Mohlala wa sena o
mane Mpumalanga, Limpopo, Kapa Bophirimela le mane karolong tsa Freistata
tse bitswang Clarence le Roadside.
Empa hoo ho keke ha etsa hore ANC e fetole ntlha-kemo ya rona ya moithaopi
ya rekang le moithaopi ya rekisang. Empa re tlameha ho tla ka leano ho
fetola maemo ana a borapolasi ba nkang monyetla ka ho rekisa lefatshe ka
tjhelete e ngata, ho thibela borapolasi ba bannyane ho fumana naha.

Leano ke lena: Letona le fuwe matla a ho nka lefatshe ho borapolasi bana ba
sataladitseng melala ya bona. Letona le tlameha ho sebedisa matla ao hoba
re tshwanela ho netefatsa toro ya baholo ba rona e reng lefatshe le tla
arolelwa batho bohle ba sebetsang ho lona. Re tshwanela ho etsa hore Afrika
Borwa e be ya rona bohle.

Ha re bua ka Land Restitution, re bua ka kgutlisetso ya naha ho ba e
nketsweng ka bonokwane. Mona ANC e kgutlisa naha ela e nkilweng ka sehloho
ka 1913. Mona he le lona le dipaki. Re bone ka moo baholo ba rona ba neng
ba itshela ka dikgapa ha Letona le kgutlisa lefatshe la bona. Mohlala ke
dibaka tse kang Maokeng, Freistata, Kapa Botjhabela le mane District Six.

Re ile ra itumela haholo ho utlwa Letona la Ditjhelete le bile le etsa
bonnete ba hore le kenya tjhelete e lekanang le R6 billion ho netefatsa
hore re tswela pele ka taba ya ho kgutlisa lefatshe le ho potlakisa taba
ena. E, e fela jwale naha e tla arolelanwa mahareng a bohle ba phelang ho
yona.

Ha re bua ka Land Tenure Reform, re bua ka molao oo sepheo sa wona e leng
ho sireletsa ditokelo tsa batho ba mapolasing ba tlatlaptjwang ke
borapolasi. Le ha ho le jwalo, borapolasi ha ba kgathalle molao ona. Ba
ntse ba tebela batho ba borona ka sehloho letsatsi le letsatsi. Batho ba
borona ba ntse ba behwa ka thoko ho tsela, ho sa kgathaletsehe hore pula e
a na, metsi a teng, matlwana a teng kapa ba dutse polasing nako e kae. Ke
bona bana borapolasi ba ipitsang hore bona ke baKreste.

Ha borapolasi ba ne ba na le tjhebelopele, re ka be re sena dipale tse
tshwanang le ena: Mane Freistata, polasing ya Heilbron e bitswang
Driefontein, ho na le ntate ya neng a bitswa Springkaan Piet Makume, ya
dutseng moo dilemo tse ka bang 63. O hlahetse moo, a holela moo, a nyalla
moo a ba a fumanela bana ba hae moo. Bophelo bohle ba hae o bo dutse moo, a
sebetsa ka thata, a sebetsa ka botshepehi, a sebeletsa rapolasi. O ne a na
le dikgomo tse hlano, ka ha a ne a dumeletswe ho rua tse hlano feela.

Ha etsahala hore selemong se fetileng a hlokahale, a siye bana ba hae ba
tsheletseng le mofumahadi. E mong wa bara ba hae o qhwadile, ka ha a ile a
hatwa ke trekere ya hae rapolasi eo. Le pele ntate Springkaan a ka patwa,
rapolasi a ba bitsa mme a ba bolella hore ka mora lefu ba tsamaye polasing.
A ba bolella hore ba ye lekweisheneng, ho Mbeki, o tla ba fa tulo.

Ba ne ba sena le tjhelete e lekaneng ya ho pata mofu. Ba kopa yena rapolasi
hore a mpe a ba thuse, empa a ba bolella hore o ne a lefa Sprinkaan R260 le
mokotla wa phofo, ka kgwedi. Ba kopela feela mmabona sebaka sa hore ba tle
ba mo patele pela ntata bona. A ba bolella hore eo polasi ke ya hae, e seng
ya ANC.

Mofumahadi wa Makume o ne a bua mantswe a bohloko a le mong, a hore ha a
utlwisise hore hobaneng ngwana eno a tshwanetse ho mo etsa jwalo. Ke yena
ya mo hodisitseng, o ne a mo ntsha maleiri, o ne a mo isetsa dikhafothini
sekolong mme a bile a bapala le yena. O ne a mo etsetsa le ntho tseo a neng
a sa di etsetse bana ba hae. A re yena Sprinkaan yenwa ke yena ya neng a
lema polasi ya ntata bona, ke yena ya neng a hlokometse mehlape ya bontata
bona. A re le lebitso lena la Springkaan o le reilwe ke ntata rapolasi eo.

A re o utlwa bohloko ka ho fetisisa ha ba ntse ba bua hampe ka moetapele
enwa wa rona, ntate Mbeki. A re hobaneng ba etsa tjena? Hobaneng ba
tshwanetse hore ba re etse tjena empa rona re sa ka ra ba tebela, re re
Afrika Borwa ke ya batho bohle ba phelang ho yona, ba basweu le ba batsho?
Ke bua le wena tjena, lelapa la ha ntate Makume le ntse le dutse moo
Driefontein, pela tsela. Le dutse moo le sena motlakase, le sena metsi,
ebile ba iswa ka pela lekgotla la dinyewe ka labone, ho ya nkelwa tsohle
tseo e leng tsa bona.

Ba bangata batho ba rona ba tshwanang le Sprinkaan, bao borapolasi ba ba
fetotseng ntho tsa ho bapala. Hona ke bopaki ba hore molao ona wa rona wa
Katoloso ya Botsitso ba Thuo ya Lefatshe, o bitswang Extension of Security
of Tenure Act, o na le masobanyana a fang borapolasi matla a ho tlatlapa
batho ba habo rona. Re tla tlameha ho kwala masobana ao. Re tla tlameha ho
ema ka maoto ho ruta batho ba habo rona ditokelo tsa bona. [Mahofi.]

Empa batho beso ba dipolasing ke rata mantswe a bona ao ba a buwang. E mong
wa bona o re: le ha ba ka re tlatlapa, ba re etsa dintho tsohle, ba re isa
hodimo le fatshe, ba kgesa ANC, empa ha e le morao teng ha re sa ile. Batho
bao ba habo rona le bona ba na le ditokelo karolong ya mobu. (Translation
of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[They said that South Africa belongs to all – blacks and whites.

Along came 1994. Those who were at the top went down to the bottom and
those at the bottom went to the top. The ANC took up governance, and now
they have to deal with this land issue. We must make sure that the country
does not belong to certain people only.

One of the laws that were put in place to ascertain this was the land
redistribution Act. With this Act, the ANC is changing the picture that
suggests that the land is only for white people. With land, we can defeat
starvation, job scarcity and poverty, because we can plant, have cows and
so on; and we can all have a good life.

We still have some problems regarding the speeding up of this law to ensure
that people get land. With regard to the willing buyers and sellers of
land, farmers put exorbitant prices on their farms to make it hard for
small farmers to buy them. They claim that we get help from our government,
and that is why they raise their prices. Examples of such situations can be
found in Mpumalanga, Limpopo, the Western Cape and parts of the Free State
called Clarence and Roadside.

However, that will not push the ANC to change its standpoint on the willing
buyers and sellers of land, but we have to come up with a plan to deal with
these farmers who take advantage of the situation and sell the land at such
exorbitant prices, which prevents small farmers from getting land.

Here is a plan: The Minister should be given the power to take the land
from these farmers who are rigidly preventing small farmers from buying the
land, and the Minister should use these powers because we have to make our
forefathers’ dream, that the land should be shared among all those who work
it, a reality. We have to make sure that South Africa belongs to all of us.

When we talk about Land Restitution, we are talking about taking the land
back to those whose land was dishonestly taken from them. Here, the ANC is
taking back land that was cruelly seized in 1913. You can bear witness to
this matter; we all saw how our elders cried when the Minister returned
their land to them. Examples of such places are Kroonstad in the Free
State, and District Six in the Western Cape.

We were very happy to hear the Minister of Finance saying that he is going
to make an amount of R6 billion available to make sure that we proceed with
this matter of reclaiming the land and that this process is speedily taken
care of. Yes, now the land will truly be shared among those who live in it.
When we talk about land tenure reform, we are talking about a law that is
set on protecting the rights of farm dwellers who are abused by farmers.
However, this law still does not bother farmers. They still cruelly kick
our people off the farms, every day. Our people are still dumped on the
roadside, regardless of whether it is raining, whether there is any water
available there, whether they have sanitation or how long they have lived
on the farm. These are the farmers who call themselves Christians.

If the farmers had some foresight, we would not be talking about situations
such as these: In the Free State, on a farm called Driefontein in Heilbron,
there was a man called Springkaan Piet Makume who lived on that farm for
about 63 years. He was born there, grew up there, got married there and
even had his children there. He lived there his whole life, working hard
and faithfully for the farmer. He had five cows, because he was only
allowed to have five cows on the farm.

Last year, he died and left his wife and six children. One of his sons is
disabled because he was run over by the farmer’s tractor. Even before
Springkaan was buried, the farmer called his family and told them that they
should leave the farm after the funeral. He told them that they should go
to the township, to Mbeki, who would give them a place to stay.

They did not even have enough money to bury their deceased, and when they
asked the farmer to help them out, he told them that he used to pay
Springkaan R260 and a bag of maize-meal each month. They asked him to give
them some space next to their father’s grave so that they could bury their
mother next to her husband when she died. He told them that the farm
belonged to him, not to the ANC.

Makume’s wife used to painfully ask herself why that child should do that
to her. She brought him up, she used to change his diapers, and she used to
bring his lunch box to school for him and even used to play with him. She
used to do things for him that she did not even do for her own children.
She said Springkaan used to plant their father’s fields, and he used to
look after their father’s cattle. She said this farmer’s father was the one
who gave him the name “Springkaan” [Grasshopper].

She said it hurts her a lot when they talk so badly about our leader, Mr
Mbeki. Why should they do that to us? Why should they do that to us when we
did not chase them out of the country; when we said South Africa belongs to
all who live in it, black and white? As I am speaking to you, Mr Makume’s
family still lives on the side of the road in Driefontein. They live there
without electricity, without water, and they will be taken to court on
Thursday and stripped of all their belongings.

There are a lot of our people who are in a similar situation to that of
Springkaan’s family; people whom the farmers have turned into their toys.
This shows that this Extension of Security of Tenure Act has some loopholes
that enable farmers to continue abusing our people. We will have to close
those loopholes. We will have to stand firm and teach our people their own
rights. [Applause.]

However, I like the words spoken by our people on the farms. One of them
said that even if they abuse us, do all sorts of things to us, take us up
and down and belittle the ANC, we are never going back. Those people also
have rights with regard to land issues.]

The land must be shared amongst those who work it, so that South Africa can
truly belong to all of us.

Taba ya naha ke ntho ya bohlokwa haholo. Ha setjhaba sa Israele se tswa
Egepeta, se ile sa bontshwa kamoo naha e leng ntho ya bohlokwa ka teng. Ba
ile ba tshepiswa naha e nang le lebese le dinotshi. Ka hoo, taba ya naha e
sale e qala le Bebeleng.

Nalane ya rona jwalo ka batho lefatsheng lohle, e bontsha hore ntwa tsohle
tse bileng teng lefatsheng ka bophara, e bile tsa ho lwanela lefatshe.
Haufinyane le rona mona, Mozambique, Frelimo e lwantshana le Portuguese,
mme taba e ne e le lefatshe. Angola le MPLA ba lwanetse lefatshe le moruo
wa naha. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)
[The issue of land is very important. When the Israelites went out of
Egypt, they realised how important land was. They were promised the land of
milk and honey. Therefore, the issue of land started as long ago as the
biblical era.

Our history, as people the world over, shows that all the battles that we
have fought were based on land. In Mozambique, just next to us, Frelimo was
fighting with the Portuguese, and the main issue was land. Angola and the
MPLA also fought for the economy of the land.]

In Nigeria, with regard to one of the greatest struggles in the history of
mankind . . .

. . . e ne e le ntwa ya ho lwanela lefatshe. Esitana le hona mona Zimbabwe,
hantle-ntle ntwa ke ya ho lwanela lefatshe. [Kena hanong.]

Ha se phoso ha ANC e re: mayibuye iAfrika [Afrika ha e kgutle], hobane re
baetapele ba makgonthe fatsheng la borona. Re batla ho etsetsa bana ba rona
bokamoso bo tjhatsi. Ke kahoo re ipiletsang ho baholo ba rona ba
kgutlisetswang naha hore ba seke ba nka tjhelete haholo, ba nke lefatshe
hobane mmuso o batla ho etsa bonnete ba hore Afrika Borwa e be ya rona
feela. Ke ka hoo ntate Trevor a ntshitseng R6 billion. Ke ka hoo re
tshwanelang ho kgothatsa batjha ba rona ho ithutela tsa temo, ho tseba
tsohle ka naha, hobane naha ke wona mokokotlo wa ho fedisa bofuma mme
batjha bona ke mokokotlo wa bokamoso ba setjhaba sa rona.
Nka lebala jwang mafumahadi? Mme o teng mane Freistata, ya bitswang
Clementina Mokoena, ya ileng a fumana kgau e bitswang female farmer of the
year [mmapolasi wa selemo], ka ho lema konofolo. Dingaka di ile tsa mo
eletsa hore, ka ha a na le lefu la kgatello e phahameng ya madi, a je
konofolo, mme o ile a qala ho itemela konofolo.

Empa qetellong, konofolo eo e ile ya rekwa ke batho bohle mme a ba a
qetella a entse polasinyana ka yona. Kajeno tjena o a e rekisa mme o kgona
ho fepa bana le ho isa bana dikolong. Bomme, ke eo he. Le utlwile hore
tjhelete e ngata jwang ya bajete. Le oreng le sa tjhabile mona ho ANC.

Empa ho na le borapolasi bao re tlamehang ho ba thoholetsa. Ke a ipotsa
hore na ebe ka mona ka ho DA ho na le ba seng ba kile ba arolela batho ba
rona dipolasi na. Ho na le bao re tshwanetseng hore re ba thoholetse, ba
itahletseng ka setotswana ho etsa bonnete ba hore ba fa batho karolo e
itseng ya naha, ba batlang ho bona hore Afrika Borwa ena e fela e le ya
rona bohle. Re tlameha ho ba leboha ka ketso eo ya bona.

Maoba mona ke kopane le balemi ba bannyane ba mane Matatiele, bontate
Malefane le ba bang, ba re ba utlwile ka puo ya Mopresidente ha a ne a bua
hore ba tshwanela ho tla fumana dithuso, mme ba thabisitswe le ho feta ke
ha ba utlwa Letona la Ditjhelete bajeteng ya lona le bolela hore ho na le
tjhelete e lekanang le R1 billion e tlo ba thusang ka dipolasi hore ba
kgone ho sebedisa dintho tse batlehang dipolasing. Ba re ba leboha
Mopresidente mme ke ba lebohele, ba leboha comrade Trevor, ba leboha le ANC
haholo-holo. Ba tshepisa hore le ha batho bana bao le ba tsebang lona, ba
ka kgesa, ba ka nyenyefatsa, ba ka bua dipuo tsa batho le tsa manyeloi,
empa bona le bana ba bona ba tla voutela ANC ho fihlela ba rwala mobu ka
sefuba. [Mahofi.]

Ba re ka morao ho puo ya Letona la Ditjhelete, kamora bajete ena, ba bona
hore e fela e le nnete hore toro e tla phethahala e reng . . .
(Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[. . . they were fighting over land. Even in Zimbabwe, their fight is
mainly over land. [Interjections.]

There is nothing wrong with the ANC saying, “Mayibuye iAfrica” [Let Africa
come back], because we are true leaders in our country. We want to give our
children a bright future. That is why we appeal to our elders whose land is
returned to them not to only consider money; they should take land because
the government wants to make sure that South Africa belongs to them. That
is why Mr Trevor Manuel made R6 million available to them. That is why we
have to encourage our youth to learn about agriculture, to learn everything
about the land, because the land is the foundation in the fight against
poverty and the youth is the foundation of the future of our country.

How can I forget the ladies? There is a lady in the Free State, called
Clementina Mokoena, who won the Female Farmer of the Year Award by planting
garlic. Doctors advised her to eat garlic because she has high blood
pressure, and she started planting garlic for herself.

However, everybody bought the garlic, and she finally started a little farm
with that garlic. These days, she sells that garlic, and now she is able to
feed her children and send them to school. Ladies, there you are. You heard
how much money is being budgeted for, so make hay while the sun is still
shining on the ANC.

However, there are some farmers whom we have to applaud. I wonder whether
there are any DA members who have shared their farms with our people. There
are some people whom we have to applaud, who have joined forces and given
some people a part of their land, and who want to make sure that this South
Africa really belongs to all of us. We have to thank them for what they
have done.

The other day, I met some small farmers from Matatiele; Mr Malefane and
others. They said they heard the President’s speech when he said that they
were going to get help, and they were even more excited by the Minister of
Finance in his Budget Speech, when he said that there was R1 billion
budgeted to help them get the necessary equipment, to help them with their
farm work. They said they would like to thank the President and I should
convey their gratitude to him, and they would also like to thank comrade
Trevor and the ANC, in particular. They promise that, even if those people
you know should scorn, belittle and say all sorts of things, they and their
children will vote for the ANC, till they die. [Applause.]

They said that after the Minister of Finance’s speech and after this
Budget, they think the dream will really come true - . . .]

. . . the land must be shared amongst those who work it.

He, batho ba heso, kgomo ha e nye boloko kaofela. [Mahofi.] [People, one
can never tell it all. [Applause.]]

Mnr F BEUKMAN: Agb Adjunkspeaker, agb lede, agb Minister van Finansies, ek
gaan nie na makrokwessies verwys soos ander kollegas reeds gedoen het nie,
maar eerder fokus op opleiding en kapasiteitsbou in die lig van die
Begroting.

Een van die belangrikste doelwitte in die staatsrede van President Thabo
Mbeki is die volgende: om sy doelwitte te kan bereik moet die regering ’n
enorme verbetering in sy bestuurs-, organisatoriese-, tegniese- en ander
vermoëns bewerkstellig. Dit het direkte implikasies vir die uitvoering van
die Begrotingswetsontwerp en die toekennings aan staatsdepartemente.

Die Minister van Finansies gee inhoud aan die beginsel in sy
Begrotingsraamwerk. Daarom kan die toekennings aan departemente en die
verdeling aan programme nie los staan van ’n verskerpte poging om die
bemanning van finansiële bestuur in die openbare sektor op die vlak van
direkteurs-generaal, bo-finansiële beamptes, finansiële bestuurders en
interne ouditpersoneel te versterk en verder met kapasiteit toe te rus nie.

Ook hierdie hoofdoelwitte blyk uit die toekennings aan Begrotingsposte 12,
8 en 10, en dis ook veral waarna ons wil verwys. Dis hier waar die vulling
van die vakante poste in die finansiële bestuurskader van die Staatsdiens
en die trek van nuwe talent krities noodsaaklik is.

Die toekennings van die owerheidsektor kan ook nie los staan van twee
belangrike doelwitte wat in die staatsrede van 11 Februarie gestel is nie,
naamlik die verslag van die direkteur-generaal om teen Mei ’n verslag aan
die Kabinet voor te lê vir die verbetering van die regering se
dienslewering en uitvoering van programme ten einde dit effektief te laat
uitvoer, en dit kan nie geskied sonder die nodige finansiële
bestuurspersoneel nie. Daarom moet opleiding, indiensopleiding en
leerprogramme aan die finansieskant van departemente die fokus bly.

Terwyl die jaarverslag van die Ouditeur-Generaal aan die een kant bepaalde
gevaartekens oor opleiding aantoon, blyk dit dat die hoofde van die
Tesourie, Samdi en DPSA bepaalde inisiatiewe geloods het om die
kapasiteitsprobleme aan te spreek. Dit word ook in die nuwe Begroting
weerspieël en moet verwelkom word. Wat kapasiteitsbou betref, moet die
kapasiteitsbou - inisiatief van die Nasionale Tesourie, waar 71 kursusse
geakkrediteer is en waarby diensverskaffers betrokke is, verwelkom word.
Ook die aanduiding van die Tesourie, verlede Vrydag, dat 243 senior
finansiële personeel kursusse met betrekking tot die Wet op Openbare
Finansiële Bestuur deurloop het, is goeie nuus.

Die bedrag van R28 199 999 met betrekking tot finansiële bestuurstelsels in
die wetsontwerp moet hierby ook genoem word. Ook die
diensverskaffingsprogram van Ipfa met betrekking tot kursusse is belangrik,
veral die program van die Rekenmeester-Generaal waar 20 interne vir
indiensopleiding betrek word, is ’n voorbeeld van ’n proaktiewe benadering
by finansiële bestuur. Dit sal goed wees as ander departemente ook poog om
die Tesourie se voorbeeld in dié verband te volg.

Sonder goedgekwalifiseerde finansiële personeel kan kwaliteitkontrole en
bestuur nie geskied nie. In dié verband is die nuwe inisiatiewe van Samdi,
Begrotingspos 12, as’t ware in ’n nuwe gedaante van deurslaggewende belang.
Dit is daarom belangrik dat departemente en die staat nie net gebruik maak
van ander instellings nie, maar ook Samdi gebruik, aangesien ander
kontrakteurdienste dikwels nie toepaslike opleiding verskaf nie en ook ten
duurste is.
Die herposisionering van Samdi moet verwelkom word, veral hulle nuwe model
wat kapasiteitsbou betref. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members, hon Minister of Finance, I
am not going to refer to the macro issues that other colleagues have
referred to already, but in the light of the Budget I am rather going to
focus on training and capacity - building.

One of the most important objectives outlined in the state of the nation
address by President Thabo Mbeki is the following: To meet its objectives
the government needs to massively improve its management, organisational,
technical and other capacities. This has direct implications for the
implementation of the Appropriation Bill and the allocations to state
departments.

The Minister of Finance gives content to this principle in his Budget
Framework. Therefore the allocations to departments and the distribution to
programmes cannot be separated from an intensified effort to strengthen and
further capacitate the staff complement of financial management in the
public sector at the level of directors-general, financial officials in the
upper echelons, financial managers and internal auditing personnel.

These main objectives are also evident from the allocations to Budget Votes
12, 8 and 10, and this is what we also want to refer to in particular. This
is where filling vacant posts in the financial management sector of the
Public Service and attracting new talent are essential.

The allocations of the government sector can also not be separated from two
important objectives which were outlined in the state of the nation address
of 11 February, namely the report from the director-general to submit a
report to Cabinet by May for the improvement of the government’s service
delivery and implementation of programmes in order to execute it
effectively, and this cannot happen without the necessary financial
management personnel. Training, in-service training and learnerships should
therefore remain the focus on the financial side of departments.

Whereas the annual report of the Auditor-General indicates specific warning
signs about training on the one hand, it is clear that the heads of the
Treasury, Samdi and DPSA launched specific initiatives to address the
capacity problems. This is also reflected in the new Budget and should be
welcomed. As far as capacity-building is concerned, the capacity-building
initiative of the National Treasury, accrediting 71 courses and engaging
service providers, should be welcomed. And the indication from the
Treasury, last Friday, that 243 senior financial personnel attended courses
regarding the Public Finance Management Act is also good news.

The amount of R28 199 999 concerning financial management systems in the
Bill should also be mentioned here. With regard to courses, the service
delivery programme of Ipfa is also important, and the programme of the
Auditor-General in particular, which involves 20 interns for in-service
training, is an example of a proactive approach to financial management. It
will also be good for other departments to attempt to follow the example of
the Treasury in this regard.

Quality control and management cannot happen without well-qualified
financial personnel. In this regard the new initiatives of Samdi, Budget
Vote 12, in fact have taken on a new form of crucial importance. Therefore
it is important for departments and the state not to use other institutions
only, but also to use Samdi, in view of the fact that other contracting
services often do not provide appropriate training and also cost too much.

The repositioning of Samdi should be welcomed, particularly their new
capacity-building model.]

We welcome Samdi’s commitment to extend the senior level agreement that
Treasury has with Ipfa to roll out short courses on a large scale. The
courses will be packaged into structural programmes for the various levels,
and be linked to Ipfa qualifications.

It’s also to be welcomed that Samdi aims to link qualifications with Saqwa
and Fasset. Samdi stated that a commitment to work very closely with
National Treasury on the roll-out of financial administration and
management training is the correct approach.

Daar kan in politieke, teoretiese en finansiële terme oor die
Begrotingswetsontwerp gedebatteer word, maar ’n voorvereiste is dat
behoorlik toegeruste en opgeleide finansiële personeel beskikbaar is om
hierdie program te dryf. Om dit slegs aan die mark oor te laat is nie
genoeg nie, en daarom is die ingryping van die Tesourie, DPSA en Samdi
nodig en tydig.

Die fokus in die Begrotingswetsontwerp op hulpbronne vir finansiële
administrasie en bestuursopleiding in die MTEF-termyn is ’n aanduiding dat
dié aspek die aandag kry wat dit verdien. Die Begrotingswetsonwerp is die
regte platform om bestuursdienste en finansiële spesialis - kennis in die
openbare sektor op ’n beter grondslag te plaas ten einde inhoud aan die
lewerings- en diensleweringsdoelwitte van die staat te gee. Dankie,
Adjunkspeaker. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The Appropriation Bill could be debated in political, theoretical and
financial terms, but a prerequisite is that well-equipped and trained
financial personnel should be available to drive this programme. It is not
sufficient to leave it to the market only, and for that reason the
intervention of the Treasury, DPSA and Samdi is necessary and timeous.

The focus in the Appropriation Bill on resources for financial
administration and management training in the MTEF period is an indication
that this aspect is receiving the attention it deserves. The Appropriation
Bill is the appropriate platform to elevate management services and
financial specialist knowledge in the public sector in order to provide
content to the delivery and service delivery objectives of the state. Thank
you, Deputy Speaker.]

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Budget is sound and builds upon
the gains of the past years that were based essentially upon the moderate
growth in the economy exceeding the growth in expenditure. They are a story
of high achievement, and we congratulate the Minister and his department
for staying the course. These things have long lead times, and they stayed
the course.

The poet Robert Browning once said that it is important that “a man’s reach
should exceed his grasp”. Quite so. Keeping the Budget below 25% of GDP is
desirable. The central question, however, remains, posed also by my
colleagues here: How can we accelerate growth wisely on a sustainable basis
so as to include ever- increasing numbers of South Africans in gainful and
self-respecting employment? Kantor says: “Workfare is better than welfare”.

What would we in the ACDP do? A précis: We would dramatically incentivise
savers, private and corporate; we would remove every barrier to economic
growth possible at all tiers of government; we would accelerate some
imaginative skills transfer and education programmes, also using private
sector educators as accelerators; we would modernise the tax system by
testing the introduction of a comprehensive low-rate transaction tax; we
would end exchange control; we would introduce an incentive scheme to
repatriate South Africans from abroad, including free travel home and a tax
holiday for the first year when they come home - and each one coming home,
we calculated, Minister, would produce six to ten jobs if they returned
home and became employed.

We would emphasise reconciliation, and de-emphasise the demotivating race
debate in South Africa and would focus on policies of reconciliation, of
nation-building and of assisting the poor and the disadvantaged; we would
follow policies of inclusion for all citizens at all levels and in every
field of endeavour; we would have a more sectoral approach to managing the
economy, and not let whole sectors languish, like textiles and agriculture,
without timely, appropriate action.

We would start identifying and building upon those things that unite South
Africans, rather than harping continuously and unproductively on things
that have divided us in the past, real or imagined. In short, we would try
to build the confidence of the nation.
How can we get that extra growth we need from the economy without
sufficient savings, personal and corporate, to sustain that growth? In Asia
growth rates are high, but so are savings rates. South Africans are
investing abroad, with some R3,8 billion net outflow of capital in the
first nine months of 2004. The government is still dissaving and personal
savings are amongst the lowest in the world. We need to address this
imaginatively. I respect that you say programmes have been launched by the
government on retirement savings, and so on. I believe we could have dealt
with tax relief on annuities now.

I believe we could have cut the corporate tax by another percentage point -
2% - rather like Singapore did a couple of weeks ago from 22% to 20%.
Another thing we need to handle very carefully, Minister, if we do not wish
to damage confidence - and I really do not want to politicise what I am
going to say to you now - is the whole question of foreign ownership of
property in South Africa.

We need to understand that in a globalising world we are in competition
with other parts of the world to attract tourists, long - stay tourists and
visitors that choose to retire here or to repeatedly revisit us by buying
property; people like Oprah Winfrey. It is an act of confidence on the part
of these people.

When they buy, we do not lose the property, but we have their investment as
well, and we have their ongoing service expenditure in maintaining their
investment, whether they like it or not. They keep coming back instead of
visiting other places, because they have a reason to come. They make other
investments here. They do charitable work, like Oprah did, for example.
This is the purest form of investment, and there is great competition from
around the world for this category of investor from Spain, Portugal,
Switzerland, the USA and the Caribbean, to name only a few.

In inner London, in Chelsea, Kensington, Mayfair and St John’s Wood, the
foreign ownership of London buildings is estimated at over 30%. In Cape
Town it is under 1%. This is a highly profitable international market that
we should be tapping into and we should do nothing to disturb it by
regulation, prohibition or precipitated action. We have something people
want; we need to nurture the possibility and not strangle it at birth
because of ignorance or xenophobia.

I want to close also, Minister, with some thoughts on the opposition. I am
often reminded that the opposition should not slavishly oppose in
Parliament for the sake of it. We in the ACDP promise not to do so, but on
condition that the government members do not slavishly support the policies
of the governing executive, no matter what. We have a duty in Parliament.
We must execute it. We will support the Budget. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Deputy Speaker, Comrade Minister, comrades and hon
Members, the Budget which we are discussing today is one that gives the
people of our country the assurance and hope that this ANC government is
committed to improving the quality of life of all South Africans.

It is a budget that will continue to stimulate growth in the economy. It
also provides our people with the opportunity to acquire and develop new
skills that will assist them to access employment opportunities. It gives
meaning and life to the words of the Freedom Charter, which was adopted at
the Congress of the People at Kliptown on 26 June 1955, fifty years ago.

The ANC’s January 8 statement in 2002 stated the following:

   . . . we must base our vision, programmes and actions on that historic
   manifesto of the people of South Africa, the Freedom Charter. This
   demands especially of our vanguard movement that we ensure that the
   Freedom Charter plays its central role in the formation of the new South
   Africa as a living document.


The ANC’s January 8 statement this year included the following:

   The Charter embodies a vision of an alternative society to the society we
   inherited. It constitutes the programme of the people of our country for
   the creation of a truly democratic, nonracial, nonsexist, united and
   prosperous country.

During our third democratic elections in April 2004,the masses of our
people reconfirmed their confidence in our movement as the best defender of
the vision spelt out in the Freedom Charter, a true custodian of their
aspirations and a trustworthy leader of all our people as they continue to
act together to meet the difficult challenge of eradicating the legacy of
colonialism and apartheid and building a winning nation.

However, there are some in our country and in this House who refer to the
Freedom Charter as an irrelevant and outdated document. They say that the
aspirations of the majority of the people of this country are irrelevant.
They also say that they have no concern nor do they care whether the people
shall share in the country’s wealth, or whether the land shall be shared
among those who work it, or whether there shall be houses, security and
comfort. The Budget tabled in this House on 23 February delivers on all the
clauses of the Freedom Charter.

The Budget allocation of R6 billion to complete the land restitution
programme will ensure that the land will be shared among those who work it.
The increased allocation of R2 billion for the new housing strategy and the
R3 billion set aside over the next three years for investment in the
community infrastructure, together with the R1,7 billion for municipal and
sanitation infrastructure, will ensure that there shall be houses, security
and comfort.

These allocations will ensure that we can build a united and prosperous
society and also provide hope to those who are in need of adequate shelter
that the government is committed to building a nation whose people are
adequately housed with access to services such as sanitation, water and
electricity.

I would like to draw attention to a new housing development in the Lanseria
area in Johannesburg, called Cosmo City. The sale of these bank-financed
homes is attracting South Africans from all walks of life. This
development, which forms part of the new housing strategy, will also
accommodate beneficiaries of subsidised housing together with those who
choose to access social or rental housing.

The development of Cosmo City and the other provincial pilot projects
provides us with the opportunity to build new, vibrant suburbs, which
reflect a united, nonracial, nonsexist and prosperous society. This will
give effective meaning to the vision of a South Africa that belongs to all
who live in it.

Yesterday the Minister of Housing, comrade Lindiwe Sisulu, announced that
the housing subsidy is to be increased from the current R28 279 to R31 900.
This is a clear indication of government’s commitment to providing quality
shelter to those who need it most.
During the election campaign last year, the ANC said in its manifesto,
amongst other things, that the land restitution programme would be
completed and that more subsidised housing would be built. Both of these
commitments, together with the others which were included in the ANC’s 2004
election manifesto, are included in this Budget.

This displays the commitment of the ANC government to the creation of a
better life for all. Included in the terms of reference of the Joint Budget
Committee is the monitoring of actual revenue and expenditure per
department on a monthly basis. The Budget provides increased allocations
for capacity-building and training. This relates to the need for increased
capacity and training within the Public Service, which was alluded to by
President Mbeki in the state of the nation address on 11 February this
year.

Whilst the Budget provides the necessary resources to implement the
programmes of government, the successful implementation of the various
departmental programmes is dependent on the capacity of the Public Service.

It is important that departments use these allocations in a manner that
will culminate in a well-capacitated and equipped Public Service that can
ensure the efficient and cost-effective implementation of government’s
programmes and policies. The practice of Batho Pele must become part of the
everyday work ethic of those who work in the Public Service.

The Division of Revenue Bill makes specific reference to the submission of
expenditure and performance reports to the National Treasury. Equally
important is the quality of spending and whether or not we are getting the
best possible value for money spent.

Emphasis must also be placed on monitoring and evaluating the expenditure
patterns of departments in relation to their strategic plans as well as the
outcomes achieved.

The Joint Budget Committee will play an important role in monitoring not
only expenditure patterns but also the quality of the final product that is
delivered. The success of the building of new, sustainable human
settlements will depend on the ability of government departments to work in
a co-ordinated manner and to align their budgets so that vibrant new human
settlements are created with all the necessary infrastructure provided
simultaneously with the delivery of shelter.

This will require greater interdepartmental co-ordination and forward
planning. The Budget allocates R3 billion for transport infrastructure and
investments as well as allocations towards the 2010 World Cup-related
infrastructure projects. It is important to ensure that the infrastructure
which is provided for the 2010 World Cup will benefit our nation for
generations to come.

The Budget allocations will accelerate service delivery programmes with
particular emphasis on the delivery of water and sanitation targeted
towards those who need it most. The effective implementation of the
programmes which are provided for in this Budget will ensure that we become
not only a winning nation but also a country that we can be proud of, and
one that will sustain our future generations.

In the coming years we look forward to reaping the benefits of the
efficient utilisation and implementation of the resources provided by this
Budget and the proposed allocations over the MTEF.

There is therefore no reason why we cannot see more Monde Zondekis emerging
on our sports fields, or more South African films like Yesterday being
nominated for Oscars.

Together, as a united nation we have the potential. The Budget provides us
with the tools to take the potential we have and produce the results that
will make us a winning and successful nation.

In addition to the monitoring of actual revenue and expenditure per
department, the Joint Budget Committee is also tasked with considering
whether allocations in the Appropriation Bill are broadly in keeping with
the policy directions of government.

We in the ANC, having read and interrogated the Budget documentation
provided, are confident that the 2005 Budget allocations, as well as the
budget over the MTEF, are in keeping with the policy directions of
government.

The Budget focuses on growing the economy, creating more employment
opportunities, reducing poverty and inequality, lowering the levels of
crime, accelerating the provision of basic services and infrastructure, and
providing quality housing, as well as improving the quality of education
and health services.

As we start our journey into the second decade of freedom, the 2005 Budget
lays the foundation for us to reach our destination and it contributes to
creating a season and decade of hope.

We in the ANC support the First Reading of the Appropriation Bill. I thank
you.

Dr C P MULDER:  Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC chose the Freedom Charter as
a theme for this year. They are all familiar with the slogan which states,
“South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white”. But is that
really true or is it mere rhetoric and ANC propaganda? Mr Manuel, my fight
is not with you. I believe all South Africans will agree with me when I say
that you are a very good Minister of Finance. My fight today is with the
ANC, it being the current government of South Africa.

Section 6 of the Constitution makes provision for 11 official languages.
Why? South Africa is a very diverse society. It is a society of cultural,
linguistic, ethnic, racial and other divisions. One would have hoped that
the government would recognise this reality, but sadly that is not the
case. In the future historians will look back at current developments in
South Africa today and write the following: “During the early part of the
21st century South Africa was faced with a new phenomenon; the phenomenon
of ANC colonialism and imperialism. During this period the ANC pursued an
aggressive policy of”

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I want to ask
if it is parliamentary for Zimbabwean parliamentarians to speak in a South
African parliament? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think that is a point of order because we do
not have any Zimbabwean parliamentarians. Hon member, please proceed.

Dr C P MULDER: “During this period the ANC pursued an aggressive policy of
expansionism, extending its ideological, political, philosophical and
cultural influence throughout South Africa. Like all other imperialists
before them, they did this with total disregard for all that was dear and
of importance to each and every other community with which they came into
contact.”

Imperialism manifests itself in one people, usually representing a
particular community that tends to dominate all others by creating a
unified system of control. That is exactly what the ANC does on each and
every level of society.

Die totale inkomste van die staat vir hierdie boekjaar is ongeveer R369
miljard. Die direkte persoonlike inkomstebelasting is ongeveer R116
miljard. Dit sluit nie indirekte belastings soos BTW in nie. ’n Aansienlike
deel daarvan word deur Afrikaners betaal - dit staan vas - maar Afrikaners
moet weet: julle het geen sê oor hoe een enkele sent daarvan bestee word
nie. Julle betaal julle deel van die belasting, en genoeg daarvan, maar
andere sal besluit wat hulle daarmee wil doen.

Op Vrydag 18 Februarie open premier Rasool die Wes-Kaapse provinsiale
parlement. Hy gee hoog op oor die ANC se strewe om die Wes-Kaap ’n tuiste
vir al sy inwoners te maak; ’n provinsie waarin net mooi 60% van die
inwoners Afrikaanssprekend is.

Op dieselfde dag word die uitspraak in die Laerskool Mikro-saak in die
Kaapse Hooggeregshof gelewer. En onthou, Mikro is nie ’n wit skool nie,
want daar is kinders van alle gemeenskappe. Dit gaan oor Afrikaans. Die
regter bevind dat die Wes-Kaapse onderwysdepartement buite sy bevoegdhede
opgetree het, en gelas hulle ook om alle regskoste te betaal. Die hof
bevind dat die ANC verkeerd opgetree het.

Ek het dadelik ’n brief aan premier Rasool geskryf en hom gevra om baie
mooi te besin: “Moenie oorhaastig reageer en besluit om te appelleer nie.
As jy en die ANC ernstig is om werklik ’n tuiste van die Wes-Kaap en ook
vir sy 60% Afrikaanssprekende inwoners te maak, dink net wat se sein stuur
die ANC vir hulle as julle hulle die reg om enkelmedium-Afrikaanse skole te
hê ontsê.”


Ons ken mos die patroon: eers een klas, dan later ’n dubbelmediumskool en
nog later ’n enkelmediumskool, naamlik Engels. Maar nee, ons is terug by
ANC-imperialisme. Die voor-toyi-toyiende plaaslike minister van onderwys,
Cameron Dugmore, lei die aanslag, natuurlik met my en ander
Afrikaanssprekendes se belastinggeld. Alle Afrikaanssprekendes moet baie
mooi weet die ANC is nié hulle vriend nie. Inteendeel.

Ek het ongeveer drie jaar gelede, toe die NNP die DA verlaat het om by die
ANC in die bed te spring, die NNP gewaarsku. Ek het van hierdie podium af
gesê: “Die ANC is nie regtig mal oor julle nie. Hulle doel is om die NNP te
vernietig”, en ek was natuurlik reg. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The total income of the state for the current financial year is
approximately R369 billion. The direct personal income tax is approximately
R116 billion. This does not include indirect tax such as VAT. A
considerable amount thereof is paid by Afrikaners – that is for sure – but
Afrikaners should know: you have no say over how a single cent of that will
be spent. You pay your share of the tax, and enough thereof, but others
will decide what they want to do with it.

On Friday 18 February Premier Rasool opened the Western Cape’s provincial
parliament. He made much of the ANC’s endeavour to make the Western Cape a
home for all its residents; a province where just about 60% of the
residents are Afrikaans-speaking.

The verdict in the Mikro Primary School case was delivered in the Cape High
Court on the same day. And bear in mind that Mikro is not a school for
whites only, because children of all communities are accommodated there.
Afrikaans is the point of issue. The judge ruled that the Western Cape’s
education department acted outside its powers and also ordered them to pay
all legal costs. The court ruled that the ANC acted incorrectly.

I immediately wrote a letter to Premier Rasool and asked him to consider
the matter very carefully: “Do not react hastily and decide to appeal. If
you and the ANC are really serious about making the Western Cape a home for
all, including its 60% Afrikaans-speaking residents, then just think what
signal the ANC is sending them if you deny them the right to have single-
medium Afrikaans schools.”

We, of course, know the pattern: first one class, then later a dual-medium
school and, later still, a single-medium school, namely English. But no, we
are back to ANC imperialism. Cameron Dugmore, the toyi-toying local
minister of education leads the onslaught – with my tax money and that of
other Afrikaans speakers, of course. All Afrikaans speakers must know very
clearly that the ANC is not their friend; on the contrary.

Approximately three years ago, I cautioned the NNP when they left the DA to
jump into bed with the ANC. I stated from this podium: ”The ANC is not
really crazy about you. Their aim is to destroy the NNP”, and I was right,
of course.]

Quite often people would like to refer to the 1994 transition as a miracle.
It was not a miracle. How can it be a miracle when one side capitulates? In
that case it is not a miracle but surrender. And that is what the NP did.
Now the Nats are all joining the ANC. Can anyone.

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Chairperson, the speaker is giving an impression in his
presentation here that the ANC is against the Afrikaners as a nation and as
a group. Isn’t it racial stirring up of emotions to make the statement that
the ANC, a particular grouping of people, are against a particular race of
people?

Hy het gesê die regering is teen die Afrikaners, en is nie hulle vriend
nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] [He stated that the government is against the
Afrikaners and is not their friend. [Interjections.]]

If you are not a friend then you are an enemy. Please, we need your ruling
on that, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, hon member, I believe that
this is part of our robust debate and that the speaker can continue. Thank
you.

Dr C P MULDER: You are wasting my time. Can anyone for one moment imagine
Yasser Arafat or Abbas from the PLO joining Sharon’s Likud party, or Gerry
Adams and others from Sinn Fein in Northern Ireland suddenly joining the
Conservative Party in London? Absurd, isn’t it? But that is exactly what
NNP are doing. The Nat Leaders are running for cover to the ANC. But
remember, their followers will not follow.

Hierdie ANC-gedrag word aan alle Afrikaners voorgehou as die norm. Die ANC
sê . . . [This conduct of the ANC is presented as the norm to all
Afrikaners. The ANC states . . .]

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon member ascribes
the statement that he has just made to the NP and does not include the late
Dr Connie Mulder as part of the people that he is speaking against. Thank
you.

Dr C P MULDER: Sit down, idiot.

Op sommige plase kry ’n mens wat bekend staan as ’n werfbobbejaan. Dit is
’n makgemaakte bobbejaan wat op die werf rondhang, ’n soort attraksie. Hy
is vas aan ’n ketting en hy hoort nie regtig daar nie. Die boer verduur
hom, wys hom vir sy vriende en gooi af en toe vir hom ’n lemoen. As die NNP
so opgewonde is . . .

Die HUISVOORSITTER (Me C-S Botha): Agb spreker, u tyd is verstreke.

Dr C P MULDER: . . . om daardie rol in die ANC te vertolk, moet hulle nie
vir een oomblik dink dat alle Afrikaners daardie roete sal volg nie.
Vergeet dit!

Die HUISVOORSITTER (Me C-S Botha): Agb spreker, u tyd is verstreke.

Dr C P MULDER: Ek wil regtig voorstel dat die agb swepe met daardie lid
praat en vir hom verduidelik, as hy nie verstaan wat in hierdie debatte
aangaan nie, is hy regtig op die verkeerde plek! [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[On some farms you find what is known as a farmyard baboon. It is a
domesticated baboon that hangs about the farmyard, a kind of attraction. He
is tied to a chain and does not really belong there. The farmer endures
him, shows him off to his friends and tosses him an orange now and then. If
the NNP is so excited . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon speaker, your time has expired.

Dr C P MULDER: . . . to play that role in the ANC then they must not for
one moment think that all Afrikaners will follow that route. Forget it!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon speaker, your time has expired.

Dr C P MULDER: I really want to suggest that the hon Whips speak to that
member and explain to him that if he does not understand what is taking
place in these debates, then he is really in the wrong place!
{Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, order, please! Order,
please! Your time has expired. [Interjections.]

Mr B E PULE: Thank you, Chairperson. Allow me to congratulate the Minister
and his department for a comprehensive Appropriation Bill setting out the
national Budget that entails two main components, namely the expenditure
side of the Budget and the revenue side.

It is further hoped that, as the Public Finance Management Act, Act No 1 of
1999, dictates, individual departments have developed strategic plans,
objectives, programmes and subprogrammes in order to commit the amounts to
be spent. Looking at the share in the national Budget allocation
analytically, and of course excluding the government debt service costs and
equitable share, individual departments’ share order is as follows: One,
Social Development with 25,54 %; two, Safety and Security with 12,85%;
three, Defence with 10,14%; four, Provincial and Local Government with 7%;
five, National Treasury with 6,31%; Six, Education with 5,59%.

One notes that Education is not one of the top five departments that
receives the greatest share because it manages policy and transfers few of
its budget amounts for tertiary education purposes and, further, most of
the implementation is done at the level of provincial departments.

It is, however, a cause for concern to note that spending trends at those
levels were relatively slow in the third quarter of the previous financial
year, 2004-05; when they were a mere 42,9% of capital expenditure.
Government can really ill afford this tardy development, as skills are the
government’s priority.

Looking further at the share order of departments, one would have thought
that Health and Agriculture could have featured as number two and three on
the list respectively, instead of Safety and Security and Defence. This
does not suggest that they are not important, but the Department of
Agriculture has to lead and support sustainable agriculture and promote
rural development through ensuring access to sufficient and safe and
nutritious food and also maximise growth, employment and income, to ensure
the improvement of the economy of our country.

The aim in the Health Department, according to the Bill is “to promote the
health of all people in South Africa through a caring and effective
national health system based on a primary care approach.”

One observation is that capital payments in this national Budget represent
a small allocation in expenditure and there has to be some form of
commitment to infrastructure development. In the event of some transfers in
individual Votes to other spheres of government and delegated agencies,
those have to be monitored through legislative oversight, and this of
course poses a big challenge for the public representatives.

Another observation is that current payments, which entail operational
expenses, constitute a huge percentage of the national Budget. And
bureaucracies need to function better and efficiently to avoid roll-overs,
unnecessary committed funds and haphazard spending at the end of the
financial year.

Ga re gane gore jaaka ke buile ka ditlhomagano tsa mafapha gore madi a ka
bo a ile kae, tse dingwe ga di tlhokege. Mme re tla tsaa-tsia gore mo
nakong e e fetileng ntwa e kgolo e ne e le gore dipuso di ne di busa ka
mapodisi le masole, ke sone se kereng go a gakgamatsa fa o bona tekanyetso
ya gompieno e naya mapodisi le masole madi a a fetang.[Nako e fedile.]
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

We do not disagree, as I have stated in relation to the arrangements of the
departments, as to the whereabouts of the money because these explanations
are unnecessary. But, one notes that in the past the main problem was that
states used the police and soldiers to suppress people. That is why it is
not surprising to note that today’s Budget gives the police and the
soldiers money that exceeds . . . [Time expired.]

The UCDP supports the Appropriation Bill. [Applause.]]

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, hon Minister, comrades and colleagues, this
national Budget represents a numerical expression of our policy
implementation and government’s priorities for this period. In this Budget
the ANC government seeks to create an equitable balance in our society and
to redress the plight of the poor in particular.

It is in this context that I convey the appreciation of senior citizens in
my constituencies of Warrenton and Strydenburg to the Minister of Finance
for the increase in their pensions. Re a leboha ntate. [Thank you, sir.]

These pensioners and parents would like to send a word of thanks to the ANC
government for the improvement brought about in their lives since the 1994
democratic breakthrough. Before I proceed, I also wish to give a message to
the UDM from my colleague, Comrade Mzondeki, which reads as follows:


   There is nothing wrong with disabled people queuing for jobs if the work
   environment is friendly, unless you think they are sick.  In fact, the
   majority of persons with disabilities cannot wait to get out of the
   pension queue and join the workers. The Budget makes provision for them
   to get the necessary skills to compete for employment.

That is what the comrade is saying in his message to the UDM.

Ek wil ook sê dat dit onwaar is, agb Mulder, dat die ANC nie ’n vriend van
Afrikaanssprekendes is nie. [I also want to say, hon Mulder, that it is
untrue that the ANC is not a friend of Afrikaans - speaking people.]

Afrikaans speaking people are actually friends of the ANC and also belong
to it. [Applause] So, don’t try and appropriate Afrikaans to belong to only
the three men sitting around you. If you are not friends of the ANC, don’t
make a general statement that says: “Alle Afrikaanssprekende mense is nie
vriende van die ANC nie.” [All Afrikaans-speaking people are not friends of
the ANC.]

Today we are debating this Budget in a critical historic context, as it is
almost a century since the formation of the ANC in 1912 and 50 years since
the adoption of the Freedom Charter in 1955. In both these instances, we
pride ourselves on the impressive track record of our glorious movement,
particularly in the past decade.

We also take a moment to remember the giant of our struggle, Comrade Joe
Slovo, who past away 10 years ago. The President, in his state of the
nation address, referred to “the confluence of encouraging possibilities”.

We find ourselves in those possibilities as a country during this period.

South Africa is gradually becoming a country of happy people, Comrade Obed.
We are an important regional and global player for democratic
transformation, working tirelessly for peace, security and economic growth.
We are well positioned to host the 2010 World Cup, which has enormous
economic and cultural returns for South Africa and, broadly, for the
African continent.

During our 10 years of democratic rule we have hosted important
international events, for example, the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, the international conference on HIV/Aids, The World Conference
against Racism and Xenophobia and, most recently, the Pan-African
Parliament.

Just this month, on 5 and 6 March, we celebrated the 50th anniversary of
Sactu, the South African Congress of Trade Unions, the predecessor of
Cosatu. Both these organisations were formed to fight for the rights of
workers and for the transformation of South Africa from apartheid to
democracy.

Later this year Cosatu will also be celebrating its 20th anniversary of
fighting for human rights. Workers’ rights are indeed human rights. It is
therefore fitting at this juncture to examine the role trade unions have
been playing in improving the lives of workers.

It is also appropriate at this time to examine this important matter in the
light of the proposals by the DA regarding the deregulation of the labour
market. They have already lost this debate in the first and second sessions
of Parliament and are bound to lose it in this session. [Interjections.]

The ANC government has succeeded in regulating the labour market in the
national interest compared to the situation prior to 1994. In the process
we have achieved a reasonable economic growth rate, good governance and
good labour relations. The track record of the DA is very disappointing
when it comes to this subject, to say the least. [Interjections.]

What even makes this debate a bit boring is that they support everything we
are saying now! But it is okay, I think is for good governance. Thank you
very much for supporting the Budget.

In 1995, just to illustrate our track record, we passed the Labour
Relations Act to strengthen collective bargaining in the country, and the
DA disagreed. We went on to pass the Basic Conditions of Employment Act in
order to ensure decent minimum conditions for workers and again the DA said
no!

In 1998 we passed the Skills Development Levies Act to address skills
shortages in the economy, and again the DA pressed the red button. But they
are the ones who, from time to time, come here and complain about skills,
and about everything that goes wrong in the country, even that which has
been successful, but is an indication of what they want to do in this
country.

We passed the Employment Equity Act to redress the discrimination workers
experienced during apartheid, whilst they were basking in the glory of
apartheid at the time. Once more, the DA unsuccessfully called for a
division in this House.

In 2001 we passed the Unemployment Insurance Act and, predictably, the DA
opposed it once again. The undeniable truth is that the DA does not care
about the rights of workers in this country. [Interjections.] [Applause.]
That is why workers of this country have no reason to vote for the
Democratic Alliance. [Applause.]

Now their latest target is to scrap Nedlac, the National Economic
Development and Labour Council, which is an important institution for
social dialogue. Once again, they are bound to lose this debate. The Setas
are also here to stay, Mr Davidson, and we are determined to make them
function properly. Given their track record of voting against labour
legislation, is it not ludicrous that the DA would now want us to believe
that they are the champions of the poor and the unemployed? What a joke!

In a few days, the country will be celebrating Human Rights Day, and in
line with our evergreen document - Comrade Dan Montsitsi refers to the
Freedom Charter as such - we have gone a long way towards achieving
equality in our society. We are now 11 years into our democracy. How do the
achievements and programmes of this government measure up to the vision
embodied in the Freedom Charter, our evergreen document?

The adoption of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa is
certainly an embodiment of the vision of the Freedom Charter. Today the
supreme law of our country provides that everyone is equal before the law
and has the right to equal protection and benefit of the law.

The Bill of Rights provides emphatically that equality includes the full
and equal enjoyment of all rights and freedoms. Unlike 50 years ago, when
the Freedom Charter was adopted, today the state may not unfairly
discriminate against anyone on the basis of race, gender, sex, pregnancy,
marital status, ethnic or social origin, culture, language and a host of
other grounds.

Today every person in this country has the right to a basic education and
to further education, which the state, through  reasonable measures, must
make progressively available and accessible. Unlike the violent years of
apartheid when Afrikaans was brutally imposed as a medium of instruction,
today everyone has the right to education in the official language or
languages of their choice.

For example, in the Northern Cape province, the !Xu and the Khwe
communities have access to learning in their mother tongue and a school of
their own, as well as their own community radio station. Everyone in South
Africa has the right to use their language and to participate in the
culture of their choice.
If you don’t want to participate in your own culture, that’s your own
choice; don’t blame the ANC for it. Persons belonging to cultural,
linguistic and religious communities may not be denied the right to enjoy
these or to form associations in this regard. That is what the Constitution
provides.

Today we have a Constitutional Court, the guardian of the rights contained
in the Bill of Rights and the highest court in the land. The Constitution
recognises 11 official languages, including Afrikaans. PanSALB was
established to promote multilingualism and to create conditions for the
development and equal use of all official languages.

We also have a National Arts Council. [Interjections.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, the hon member has 14 minutes and I had only
five!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Sorry, hon member Mulder, may I ask
the speaker to sit down before you continue. Would you like to raise a
point of order?

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, I would like to ask the hon member a
question. He has 14 minutes; surely he has time. It is an easy question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon speaker, will you accept a
question?

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, when I have finished. Just stay where you
are. I might just be answering your question as I speak now. We also have a
National Arts Council whose responsibilities are to develop, promote and
support the arts and culture in the country. Our systems are in place.

In addition to our new national flag that was brought into use on 27 April
1994, we have, over the past few years, transformed our national coat of
arms and national orders. Today these symbols reflect the diversity of this
beautiful rainbow nation; a nation which has become the envy of the world
despite attempted distractions of the DA and their cohorts. Other arts and
cultural organisations that were established to bring to life the rights
contained in the Constitution are the National Heritage Council, the SA
Heritage Resource Agency and the SA Geographical Names Council.

These bodies have a continuing agenda of ensuring that our symbols and
cultural institutions are representative of the South African nation. This
is the Freedom Charter brought to life. Today we can proudly say that all
national groups have equal rights.

This does not mean that we do not have challenges. For instance, there are
still names of areas, streets and buildings that must change and be
replaced by names with which the historically discriminated national groups
can identify. Recent examples of language discrimination in the Western
Cape, as well as in some schools in the Northern Cape, tell us that not all
official languages are fully recognised in our society. However, we have
complete confidence in our Department of Education to deal decisively with
these matters.

We are, of course, not alone in facing these challenges. A recent report of
the United Nations development programme in 2004 identified certain global
threats as being “racism, sexism, xenophobia, ethnicity and nationalism,
religious intolerance, economic, social and political discrimination.”


The report also highlights one of the key global challenges as being the
recognition that cultural diversity is an inescapable part of the future
landscape of politics in the 21st century.

These global challenges are also challenges in our own country. We cannot
allow them to go unheeded. This House must be vigilant in protecting and
promoting the rich diversity of our country.

The ANC supports this Budget Vote.

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, can the hon member take his question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, since your time has not
expired, are you prepared to take a question?

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, it is an easy question. The hon member speaks
very highly of the Constitution and all the wonderful protection, and the
ANC is supposedly the champion of that. Now, let me take you to section 29
of the Bill of Rights that deals with education and also makes provision
for single-medium institutions.

That being the case, if the ANC accepts the Constitution and the Bill of
Rights, why is your government in the Western Cape appealing and taking the
decision of the court to the High Court and the Constitutional Court and
not accepting the right of that community of parents who are entitled, in
terms of the South African Schools Act, to have a single-medium educational
institution? Why are you appealing that decision?

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, the hon member is asking me a question on
matters that are still before the courts. Can we allow that process to
proceed?

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, the PAC will vote for this Appropriation Bill.
But I want to comment as follows: We are taught in life to learn to do
good, seek justice, relieve the oppressed, defend the fatherless and plead
for the widowed. It is one thing to accept that a volcanic eruption will
result in the deadly flow of lava, but quite another to acquiesce in a
process that leads to suffering that can be changed by human intervention.

The 2005 Budget is about choice - the choice to prevent thousands dying
from crumbling human immune systems caused by HIV/Aids; the choice to stop
rewarding small pockets of prosperity, while over 63% of women in rural
areas continue to live in chronic poverty; the choice to prevent one man
from making a bonus of R11 million, while over 51% of the population does
not enjoy the right to work.

The PAC welcomes the overarching goal of advancing social development and
reducing levels of inequality. However, rapid economic growth does not
automatically benefit the jobless and the rural people without an
appropriate distribution mechanism. The economic system of this country is
suffering from a systematic breakdown, but we are not willing to
acknowledge it. Under the current Budget and macroeconomic framework, we
will never achieve full employment. The implications of this are so
detrimental that it is imperative to formulate an alternative.

The Minister tells us that the answer is to grow small business. However,
small African businesses in communities across this country are being taken
over by big business. The local tuck shop is being invaded by Pick ’n Pay.
The street fruit sellers are being invaded by the Fruit and Veg City
franchise. Big business centralises, employs technology, rationalises and
sacks thousands of people.
Small business is not doing business. It is going out of business faster
than it is being created. Small business does not employ many people. It
relies on families to work for half-pay. What we need from this Budget is
direction on how to create livelihoods for our country. The point is: When
will the Budget support the creation of social entrepreneurs, scientists,
writers, artists, inventors and thinkers, and link that kind of work to
income as part of normal life in our country?

Economic growth is essential for our country. However, it is not a panacea
for poverty if the poor do not share in it. If it does not work for people;
if it does not serve the people; if it creates job insecurity and falling
wages, and if it does not create an adequate social security safety net for
the aged and children, we need an alternative model. We need economic
growth with social equity. This means addressing how economic growth is
generated - the pattern and rate of growth and who benefits from this.

South Africa does not have a financial deficit. There is no scarcity of
money. Money is not our problem. The fact that 12% - over R55 billion of
the 2005 Budget – has to go towards paying the odious apartheid debt is a
scandal in a country faced with deepening and chronic poverty.

Poverty eradication, inequality and a lack of redistribution of wealth
remain a defect on our country’s landscape. They pose the most serious
threat to the consolidation of democracy. The market has failed to achieve
significant redistribution. The PAC would welcome a broad-based
redistribution programme on behalf of the poor. This is imperative and
cannot be stalled forever.

Izwe lethu, hhayi labanye. Futhi-ke izwe lethu akulona idikazi ngeke libe
ngelawo wonke umuntu [Kwaphela isikhathi.] [Ihlombe.] [Our land, not for
others. Our land cannot just be for everybody.] [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Chair. All South Africans eagerly await
this time of the year as it is the time when our hon Minister of Finance
and his competent finance team unveils the best-suited Budget for our
economy with regard to operation, progress, development and advancement.

South Africa is home to approximately 46,6 million South Africans, as
estimated by Statistics SA. This population, hindered by the seriousness of
poverty, depends on a well-formulated Budget to release them from this
situation and open doors to better living conditions, prosperity and social
development. From the birth of our democracy, South Africa, under the
people’s governance, has managed to unshackle itself from the horrific
remains of the apartheid regime.

Today we stand subject to our ninth Budget in which, it appears, our hon
Minister of Finance is aiming to motivate South Africans to be self-
reliant. The Appropriation Bill, eagerly awaited by the various spheres of
government, delivers a comprehensive division of Votes. With regard to the
Appropriation Bill 2005, the MF observes the suitable division of funds
awarded in view of the needs for the further development and advancement of
South Africa. We acknowledge and approve the larger share of our national
Budget, 26%, being allocated to social development. We trust that this
investment in the impoverished areas will greatly free South Africa from
the biggest challenge of poverty.

The MF takes this opportunity to voice its discontent regarding this year’s
allocation for pensions and child grants. We firmly put our aged citizenry
on a pedestal for being the pioneers of our democracy who should be earning
a reasonable pension that would allow them to reap the benefits of their
hard work.

The child of South Africa needs to be provided for adequately, and the
allocated amount for this is not sufficient. Our old and young are of
primary importance to us, and because of the constraints of poverty the
responsibility is upon us to substantiate the Budget allocation to this
department.

Though crime levels have decreased in some areas, they have increased in
others. Minimal resources in manpower in the SAPS hinder our attacks on
crime prevention, deterrence and eradication. The Budget for 2005 serves to
correct this shortfall by increasing the number of police persons, and by
facilitating the maintenance and necessary construction of police stations,
courts and prisons.

Salaries and better management are also on the agenda. The MF hopes that
these funds shall be utilised adequately and that the progress that the
sector of safety and security has achieved will bring crime in South Africa
down significantly. We further call for the improved accessibility of the
SAPS for more rural areas and for persons who are geographically isolated.

Having Defence accounting for 10% of the Budget is substantiated, and
supported in view of our peacekeeping operations through the AU and the
PAP. Internationally, we are being condemned for our tiptoeing around the
Zimbabwe issue. Our larger responsibility is to Africa, and our commitment
to SADC, Nepad, the AU and the PAP requires intervention on the Zimbabwe
issue. Africa cannot allow human injustice on the continent ranging from
colonialism, apartheid and our own horrific past. Why do we dance to the
tune of an oppressor?

Provincial and local government appear to be a priority in this year’s
Budget allocation. The MF calls on the municipalities to welcome and
utilise allocations with determination, efficiency and confidence to
achieve effective results and development in the necessary areas. The needs
of communities vary, and the MF believes it is the responsibility of local
government to bring these needs to the table.

The National Treasury, with its firm aims of promoting economic and social
development as well as good governance, receives a suitable portion of 6%
of the national Budget.

An educated nation is a stronger nation. Our government is working hard to
attain equal, accessible education for all minors and adults. Many
policies, schemes and programmes have been endorsed to attain this. The
building of schools seeks to end the days of children learning under trees,
and the R7 billion for increasing teachers’ salaries and R776 million for
the National Student Financial Aid Scheme are all benefits that will assist
in attaining an educated South Africa.

The government’s commitment in developing and prioritising our
infrastructure is noted through Votes such as Transport and Communication
reflecting a gradual increase.

We applaud our Minister for introducing this Budget. The MF supports the
Appropriation Bill. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Chair, hon Minister, hon members of the House, the
Budget before us today was tabled in an environment of relatively low
inflation, improved business and consumer confidence, and a large tax
revenue windfall.

This has given the Minister space to announce a mildly expansionary Budget.
Despite limited growth in some sectors of the economy due to the strong
rand, the economic prospects for 2005-06 remain positive, provided that the
global economy remains healthy and crude oil prices stay affordable. We
hope that the downside risks associated with a pro-cyclical stimulatory
Budget do not preclude a very necessary loosening of monetary policy.

The DA welcomes the set of tax breaks for small business and the 1%
reduction in the corporate tax rate. But we do wonder if these cuts are
sufficient to make our tax system truly investor-friendly. For example, we
believe that the net effective corporate tax rate is still too high. And in
this regard we appeal to the hon Minister to implement the phasing-out of
the secondary tax on companies. This tax is generally not well understood
by foreign investors - allow me to finish, hon Minister - and may act as a
deterrent to fixed foreign direct investment. [Interjections.]

The DA also notes with regret that this particular Budget lacks any further
relaxation of exchange controls. It is our opinion that the full abolition
of exchange controls, including administrative requirements, will encourage
foreign and domestic direct investment and will provide currency stability
by allowing the rand to reach its true level.

While we welcome the increase in the tax threshold to R35 000, we feel that
the retention of the 18% on the taxation of retirement funds is deplorable.
What this means is that a large number of retirement-funded members are
still subject to double taxation. Thousands of pensioners experience
profound difficulties in meeting ever-increasing medical and housing
expenses, even as the Minister continues to renege on his commitment to
Parliament to table legislation on the taxation of retirement funds.

The Minister’s own Budget Review reports that our savings rate has dropped
from 16,2% of our gross domestic product in 2003 to only 14,7% of GDP in
2004. This situation can only be rectified if government immediately cuts
taxation on retirement funds by a third each year for three years.

Alternative revenue sources for the potential loss of the income presently
derived by revenue are available from the broad set of efficiency gains,
consolidations and cuts in the wasteful expenditure detailed in the DA’s
alternative budget, which we presented in the week before the Budget.

Our alternative budget also contains a proposal to abolish capital gains
tax, which we feel should have been included in the Budget before us today.
This form of taxation is costly and difficult to administer. In addition,
the recent sharp and sustained increases in residential property prices
have had a negative effect on income derived by the lower end of the
market. This is highlighted by the fact that the average price of
residential property in many suburbs is in excess of R1 million, the CGT
threshold.

The main contributors to South Africa’s lacklustre economic growth
performance are our chronically low rates of foreign and domestic
investment. The broad base of tax cuts I have proposed today will go some
way towards turning this situation around.

While this approach will result in reduced government revenue in the short
term, we believe that the long-run growth and investment effects will more
than make up for this revenue loss. For example, Ireland, and indeed some
of our neighbouring trade partners, have lowered corporate tax rates to
attract new investment and, in the process, have increased their tax take,
and I hope the Minister takes note of this. Such bold steps are required to
. . . [Time expired.][Applause.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Chairperson, members of the House and South Africans
outside this House, this is a people’s Budget.

Yebo isabelo sezimali sabantu. [Yes, it is a Budget for the people.]

Ja, dit is ’n Begroting vir die mense. [Yes, it is a Budget for the
people.]

It is a redistributive Budget and a Budget that bridges the barriers
between the first and the second economy. Indeed it is a reaffirmation of
the Freedom Charter and its vision of a country in which all of its people,
especially the poor, share in our wealth.

Interestingly enough, it is quite clear that the persuasive powers of this
Budget and its optimism have proved contagious, to the point where we see a
welcome turnaround from the DA as expressed by Ian Davidson in the House
today.

Although subsequently we had a number of qualifying comments, the ANC
welcomes this expansionary Budget, a Budget that reflects the Government’s
commitment to three prioritised challenges: poverty, unemployment, and the
stimulation of productivity and investment from the private sector.

Growth, sustainable development and equity are identified as the key
instruments that will be used to implement the outputs and achieve the
outcomes of this redistributive Budget. Indeed, what this Budget
demonstrates and what the enthusiasm with which it has been grasped
demonstrates is the resurgence of Africa and the spirit of hope that is
beginning to prevail in South Africa and embrace all, even those who
prevaricate on the margins of liberalism.
The priorities reaffirm the call of the Freedom Charter for all people in
South Africa to work together to bring about social and economic justice in
which all people share in the prosperity of the country, a country in which
race, sex and religion do not determine a person’s potential.

Indeed, this Budget directs resources, human and financial, directs
performance and drives delivery. Public Enterprises is poised to fuel
massive infrastructural development in Eskom and Transnet. Simultaneously,
R3 billion earmarked for the Expanded Public Works Programme targets the
unemployed and focuses on labour-intensive employment.

Emerging entrepreneurs benefit from several measures, such as less
paperwork, generous tax cuts and increased financial access to finance and
skills upgrading. Private sector investment is stimulated and indeed even
bond traders get a lift.

The actual, maintained low inflation is extremely important in ensuring the
protection of the wages of workers. The 60% investment in Social Services
is supported by R160 billion for new investments to fuel economic growth.
The redistribution role of the Freedom Charter certainly finds expression
in this Budget. But, what are some of these measures that will spread South
Africa’s economic growth benefits? How will the poor benefit?

Chairperson, this is how it will be done.

Kwezemfundo othisha bathole R6,9 billion amaphoyisa athola R4,2 billion
wamaholo. Izindlu zithole R2 billion. [In Education teachers receive R6,9
billion and the police receive R4,2 billion for salaries. Housing receives
R2 billion.]

Land, which is a critical issue in any country that has previously been
colonised, gets R6 billion to finalise rural land restitution. Community
infrastructure gets a significant increase in financial resources to target
water and sanitation, clinics, multipurpose centres, schools, police
stations and roads.

The roll-out of basic services through local government is accelerated and
there are increased funds for in-house capacity development.

Ten spyte van dié uitdagings in ons land het die ANC-regering bewys dat ons
die politieke wil het om ’n nuwe Suid Afrika vir almal te bou.

Die arm mense sal met hierdie Begroting weet dat hulle ook ’n plek in die
son het en dat daar ’n regering is wat deur middel van hulle optrede bewys
dat hulle vir al die mense omgee. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[In spite of these challenges in our country the ANC government has proved
that we have the political will to build a new South Africa for all.

This Budget will assure the poor people that they also have a place in the
sun and that there is a government which has proved by means of its actions
that it cares for all the people.]

Unlike a few market Jeremiahs, I believe the credibility developed under a
course chartered by the ANC-led government with Manuel and his shipmates
navigating with discipline and determination, continues, with this Budget,
to steer us safely through global financial storms that prevail.

The upward revisions of the growth of the Gross Domestic Product, or GDP,
from about 3% to 4% have contributed to increased revenue collections and
could hardly be considered a windfall when it was planned.

It was planned because the economy was well managed and revenue collections
were robust, as has already been stated clearly in this House. These
revenue collections have also led to a much smaller than expected deficit
to the GDP ratio in the current fiscal year.

This configuration strengthened where financial consistency has also
resulted in an increased ratings agency upgrade. Such an encouraging and
enabling economic environment surpasses most emerging countries and indeed
in some areas challenges some of the developed countries. For example, the
steady increase in social expenditure from a constrained public purse and
also the decades of impoverishment of the majority challenge social
governments such as Sweden and Britain who never came from that legacy.

This year’s Budget also targets the critical challenge of the skills
mismatch with the growing economy.

Isabelo sezimali sikhombisa ubuntu. Lokhu kukhonjiswa ukukhuliswa kwe-
social grant. Inhloso ukuthi kukhuphuke amaholo abantu bonke abampofu
ngokuba bafunde amakhono emisebenzi. Lokhu sikubona ngezimali ezifakwa
ekufundiseni amakhono emisebenzi. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraph
follows.)

[This Budget shows ubuntu. The increase in the social grant shows this. The
intention is to increase the grant for all destitute people so that they
can acquire skills. Our preparedness in this regard is shown through the
monies that we invest in training people.]

To raise the profile and capacity of this sector to respond to the skills
development, R1,5 billion will be invested in the recapitalisation
programme plus R50 million for planning and other targeted interventions.
The focus will be on scarce and emerging skills necessary for this rapidly
changing economy. Training, with all due respect even to my own church,
will no longer focus on Bible studies and other things. But, training
informed by national and provincial requirements, regular reports on skills
shortages and labour market trends, will ensure that enlightenment in
specific areas assists colleges to be more responsive to the requirements
of a changing economy. Access to funds will be directly linked to business
plans to meet these objectives.

Our real growth averages about 5,5%. [Interjections.] Indeed it does, and
those who need a calculator, please let me know. Not since the Second World
War has economic growth hit such high levels. But unlike that period when
so many resources were used for so few people . . . [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Why are you pointing at us?

Ms J L FUBBS: Because I hear a note of confusion with the hon Mr Davidson.
Now such increased resources will be spread to many more people,
particularly the most vulnerable, namely the poor, children, youth, the
unemployed and the pensioners.

Indeed we have given people hope in the face of challenges to which others
offer a vision factored in with vouchers, a solution resolved on paper
without any realistic appreciation that this is South Africa, Afrique du
Sud and not Europe or Britain. [Applause.]
This Budget expresses the ANC’s vision for a better life in an unambiguous
commitment of resources.

The revolutionary poet concretises the dreams of the people in saying,
“yesterday we had a dream.” Today these dreams have become a reality and
been given fresh expression in a Budget through macroeconomic interventions
of the state which our market cannot give and will never be able to give,
as Sweden has found out, as Britain has found out and as Bush himself is
finding out. [Applause.] Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.]

I want to say - seeing that I have two or three minutes left - that Steve
Biko, with whom I was at university in Natal when he was studying at the
medical university there, and perhaps some of you do not know who he is,
said: “Ours is a . . . society whose sacred tradition is that of sharing”
and I say  . . .

An HON MEMBER: Ja, tannie. [Yes, auntie.]

Ms J L FUBBS: I am not your “tannie”, I am a grandmother.

And I say not the exploitive tendencies coupled with the overt arrogance
that often resides in the hearts of some – and I emphasise “of some” - who
espouse capitalism.
Yes, I also want to say that the ANC government with this Budget that we
fully support and I fully support, creates employment and has the capacity
to overturn the nightmare of the past, deliberate discriminations. But of
course I also say to all of us here in Parliament, all of us here in this
House: We have a set of Estimates of Expenditure. It is our duty, the duty
of everyone in this House, to monitor how well that expenditure is felt in
the community.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: Madam Chairperson, the DA welcomes the Budget’s emphasis
on small business. However, the current strategy of small business
development as reflected in the Budget assumes the problem is merely or
mostly financial. I would want to submit today that the problem is much
deeper than that. Actually the problem - if there is any one particular
problem - is insufficiency or lack of entrepreneurship.

On entrepreneurship, South Africa lags behind many countries even on this
continent. Now compared with Brazil, it does even worse. What should
therefore be done? The government should take measures to develop
entrepreneurship as a matter of urgency. Its entrepreneurship policy - the
one that we recommend, at least - should aim mainly at removing obstacles
that currently stand in the way of the entrepreneur. In this regard the DA
welcomes the government’s plan to reduce the administrative burden that
small businesses currently face. We welcome that plan. We also welcome
government’s plan to deregulate the labour market for small businesses. The
President even gave clear timeframes for doing this.

We are, however, dismayed and in fact concerned when we hear contradictory
statements made by Ministers of state, by ANC MPs and by high government
officials regarding the much-needed deregulation of the labour market for
small business. The DA urges the government to move boldly with resolve and
determination and not waver at this point in time. For what is really at
stake is the chance to grow the economy and provide jobs for millions of
black people. The issue is that important. Indeed, every piece of research
conducted by independent boards in this country has pointed to labour
market rigidities and the administrative burden currently faced by small
businesses as the main impediments to growth and development.

We therefore urge government to take the matter seriously and not be misled
or swayed by certain sections of the ruling party. With a deregulated
labour market and a significantly lessened administrative burden than we
currently face, we guarantee, I guarantee and every economist understands
that we will unshackle the spirit and practice of entrepreneurship. What
would then follow? What would be the consequences of this? We would have
higher rates of growth, we would have lower rates of unemployment and we
would have increased economic welfare for all.

In conclusion, the DA supports the Budget, but recommends that the
government heed the call of the entrepreneur in whom alone - and I repeat,
in whom alone - lies the solution to our growth and unemployment problem.
The question is: Would government accept this challenge? When we hear
noises contradicting, threatening to scuttle a well-needed reform
programme, we in the DA can only stand behind government at this point in
time and ask government to remain or stand firm and carry through just like
it has done with other policies – that is those regarding macroeconomic
stabilisation. If this is done, I guarantee that we will go a long way
towards bridging the gap between the so-called two economies – the first
and the second. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms L M MASHIANE: Madam Deputy Chairperson, Minister, hon members, ladies
and gentlemen, I rise to support the Budget by Finance Minister Trevor
Manuel. It is a Budget that reflects benefits for all South Africans, but
of utmost importance it is a Budget that deals with the aspirations of the
majority of our people, a Budget for the poor.

Kgaratlho ya go tlhama ditiro le go tlisa tshireletsego go baagi botlhe ba
Aforika Borwa le tsweletso ya diphetogo mo dikunong le mo moruong, e
lebisitse kwa go fetoleng ga leruri ga puso e e neng e tlhaola batho, mme e
ba beela kwa thoko, go isa kwa go e e leng ya batho mme e ba akaretsa
botlhe jaaka e le Maaforika Borwa.
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[The fight to create employment and security for all South African
citizens, the ongoing recovery in production and in the economic sector led
to the transformation from a government which marginalised people, to one
that belongs to the people and which ensures integration and further
reaching out to all South Africans.]

In analysing the Freedom Charter, Umrabulo No. 11 says:

  The state shall recognise the right and duty of all to work and to draw
  full unemployment benefits. Men and women of all races shall receive
  equal pay for equal work.

And goes further to say:

  The use of child labour, the housing of male workers in single men’s
  compounds, the system whereby workers on wine farms are paid tots of wine
  as part payment on their wages, contract labour – all these pernicious
  practices shall be abolished by a victorious revolutionary government.

How far have we gone to achieve these ideals in these 10 years after
celebrating our democracy? The 14th of February marked the end of a five-
day international conference on child labour in the Indian city of
Hyderabad, which was organised by the International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions. This city was chosen because India houses an estimated 60
million of nearly 250 million child labourers worldwide. It is reported
that one in every six children in the world aged between 5 and 17 is now
exploited as a worker.

Children labour in mines and quarries, in homes, in carpet and garment
factories, usually for little or no pay, are frequently malnourished and
often subjected to physical and sexual abuse. South Africa is not immune.
In South Africa it is a criminal offence to employ a child under the age of
15 except if you have a permit from the department to employ children in
the performing arts. According to the Act children aged between 15 and 18
may not be employed to do work that is inappropriate for their age or work
that places them at risk.

Child labour is still rife during the harvesting periods in the North West.
It doesn’t stop because parents have no choice but to allow it for them to
keep their underpaying jobs and a place to sleep. Recognising that child
labour is to a great extent caused by poverty and that the long-term
solution lies in sustained economic growth leading to social progress, in
particular poverty alleviation and free basic education, one of the
interventions by the North West government is through easy accessibility of
educational resources with the Farm Child Project, which identified 10
routes passing through the farm areas and deployed buses to assist learners
attending schools located in the farms. Also, 197 schools have been reached
in terms of bicycle projects.
The North West, like most provinces, is faced with a problem of farmers who
are still violating the Extension of Security of Tenure Act. Farmworkers
are still evicted with nowhere to go. This behaviour is still prevalent
near the Hartebeespoort area and Skeerpoort.

For the farmworkers, domestics, security guards and others in this group
who have for years been paid slave wages, the prescribed minimum wages give
them an opportunity to help their families, especially the children, to
escape poverty. These achievements notwithstanding, we are still seeing
patterns of behaviour by certain employers that can only be understood in
the context of a cold war against the transformation programme of the
democratically elected government.

There is an increasing tendency on the part of certain farmers to victimise
workers as a response to laws and regulations aimed at ensuring work and
security for workers. For example, when the minimum wage law was passed we
saw the dismissal of farmworkers and others in this category. For example,
we in the North West are beginning to hear Grain South Africa argue that
they are finding grain production unsustainable because of minimum wages
for farmworkers. We still see the majority of farmers violating the
Extension of Security of Tenure Act. Farmworkers are evicted with nowhere
else to go. This situation is still prevalent in Ventersdorp, Lichtenburg
and other strongholds of the Transvaal Agricultural Union.

The 2005 Budget focuses on key areas such as creating more job
opportunities, fighting poverty and inequality, reducing levels of crime
and extending basic services and infrastructure to marginalised
communities, including the provision of decent housing and agricultural
land. The future and historical growth rates in the economic services are
above the average consolidated growth rate and reflect the emphasis placed
on supporting for growth, mainly through increased infrastructure spending.
The official growth rate of unemployment has decreased from 31,2% in March
2003 to 27,8% in March 2004.

The Labour Force Survey findings show that there has been a steady increase
in employment across all sectors of the economy, broadly in line with the
average rate of economic trade. South Africa faces a severe skills shortage
but has a surplus of unskilled and semiskilled labour, hence the need for
labour-intensive investments, which tend to create more jobs for unskilled
and semiskilled workers. Allocations given to the Department of Agriculture
for the Microagricultural Financing Scheme and to the Department of Trade
and Industry for the Apex Fund, the tax treatment for small businesses,
many of which are engaged in labour-intensive production and service
activities, are some of the examples of policy measures by government to
address this skewed supply of skilled and unskilled labour.

A lot of work and commitment from different sectors is still needed, so as
to address skills shortages, for example Setas are still not supporting
training enough and there are serious blockages in the system that need to
be addressed. However, government budget allocations address this by real
increases in education allocations over the MTEF, particularly the R1
billion for the recapitalisation of the FET colleges, the R776 million for
the NSFAS and R6,9 billion to improve salaries of teachers.

In creating work and alleviating poverty so as to secure a better life for
all, our government has embarked on a large-scale job creation project,
which is the Expanded Public Works Programme. The EPWP and other
initiatives such as the National Youth Service Programme have provided
short-term employment. However, the challenge still remains to assist
people in attaining permanent formal-sector employment.

The average increase in nominal remuneration in the formal sector moderated
from 9,6% in 2002 to 8,7% in 2003 and 7,9% in the second quarter of 2004.
One of these targets was for the EPWP to create, at least, work
opportunities coupled with training within the first five years of the
programme. To date good progress has been made towards meeting that target.
In the first six months of the programme up to September 2004, at least
R1,5 billion had been spent on implementation of 1 518 projects and to
create 82 200 gross work opportunities.

The EPWP is well on its way to achieving a target of at least     130 000
work opportunities in its first year. As we are about to celebrate the
first anniversary of the programme in April, the challenge is to ensure . .
. [Interjections.]

In conclusion, we are honouring the Freedom Charter with this Budget. I
thank you. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Hon Chair, this time you don’t have to worry too much. I’m
not going to have a fighting spirit. I will have another type of debate
today.

At the first instance, I would like to congratulate the hon Joan Fubbs on
what technically here in Parliament has been her maiden speech. But of
course she comes from the Gauteng legislature. Well done, Joan!

However, with regard to the Freedom Charter there are so many good things
in it. But one should also bear in mind that some of the aspects need clear
revision, and it is today outdated. So, I think you can perform a valuable
task in assisting the Minister to also address those aspects that are
flying in the face of the hon Minister.

I must differ with my good friend, the hon Martin Stephens of the UDM with
regard to his emphasis on company tax, particularly since these companies
are the backbone and are really the income generators and job creation
generators for South Africa, and we should do everything to encourage in
this field certain of these aspects to come to the fore.

The hon Minister of Finance must be congratulated on a balanced Budget that
particularly focuses on growth. The IFP has no hesitation in supporting
this Budget, and we will vote for it. We have also known and recognised the
hon Minister Manuel as a good juggler, and this time he made sure that his
budgeting balls stayed in the air. [Laughter.]

I have previously said that the economic policy of the ANC is moving closer
to the philosophy of the IFP, and I have encouraged them to continue to
steal more and more of our economic policy. The more you steal the IFP
ideas, the better it will be for our country. Should the hon Minister
Manuel wish to join the IFP, he would be sincerely welcome, and I would
gladly make a place for him and even nominate him for the position of
President of South Africa. But please note, hon Minister: definitely not as
President of the IFP.

Of course, the hon Minister also had a special windfall in having more than
R11 billion of surplus monies from the South African Revenue Service
available, even before he started dishing out his goodwill bonuses. This
R11 billion was a result of improved controls at the South African Revenue
Service, but also because of a substantial increase in value added tax,
mostly resulting from the increase in the GDP of the country.

A proportionate increase of VAT in terms of the increase in growth rate and
GDP is a clear monitor of taxation, good governance and effective tax
recovery. Our success story with the increase in VAT is in sharp contrast
with our neighbour Namibia where, despite substantial growth, VAT
technically remained the same over the years. This is a clear indication
that there is something drastically wrong with the revenue collection and
controls of Namibia. I hope they will take a leaf from our revenue service
and follow suit.

The IFP will support all efforts by the Minister to effect an increase and
acceleration in economic growth. The IFP firmly believes in the principle
of the multiplier effect, which is being created by major government
projects. The massive upgrading of the Transnet infrastructure and the
expansion projects of Eskom over the medium to long term will further
stimulate the economy and result in continued growth.

Should the relative lower interest rates be maintained or even further
decreased, this would further encourage local investors to invest in new
enterprises and to expand their existing businesses. This, to me, is a
prerogative before massive real foreign direct investment would flow to
South Africa. We cannot expect foreigners to invest in our country when our
own people are hesitant to invest.

Government should introduce a carrot and stick development strategy in
order to encourage South African investors and entrepreneurs to establish
more factories and thereby start an industrial revolution, rather than
giving support to investors for the building of lucrative shopping centres.
Shopping centres, to my mind, are just a recirculation of existing wealth,
whereas with the industrial development comes the creation of new wealth,
which we so desperately need.

If we just look at the iron ore situation - and we are grateful about the
announcement of Transnet and Kumba with regard to the Saldanha-Sishen line
- isn’t there, with regard to beneficiation, the possibility that we can
encourage China to actually set up factories at this particular point? Or
isn’t there a possibility that we can at least try and melt up some of our
iron ore, and even with pig iron - just to get pig iron out of the country?
By that way of beneficiation, at least we can create thousands and
thousands of jobs.

This brings me to the success also of the foreign exchange amnesty period
during which South Africans could declare their illegal foreign investments
and repatriate some of these investments. The so-called penalty of these
amnesty transactions enabled the Minister to allocate billions of rands to
special housing projects, whilst billions of rands flowed back into the
country.

However, Mr Minister, the fact is that many people at the time did not
trust the amnesty process or were just negligent in missing the deadlines.
Furthermore, South Africa today is a much better and lucrative investment
haven. The stability and improvement of the currency value of the rand
makes it nonsensical for investors to keep their investments abroad. To me,
South Africa is an investment haven and should be a priority for domestic
as well as foreign investments.

We also support the Homecoming Campaign. Hon Minister, I’m confident that,
should you grant a second amnesty period or window of opportunity, your
expectations would be exceeded and even more foreign investments than
previously would be repatriated.

But you also said no the first time I suggested the amnesty. And you
introduced it. So thank you. Maybe we will see it in the future. I also
feel sympathetic towards you, Minister, with regard to the fact that so
soon after a splendid Budget the positive aspects of the Budget are doused
by the tremendous spiralling of world crude oil prices. And you’ve got
nothing to do with it, I know. But that has resulted in unheard-of petrol
and diesel prices in South Africa. Fortunately, the favourable currency
level of the rand against particularly the US dollar has softened the
financial blow against South Africa. I still believe, however, that fuel
prices in South Africa have increased unrealistically and progressively
against the rand value.

The IFP fully supports the greater emphasis that you have placed on
agriculture, and particularly assistance to small-scale farmers. The IFP
have, over many years, proposed the development of small-scale sugar cane,
maize and vegetable and fruit farming. We in the IFP term this our “Green
Revolution”. And may the Green Revolution of the IFP live on! Viva the
Green Revolution! Viva IFP! [Applause.]

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, I would like to thank hon Bekker for suggesting a
review of the Charter but this is done every five years and the voters
always give it the go-ahead. As for the IFP’s economic policy, that still
has to be seen. I don’t think you will be able to produce anything before
the ANC, just like the establishment of your party itself. Regarding the
amnesty, I am sure the hon Minister will talk to you outside this Chamber
because I think you are speaking for yourself.

Once again, we are presented with an opportunity to debate what the
Minister of Finance calls “the people’s Budget for a decade of hope and
rising confidence of our people”. You rightly put in isiZulu: Thokola
themba, amathunzi ayewukela. [Thokola, take heart, shadows are lifting.]
Without any shadow of doubt, this is an expansionary Budget in real terms.

In the state of the nation address the President reminded us of our
objectives that should guide our agenda as we move forward in this decade.
Those objectives are the following: the first one is that of entrenching
democracy; secondly, eradicating poverty through a growing first economy
and a transformed second economy; thirdly, creating sustainable
livelihoods; fourthly, securing the safety and security of all South
Africans; fifthly, building an efficient democratic state that truly serves
the people’s interests; and lastly, contributing to the African Renaissance
and a better life for the peoples of Africa and the world.

A considerable amount of progress has been recorded in respect of the above
and our people are beginning to reap the benefits of a stable economy in a
democratic dispensation that was called for by the people’s congress in
1955, in Kliptown, when the people’s charter was drawn up. One of the
clauses of this Freedom Charter proclaims that the people shall share in
the country’s wealth.

Our mandate as the Joint Budget Committee in Parliament directs that, among
other things, we consider that the allocations made in this appropriation
are broadly in keeping with the government’s objectives. Indeed, the ANC’s
commitment to the ideal of the Freedom Charter is abundantly demonstrated,
especially in the following aspects: through the economy that has been
growing impressively for the benefit of all, as opposed to the view that is
always espoused by the DA of just 6%, without paying attention to the
equitable distribution of these resources; over the years, social security
has been rising as a percentage of government expenditure, and caters for
the poorest of the poor; and the impressive economic growth recorded in the
past years has also translated into a growing social wage for the
vulnerable, which is currently at R956 per month for the poorest 40% of
households, according to the latest study.

The first economy has accelerated as a result of a conducive economic
environment, particularly the tertiary sector, which has recorded
sustainable growth in fixed capital formation. Transformation of the second
economy also is receiving attention in the form of broad-based black
economic empowerment and incentives that seek to make it easier to enter
the mainstream and promote emerging entrepreneurs through a preferential
policy framework.

The announced exemption of small business from onerous bureaucracy and the
relaxation of the tax threshold for small business will go a long way in
levelling the economic landscape in favour of the small, medium and micro
enterprises. It is also envisaged that the Small Enterprise Development
Agency will be established soon to improve government support for small and
medium enterprise development.
Reducing the cost of doing business is key to promoting investment that is
capable of creating employment opportunities. Steps have already been taken
to liberalise telecommunications, and this should bring down the costs for
consumers and the industry. It is also envisaged that by May 2005 the
review of performance practices in state-owned enterprises will be
finalised. Creating sustainable livelihoods through promotion of
agriculture at subsistence and emerging levels, and graduating to
commercial levels is also being accelerated.

The expansion of access to small and micro credit for the formerly excluded
through the following instrument is also applauded: the agricultural credit
scheme that has R1 billion capital for operation by May 2005. The provinces
have also received R100 million to implement the farmer support programme.
The Apex Fund, whose launch was delayed, is now operational. A Bill on co-
operatives will also be submitted and will be serving before Parliament
soon.

Let me highlight some of the main spending changes, although they have also
been mentioned by most of the members here. Amongst those changes are: the
additional R23,3 billion which is for the increase of social security
grants and shows how the ANC cares for the vulnerable; R6 billion allocated
to finalise land restitution, which is the transfer of physical assets to
the poor; R5 billion to improve levels of remuneration and increase police
numbers in order to promote effective policing; R6,9 billion for teachers’
salaries; R2 billion for the new housing strategy and R3 billion for
related community infrastructure; R1,7 billion for water, sanitation and
other municipal infrastructure; R3 billion for public transport investment
and roads - partly related to the 2010 Soccer World Cup as well; R3,7
billion for the delivery of municipal services; R7,4 billion to step up
education and health spending in provinces; R776 million more to the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme, which opens the doors of learning
for all; R1 billion to revitalise further education and training colleges
in order to address the skills mismatch and hence structural unemployment;
and R400 million to enhance the infrastructure of the public broadcaster,
the SA Broadcasting Corporation.

What do all these spending changes mean to the ordinary man or woman in the
remote rural area of Ntunjambili or Nkandla? They mean many things but to
me they mean that there will be more social grants to the deserving
beneficiaries.

Zizoletha amanzi ahlanzekile kuyo yonke imiphakathi yakithi; ukubuyiselwa
kwemihlaba kubantu bakithi nokuthuthukiswa kwayo le mihlaba; amathuba
okungena kwezohwebo njengabanikazi, hhayi njengezisebenzi njengoba
bekwenzeka ngaphambilini; imigwaqo izokwakhiwa nakwandlwana imbala;
ukuphepha okuzoqinisekiswa uma amaphoyisa andiswa nezimo zawo zokusebenza
zibhekelwa; abasebenzi bakahulumeni abakhuthalele ukusiza abantu; ukwakhiwa
kwamagumbi amaningi okufundela ukuze zonke izingane zifundele endlini;
nosonkontileka abancane abazothuthuka bathole imisebenzi kumathenda
kahulumeni.

Konke lokhu kudinga ukuba imiphakathi isukume ibambisane nohulumeni ukuze
kufezeke, nekati lisuke eziko. Uthe-ke uNgqongqoshe uma eyisho le ndaba:
Thokola themba, amathunzi ayewukela. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[That will provide for the provision of clean water to communities, the
restitution of land to our people, the servicing of that land, the opening
of ownership opportunities, and not having to work the land as workers, as
was the case before. Roads will be built even in the poorest area. Security
measures can be intensified if the numbers of police officers are increased
and their conditions of service are taken care of.  Public servants who are
determined to serve the people will be employed.  Adequate classrooms will
be built so that all the pupils will learn in a home environment. The
emerging contractors should be awarded tenders from the government
tendering programmes.

In order to achieve all this, the communities should work together with the
government, and this will also help to alleviate poverty. When the Minister
spoke about this he said, ”Be consoled, the dream is about to come true”.]

The Joint Budget Committee is therefore satisfied that these allocations
are broadly in keeping with government priorities and looks forward to a
healthy engagement when departments engage with portfolio committees on
their readiness to implement their programmes. Our main task from now on is
to be vigilant in our oversight. We will no longer tolerate and accept the
failure of departments to spend according to their strategic plans, and
noncompliance with the Public Finance Management Act to the detriment of
our service delivery to the people of South Africa.

We are encouraged by the government’s undertaking for a deliberate
initiative to improve government’s capacity. To this end, the directors-
general will submit to Cabinet a review of how government is functioning
and proposals to increase government’s capacity to implement and mobilise
the Public Service in order to speed up social transformation.

We are also pleased that local government will receive the same attention
in terms of capacity through Project Consolidate, and this will assist 136
municipalities that are at risk to put their house in order. It’s also
envisaged that the new Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill will
serve before Parliament in due course to promote better integration among
the three spheres of government, and to align spatial development
strategies and planning. We look forward to the completion of a plan for
improved monitoring and evaluation across government by June, and its
implementation will be phased in.

All these initiatives will not change our people’s lives unless we, as
elected representatives, play our role both in Parliament and in our
constituencies across party-political lines.

This Budget has been made possible because of the conscientious efforts of
all South Africans over the past decade and puts the country on a sound
footing to tackle the challenges we still face by effectively using the
resources at our disposal. The ANC calls upon all South Africans, in
whatever sector they may find themselves, to use this Budget as a basis for
further building a people’s contract to create work and fight poverty. The
ANC supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you, Chairperson. The national Budget should be the most
important job creation tool in government’s armoury, yet the glaring hole
in this year’s Budget is that it fails to break the back of the chronic 40%
unemployment crisis or adequately address the 500 000 skilled job vacancies
that even Treasury concedes is one of the major constraints to economic
growth and job creation.

The National Skills Authority and the Labour Minister boast that they have
exceeded the five-year target to enrol more than 80 000 people in Seta
learnerships, but it remains a drop in the ocean compared to the 8 million
in the unemployment queue and the skills deficit of 500 000.

Research shows that as few as 14% of the 80 000-plus learners are actually
completing their programmes, with even fewer finding jobs afterwards. Less
than 30% of firms paying the skills levy actually had grants disbursed to
them, and more than 80% of grants paid are to entities other than SMMEs.

So let us be frank: the Seta system has minimal potential to materially
plug our skills gap. It costs R3,2 billion a year but it is unable to
deliver the knockout blow to the skills crisis. Even if they did manage to
spend their training budgets, Setas would still not reach the majority of
would-be learners. Last year alone, they failed to spend nearly R750
million, yet this year’s Budget allocates them R4 billion more. That’s a
lot of conferences and videotaping, even at Gallagher Estate rates. If the
Setas can’t or won’t spend the money, then you need to be able to step in
and do it for them, Minister, and that means amending the Skills
Development Act, which currently ties the Skills Development Levy solely to
the Setas.

The Democratic Alliance will shortly table a Private Member’s Bill to
change this, and free up funding for targeted skills training initiatives.
What we need is a budget that provides incentives for job creation and
skills development, rather than penalties for not carrying these out; a
budget that delivers tax breaks to companies and individual households that
encourages them to create permanent employment, and targeted interventions
that grow our skills base through effective education and training, and
bursary opportunity voucher programmes as incentives for employers to
shoulder the burden.

Scrap the Seta system in favour of an opportunity voucher and tax rebate
system that enhances skills development, encourages businesses to employ
more labour, and assists young people to obtain work experience and
training, start more small businesses or further their studies by reducing
the cost of any one of these options. Combined with the tax deduction of
150% of the first R2000 per month of every new employee’s salary, this will
create an environment where business are encouraged not only to employ more
workers, but to train and develop them to meet the future skills needs of
the business. Backed by the labour law reform for SMMEs promised by
President Mbeki but subsequently refuted by the Minister of Labour, this is
the way to solve our skills and unemployment crisis.

Labour and Education also need to resolve their turf war over the National
Qualifications Framework, which is now three years overdue. The R22 billion
allocated to skills development via the Setas and NSF over the next five
years will be largely wasted unless the skills opportunity net is
substantially widened and statutory amendments are made to relax the
dedication linkage between Setas and the Skills Development Levy.

Holding multimillion rand conferences at Gallagher Estate might make the
front pages of the national media, but it does little to help get South
Africa skilled and working. This Budget does achieve much, but where it
matters most, to the unskilled and unemployed, it fails to offer the kind
of solutions and hope that it so easily could do.

In conclusion, I want to respond to the hon Rob Davies’ ridiculous
allegations. If he took the trouble to remove his blinkers for a second to
read about the DA’s other tax initiatives, which include R2,3 billion worth
of direct tax cuts designed to encourage employment, R2,4 billion to
stimulate investment, and R1 billion to promote tertiary education and
fight crime, I think he’d sing another tune. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: Deputy Chairperson, various Premiers, hon members,
comrades, I just want to respond, firstly, to the member of Parliament who
was here. I want to respond by saying that the Setas are here to stay. If
your youth, your women or your target groups in your party are highly
skilled, ours are not skilled the way we want them to be. [Applause.] So
the Setas are here to stay.

Njengobe nyalo sesingena esigabeni sesibili seminyaka lelishumi satfola
inkhululeko, inkhulumo yami yalamuhla itawuhlonipha bonkhe bomake emhlabeni
wonkhe jikelele. Mhlazane tingu 8 kuMashi 1975 emave amhlabuhlangene
avumelana nga ngelethu, kutsi lelilanga kube lilanga lekuhlonipha
umzabalazo wekukhululeka kwabomake emhlabeni wonkhe, loku lokutsiwa
pheceleti International Women’s Day. Ngitawuphindza futsi ngihloniphe
bomake bekucala lababa bavukuti bangena ematfunjini emhlaba bawuvukuta
[women miners]. (Translation of siSwati paragraph follows.)

[As we enter this second phase of our 10 years of freedom, my speech is
going to honour all the women of the world. On 8 March 1975 the UN agreed
that this day be the day to celebrate the struggle of women’s liberation
throughout the world, which is called International Women’s Day. I will
also honour the first women who went into the bowels of the earth and
involved themselves in mining.]

These are women who started in companies that dealt with our roads and in
areas that were regarded as male dominated. I refer here to women-dominated
companies, such as the South African Women in Construction, or SAWIC, and
the South African Women in Mining Association, or SAWIMA, which are
contributing in building economic growth for women, in particular our rural
women.

Somlomo, singu ANC siyevelana kakhulu netihlobo nebangani labashiywe bobabe
labangubona bebondla emakhaya abo kulenhlekelele lenkhulu kangaka
leyentekile yekudzilika kwemigodzi kuletimayini letimbili. Ngiphindze futsi
ngihloniphe bafelokati bemaphoyisa netintsandzane, bafelokati labasele
dzengwane emvakwetimphi temibango, bafelokati netintsandzane labaswele
batali ngenca yetingoti temigwaco, bafelokati netintsandzane labafelwa
ngulabatsandzekako babo ngekuhlaselwa ligciwane lengculaza, ngibuye
ngihloniphe nalabakhubatekile kanye nalabadzala. Ngiko nje ngetfula
lenkhulumo yami ngiyicondzanisa nekuhlonipha bona ngobe bonkhe batindlalifa
takulebhajethi.


Somlomo, kusukela kudzala bomake ngibo lababesembili ekuwagcineni
nasekwabeni emafa emindeni yabo. Ngibo lababeneligalelo ekwabeni emaphakelo
etimali emasontfweni nakubomasingcwabane. (Translation of siSwati
paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, as the ANC we sympathise with the relatives and friends who
have lost fathers, their breadwinners, in the disaster  when these two
mines collapsed. Let me also honour the widows who were left destitute due
to faction fights, the orphans who lost their parents due to road
accidents, the widows and orphans who lost their loved ones due to
HIV/Aids, and the disabled and elderly people.

The reason I deliver my speech in their honour is because all of them are
beneficiaries of this Budget. Madam Speaker, women have always been
responsible for securing and distributing their families’ wealth. They are
also responsible for allocating the budgets of churches and burial
societies.]

We, as women, can be able to feed and provide for the basic needs of our
people and give shelter to the total population of South Africa, which is
46,6 million, through the ANC policies and programmes guided by the Freedom
Charter. I just want to define the word “mother”: M stands for manager; a
mother is a manager at home. O stands for organiser; a mother is an
organiser in her home. T stands for teacher; a mother is a teacher. H
stands for healer; a mother is a healer. E stands for engine; a mother can
give warmth to every family member. R stands for rescuer. [Applause.]

Let us drink from the fountain of mountain water as contained in the
Freedom Charter: There shall be houses, security and comfort; the aged,
orphans, disabled and the sick shall be cared for; every person shall have
a right to leisure, rest and recreation; fenced locations and racial
ghettos shall be abolished; laws which result in breaking up families shall
be repealed.

Yasebela-ke I-ANC yakucedza konkhe loko. Emahostela nyalo sekwaba tindlu
tekuhlala imindeni. [The ANC responded and eradicated all that. Hostels are
now family units.]

We came up with the following legislation guided by the vision enshrined in
the Freedom Charter. We put in place legislation such as the Housing Act of
1997, the prevention of illegal eviction Act, the land Act of 1998, the
Housing Consumers Protection Measures Act of 1998, the Rental Housing Act,
the Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Act of 2000, and the Disestablishment
of South African Housing Trust Limited Act of 2002. However, in 10 years of
democracy 1,74 million new housing units have been built for households
with an income of less than R3 500 per month. In addition, 2,6 million more
subsidies were approved to benefit more than 6,6 million people.

Simvile-ke umhlonishwa, Indvuna Yetetindlu, itolo nakamemetela kutsi imali
yekusita ngema-subsidi etindlu ikhushuliwe ngeti R3 000, lokusho kutsi
nyalo seyitaba ti R31 900.  [Yesterday, we heard the hon Minister of
Housing announce that the housing subsidy has been increased by R3000,
which means that it will now be R31 900.]

To date, the total cost of housing delivery is R2,76 million. There is also
an additional R43 billion of national rates revenue added to the provincial
budgets. One of its functions is to speed up the process of building
houses, although additional resources allocated to social programmes
targeting the poor and the vulnerable, improvements in the quality of
spending, especially in the area of housing and social security, are
essential. An amount of R2 billion is added to housing subsidy programmes
to support the implementation of the new strategy, which is aimed at
upgrading informal settlements to accelerate the pace of housing delivery.
Even though housing shortages exist across the country, migration to the
cities places a severe strain in the urban landscape.

Ukhulumile-ke Make Mmathulare Coleman, MEC Wetetimali eMpumalanga.
Eluhlelweni lwakhe lwekwabiwa kwetimali, utibeke embili temphilo,
netibonelo tetindvodla, kanye netemfundvo. Ucaphunile-ke futsi kulesamba
semali lenganga R15,075 billion layabelwe yiNdvuna Manuel - siyabonga babe.
Ushito-ke nekutsi ikhuphuke nga 9% nawucatsanisa nesabelo semnyakatimali
lophelile wabuye wengeta nangekutsi kulesikhwama sakhe ubeke eceleni imali
lenganga R20 million yekucedza nya luhlelo lwekutfutfwa kwendle
ngemabhakede. Loko ukushito nakaphendvula simemetelo salomdzala,
Ndvunankhulu waseMpumalanga, longangababe Thabang Makwetla naketfula
inkhulumo yakhe yesifundza [the state of the province address] asho kutsi
ngaMashi utabe asakucedzile kutfutfwa kwendle ngemabhakede.

Uphindze washo-ke umhlonishwa Make Coleman wacaphuna inkhulumo
Yandvunankulu watsi:

   In order to promote the sustainability of municipalities and integrated
   housing and human resettlement development, the provincial department of
   local government and housing will receive a total amount of R489,765
   million.


Sibabonile-ke, Somlomo, bosomashishini labancane kutsi baye bahlomula noko
kuloluhlelo kutsi kucaliswe luhlelo lwekusungulwa kwema-Software House
International, nelubambiswano lwekwakhiwa kwetindlu tekuhlala. Bomake
bangenile babhaka tinkhwa. Sibabonile kubomabonakudze. Siyababona bayatakha
tindlu, lokusho kutsi sesitayibhodla indlala. Empumalanga-ke kunetinkampani
letincane letisahluma, letinye tato nguleti letilandzelako. (Translation of
siSwati paragraphs follows.)

[The hon MEC for finance in Mpumalanga, Madam Mmathulare Coleman, has
spoken. On her appropriation programme she has prioritised health and
education with outstanding funds. She withdrew a certain amount from the
R15,075 billion that was allocated to her by the hon Minister Manuel. We
thank you, sir. She also mentioned that the budget has increased by 9% when
compared to last year’s budget and he also set aside R20 million for the
complete eradication of the bucket system. She said this when replying to
the hon Premier of Mpumalanga, Thabang Makwetla’s provincial address. She
stated that in March the total eradication of the bucket system would be
complete.

The hon MEC Coleman has again extracted from the hon Premier’s speech and
said:

   In order to promote the sustainability of municipalities and integrated
   housing and human resettlement development, the provincial department of
   local government and housing will receive a total amount of R489,765
   million.
We have seen, hon Speaker, small entrepreneurs who have benefited from this
programme of establishing Software House International, and the partnership
of building domestic houses. Women have also engaged themselves in bread
making. We see them building houses, which means we are going to eradicate
poverty. In Mpumalanga there are small companies, which are still
developing, some of which are the following.]

There is the Greater Middleburg Housing Association, which has 501 units;
the Imbombela East Housing Association envisages developing 500 units; the
Highveld East Housing Association envisages developing 500 units; and the
Emalahleni Housing Institute which has their own technical team in place,
and their first phase will start soon.

Bajabulile-ke bantfu labadzala kutsi, emvakweminyaka leminyenti
etimphilweni tabo, babe netikhiya nje tetindlu letitabo matfupha. Bayasho
nangemilomo yabo kutsi bangeke baze bayibone lenye inhlangano letabentela
lokuhle kangaka. Bajabula badzimate bakhale, kube buhlungu kubona bantfu
labadzala bakhala tinyembeti tenjabulo, badzimate basho batsi nome
sengingafa, ngitawufa ngishiye batukulu bami basendlini. [Tandla.]

Loku-ke yinhlanhla lelivela kancane kubalingani bami labangala, futsi
kusibusiso kutsi umuntfu lomdzala akunike sibusiso. Basinikile-ke tsine
njenge ANC sekutsi siyawubusa kudzimate kubuye Jesu. Loku kungobe sibanike
emandla elutsandvo. Vumelana nami-ke Mfundisi Meshoe, nome ungekho lapha
kodvwa ngiyakholwa uyangibona lapho ekhaya kutsi letindlu lesikhuluma
ngato, lesitinika bantfu labadzala labangazange etimphilweni tabo
sebahlonishwe njengebantfu, ngekunikwa tindlu, kwekutsi ngito letindlu
lesitatitfola naseZulwini lekukhulunywa ngato nakutsiwa “Ekhaya lababe
kunetindlu letinyenti”. [Luhleko.] (Translation of siSwati paragraphs
follows.)

[The elderly are therefore happy that after so many years they have keys to
their own houses. They even said that they would never see another party
that will do such a beautiful thing for them. They are so happy that they
even cried. It was painful to see old people crying tears of joy.

They even said that if they die, they would die leaving their grandchildren
in a house. Home sweet home. [Applause.] This is something that occurs
seldom to my colleagues on the other side. It is a blessing to be given. It
is a blessing to be blessed by an elderly person. We, as the ANC, have been
given a blessing to rule till Jesus comes back. This is because we have
given them the power of love. Agree with me, Rev Meshoe, though you are not
here but I believe you can see me there at home. And that is the house we
are talking about, that we are giving to the elderly people who have never
in their lives been respected as human beings, by being given houses that
we will get in heaven, when it is said “in my fathers house there are many
rooms”. [Laughter.]]
In conclusion, we encourage people – black and white – to live by the
vision of the Freedom Charter with an emphasis on fighting poverty,
unemployment and underdevelopment. We are also encouraging possibilities
for greater hope for our people. Acting together, we do have the capacity
to realise these objectives, and sparing neither effort nor strength we can
and shall all build a South Africa that truly belongs to all who live in it
– black and white united in diversity.

Ushito-ke lomdzala longangaMengameli. Njengobe ngisenemizuzu lemibili,
ngisafuna kwenta nasi sibonelo. Nawucindzetela umuntfu, njengalokwekutsi
ulwa nebuphuya, umcindzetele umuntfu umfutsetelanise angasakhoni
nekuphefumula, mzukwana atfola imbotjana nje lencane atsi uyaphefumula
atfole umoya – tsine bantfu labamnyama labakwatiko kucindzetelwa – akatsi
nakavuka lapho bese ushaya sibhakela kodvwa uvuka ajampe aye etulu
njengebhola yentenetja nawuyigcumisa phansi. Ubhampa aye etulu, nakabuya
lapho umtfole aseme la asaphetse umbuso. Sihleti lapha. Sitawutsatsa
lombuso nome nasicindzetela kangakanani. [Tandla.] Nanisitjela kutsi
niyasicindzetela kantsi niyasibhampisa njengebhola yentenentja sagcuma saya
etulu nasibuya lapho satsatsa umbuso sabuya nawo la phansi sakhulula bantfu
labamnyama. Ngiyabonga. [Tandla.](Translation of siSwati paragraph
follows.)

[The hon President has spoken. Now that I am left with two minutes, I would
like to give this example. If you oppress a person by saying that you are
fighting poverty, and you oppress that person by making him suffocate, the
day he gets a small hole and manages to breath – we black people know
oppression – he does not just wake up and fight you but will jump sky high
like a tennis ball when it is bounced. He jumps sky high, and when he falls
down he will be in power. We are here to stay. We will rule this government
regardless of how long you oppressed us. [Applause.] You told yourselves
that you were oppressing us whilst you made us jump sky high like a tennis
ball and when we came back we took power, and freed the black nation. I
thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Voorsitter, indien ons kyk na die vier ekonomiese mikpunte
van die regering, naamlik prysstabiliteit, betalingsbalansewewig, volle
indiensneming en ‘n hoë groeikoers, dan het die regering geslaag wat die
eerste twee aanbetref, want ons het ‘n lae inflasiekoers en ‘n surplus op
die betalingsbalans. Wat die laaste twee aanbetref, het die regering
gefaal, want sedert 1995 het werkloosheid met 88% gestyg, én is 40% van die
arbeidsmag tans werkloos.

Maar, die Minister van Finansies sê dis nie waar nie, want anders sou ‘n
twee-derde meerderheid nie vir die regering gestem het nie. Meneer, die
mense het vir politieke vryheid gestem, nie vir ekonomiese vryheid nie. As
die mense van dié land vir ekonomiese vryheid stem, sou die ANC so min
stemme gekry het dat u dalk vandag nie eens in die Parlement sou gewees
nie.
Die ekonomiese groeikoers is laag vanweë die ANC se magshonger om baas te
wees oor die ekonomie. Die ekonomie ken nie grense nie en die ekonomie wil
ook nie hê daar moet met hom ingemeng word nie. Die besigheidsektor is daar
om wins te maak, en hy laat hom lei deur vraag en aanbod in die ekonomie.
Hy laat hom nie lei deur ‘n oorbehepte regering of ‘n ongedissiplineerde
arbeidsmag nie, want dít is die twee faktore wat tans ons ekonomie teister.

Minister Manuel, en dit geld ook vir die ander Ministers, enige politieke
wenslikheid hang van die ekonomiese moontlikheid af. Om die regering se
beleid te implementeer kos geld, maar as die ekonomie dit nie toelaat nie
dan beperk dit u bestuursraamwerk. Daarom moet ons die ekonomie uitbrei, en
al hoe ons dit kan doen, is deur ekonomiese ontwikkeling of om die
maatskaplike opheffing van ons mense daar te stel.

Deur bogenoemde te doen sal gelykheid, herverdeling en hervorming dan
outomaties ook deur die ekonomie bevorder word. Gelykheid, herverdeling en
hervorming kan nie bloot onbepaald polities, administratief en kunsmatig
ingestel en gehandhaaf word nie. Wat die maatskaplike ontwikkeling dan
aanbetref, moet ons kyk na die gesondheidsbevordering van al ons mense. Ons
moet kyk na die basiese munisipale dienste van al ons mense. Ons moet kyk
na die verbetering van onderwys en opleiding . . . [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, when we look at the four economic goals of
the government, namely price stability, balance of payment, full employment
and a high growth rate, we will see that the government has succeeded with
the first two, as we have a low inflation rate and a surplus on the balance
of payment.  The government has failed with regard to the last two, since
unemployment has increased by 88% since 1995, and 40% of the labour force
is currently unemployed.

But the Minister of Finance says this is not true, otherwise a two-thirds
majority would not have voted for the government. Sir, the people voted for
political freedom, not economic freedom. If the people of this country
voted for economic freedom, the ANC would have received so few votes that
you would possibly not even have been here in Parliament today.

The economic growth rate is low as a result of the ANC's yearning for power
to rule the economy. The economy knows no boundaries and the economy also
does not want to be interfered with. The business sector is there to make a
profit, and is led by demand and supply in the economy. It does not allow
itself to be guided by an obsessed government or an undisciplined labour
force, as these are the two factors that are currently devastating our
economy.

Minister Manuel, and this also applies to the other Ministers, any
political desirability depends on its economic possibilities. It costs
money to implement the government's policy, but if the economy does not
allow it, it restricts your managerial framework. We therefore have to
expand the economy and the only way in which we can accomplish this is by
economic development or by achieving the social upliftment of the people.

By doing the above-mentioned, equality, redistribution and transformation
will automatically be promoted by the economy. Equality, redistribution and
transformation cannot be established and maintained on a political,
administrative and artificial level indefinitely. Where social development
is concerned, we have to look at the promotion of the health of all our
people. We have to see to the basic municipal services of all our people.
We have to look at the improvement of education and training . . .
[Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): Order! Order, hon member, could you
just take your seat. Are you rising on a point of order, sir?

Mr N J GOGOTYA: May we take off our jackets, please? There’s so much hot
air coming from the speaker at the podium, may we take off our jackets?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): That is not a point of order, sir.
[Laughter.] Please continue.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Ons moet kyk na die verbetering van die onderwys en die
opleiding van ons arbeidsmag, asook die daadwerklike bekamping van misdaad
en die uitroei van korrupsie. Ons pleit dat die Begroting oor die
mediumtermyn sal konsentreer op die maatskaplike opheffing van ons mense,
sodat ons ‘n gesonde, welvarende, gedissiplineerde en ‘n gespesialiseerde
arbeidsmag tot stand kan bring.

Wat die ekonomiese ontwikkeling aanbetref, moet ons besef dat aan die
vraagkant ‘n bestendige monetêre en fiskale beleid nié die ekonomie alleen
sal red nie. Ons moet ook kyk na die aanbodkant, die opheffing van die
maatskaplike welstand van ons mense, en ekonomiese ontwikkeling, en dán
praat ons van deregulering.

Om jou produktiwiteit te verhoog, gaan jy onder andere jou tegnologie
verander, en dit is presies wat 30 jaar gelede gebeur het met die koms van
vakbonde, arbeidswetgewing, maatreëls en kwota’s. Die ondernemings het
oorgeskakel van arbeidsintensiwiteit na kapitaalintensiwiteit. En dít gaan
vandag nog aan, want ons sit met ‘n baie sterk rand, lae inflasie en ‘n lae
rentekoers.

Meneer Manuel, dit is hoe die ekonomie werk, maar dan bly die regering
inmeng in die ekonomie en dit is hoekom die sakeondernemings nie meer
arbeid in diens neem nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: We have to look at the improvement of the education and
training of our labour force, as well as the active combating of crime and
the eradication of corruption. Our plea is that the Budget, in the medium
term, should concentrate on the social upliftment of our people, in order
for us to establish a healthy, prosperous, disciplined and specialised
labour force.

As far as economic development is concerned, we have to realise that on the
demand side, a stable monetary and fiscal policy will not be sufficient to
save the economy. We also have to look at the supply side, the upliftment
of the social welfare of our people, as well as economic development, and
only then can we talk about deregulation.

To increase your productivity you have, amongst other things, to change
your technology, and that is exactly what happened 30 years ago with the
arrival of trade unions, labour legislation, measures and quotas. The
businesses have made a switch from labour intensity to capital intensity.
And it is still carrying on today, as we have a very strong rand, a low
inflation rate and a low interest rate at the moment.

Mr Manuel, this is how the economy works, but then government keeps
interfering with the economy and that is why the businesses do not employ
labour forces anymore.]

If the government keeps on doing what it has been doing, it will be getting
what it has been getting.

En daarom moet ons ophou om met die ekonomie in te meng.

Wat die regering behoort te doen, is om die klein-, medium- en mikro-
sakeondernemings, ongeag ‘n omsetplafon, los te maak van sekere
belastingsheffings en sekere arbeidswetgewing. Wat nodig is, is die
deregulering van die besigheidsektor tot ‘n absolute nodige minimumvlak,
gepaardgaande met strukturele aanpassings om van die diskresie van onnodige
burokratiese instellings ontslae te raak.

Dan sal klein sakeondernemings groei, buitelandse belegging sal toeneem, en
ons sal ook kan slaag om die 46% alleenlik swart werkloosheid aan te
spreek, wat niks anders is as ‘n vorm van swart ekonomiese bemagtiging nie.

Verlede jaar het mnr Tony Leon gevra vir 150 000 polisiebeamptes op straat,
en die President het dit verlede jaar in werking gestel. Mnr Tony Leon het
gevra vir deregulering, en vanjaar het die President ook dít in werking
begin stel. Nou het die DA ‘n alternatiewe begroting daargestel en nou vra
ons die Minister van Finansies om net soos die President te luister na die
DA, sodat die DA ‘n bydrae kan lewer om die ekonomie van dié land te red.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Ek sê vir u dankie, Voorsitter. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[And that is why we have to stop interfering with the economy.

What the government should do is to release the small, medium and micro
businesses from certain tax levies and some labour laws - irrespective of a
turnover ceiling. What is needed is the deregulation of the business sector
to an absolutely necessary minimum level, along with structural changes to
get rid of the discretion of any unnecessary bureaucratic institutions.

Then small enterprises will grow, foreign investment will increase, and we
will also be able to address the 46% black-only unemployment rate, which is
nothing more than a type of black economic empowerment.

Last year Mr Tony Leon asked for 150 000 police officers to be deployed on
the street, and the President put this into operation last year. Mr Tony
Leon asked for deregulation last year and this year the President also
started putting this into operation. The DA has now also released an
alternative budget and now we ask the Minister of Finance to listen to the
DA just like the President did, so that the DA can make a contribution to
save the economy of this country. [Interjections.] I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mr K A MOLOTO: Thank you, Chairperson. Indeed we have listened to the DA’s
alternative budget. Let me state from the outset that if the hon Lowe
removes his blinkers and examines the voucher system of the DA closely -
examine the figures very closely - the R800 million per year that you are
proposing will not be sufficient for the training needs of the unemployed
in this country. It is just peanuts; a populist gesture - it is a con.

We have always characterised the unemployment situation in South Africa to
be of a structural nature. Therefore regular and mindless tax cuts will not
alleviate this situation. The hon Nkem-Abonta takes a very narrow approach
to the challenges faced by SMMEs. The issue of access to capital is key to
the success of most SMMEs in this country. The majority of black people in
this country know the challenges that they face when they try to access
capital.

Therefore his views are foreign to most SMMEs in this country. He is
advancing a nonexistent debate on entrepreneurial spirit in the country.
But I want to state very clearly that entrepreneurship will only thrive
where there is a broad base of skilled people, hence the need for skills
development in South Africa. We need to take an eclectic approach, which is
the same approach that has been adopted by government.

Allow me to provide a penetrating critique to the DA’s views and the so-
called alternative budget and restate the correctness of the ANC’s policies
as expressed through the Budget tabled by the Minister. [Interjections.}
I’ll come to you.

The hon Dr Rabie talked about the lower-income groups being affected by
capital gains tax. I wonder which lower-income groups he is talking about,
because capital gains tax applies only to primary residences. Let him show
me any lower-income group person who owns more than two or three houses -
it really baffles me.

The DA’s alternative budget for 2004, amongst other things calls for the
abolition of capital gains tax. When this House adopted the Taxation Laws
Amendment Bill in 2000, it did so guided by certain principles of fairness,
equality and the need to close tax avoidance measures that undermine these
principles. Therefore, it is important to restate these principles.

Our tax system calls for those who are rich to pay more tax than the poor.
It calls for those who have equal capacity to pay the same amount of tax
and calls for those with greater capacity to pay more tax.

The ANC has argued correctly, during the passing of the Bill, that there is
a possibility of the wealthy in society converting their income into
capital gain and easily avoiding taxes on such income. Those who own shares
in the stock exchange could avoid being taxed on the increases in value of
their shares by simply insisting that it was a capital gain. The point
remains that their wealth has increased, while an ordinary income earner
will pay tax in full.

Such tax avoidance measures by the wealthy would have compromised the
principle of equality and fairness. The abolition of capital gains tax will
lead to a distortion in the allocation of resources and investment
decisions. Obviously this will have undesirable consequences for the South
African economy.

This special pleading by the DA, on behalf of the rich, to scrap taxes on
income has disastrous consequences for this country. Serious economic
thinkers maintain that the abolition of capital gains tax will increase tax
revenue in the short term, but then increase the long term debt of
government. The short-term mentality of the DA is harmful to the long-term
economic prosperity of the country.

The DA is promising numerous tax rebates and deductions, which are totally
misguided and incoherent. Again, if one examines the DA’s proposals on a
lot of issues, it becomes apparent that they are purely populist gestures.

Really, why on earth does the DA propose a R2000 tax deduction per month
for people who employ domestic workers and helpers? That amounts to a tax
deduction of R24 000 per annum per household. All the DA needs to do is to
join hands with the Minister of Labour to encourage people to pay their
domestic workers decent wages.

The DA’s flirtation with crazy tax ideas is a cause for concern. How is the
DA going to finance some of the critical capital expenditure that is needed
for economic and social development? [Interjections.]

This reminds me of the critique of the Brookings Institution in the US.
They provided this critique on President Bush’s budget proposal on tax cuts
for the wealthy - for the wealthy, mind you. I found their statement quite
informative. [Interjections.] Go and read your document, go and read your
document carefully. Let me quote the statement. They are saying that:

  Paying for the tax cuts would require monumental reductions in spending
  or increases in other taxes. To offset the revenue losses in 2014 would
  require, for example, a 48% cut in Medicare benefits, or a 117% increase
  in corporate taxes.


Standing here, I am asking myself: What would the DA do if they realised
that the budget deficit was ballooning beyond control, as a result of their
mindless tax proposal? There is a simple answer to this. They would simply
drop the Basic Income Grant proposal, reduce social security grants and
bring into the tax net people earning below R35 000. They will increase VAT
from 14% to possibly 20%.

The ANC government calls for tax relief on small businesses to stimulate
growth and encourage their role in the economy. A graduated tax rate
structure is being proposed which will also include a depreciation
allowance.

The DA proposal reminds me of the critique of Herbert Stein, a former
Chairman of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers from 1972–1974. He
had this to say after analysing the budget of President Reagan. He
indicated that the Reagan administration’s reckless and mindless tax cuts,
similar to those proposed by the DA, would only reduce economic tax and
therefore be very dangerous or harmful to the economic growth of the
country.

Allow me to tend to another controversial issue raised by the DA in their
alternative budget. The DA calls for the introduction of a sunset clause to
the Employment Equity Act. Let me just read the preamble of the Employment
Equity Act. Let me quote:

  Recognising that as a result of apartheid and other discriminatory laws
  and practices there are disparities in employment, occupation and income
  within the national labour market; and that those disparities create such
  pronounced disadvantages for certain categories of people that they can
  not be redressed by simply repealing discriminatory laws . . .

I also ask myself: What is the difference between the DA and the whites-
only trade union, Solidarity?  The answer is: It is just a bunch of right-
wingers, united by a common hatred of transformation and opportunities
created for the previously disadvantaged.

The DA cause is calling for the privatisation of the Land Bank, the DPSA
and the IDC, amongst others. [Interjections.] No, no I’ll come to you. The
DA wants to create a minimalist state, which cannot make an intervention in
addressing the inequalities of the past and encouraging state-led economic
growth in depressed areas.

These institutions are critical to the development agenda of this
government and therefore they should be encouraged. Really, the DA’s
proposal is a nonsensical product of conceptual confusion. The Land Bank
and the Post Bank are going to play a critical role in reaching out to
emerging farmers and beneficiaries of land reform.

Emerging farmers and beneficiaries of land reform require finance to buy
fertilisers, equipment and basic infrastructure to engage in meaningful,
productive activities. They need better access to roads to take their
produce to markets. They require water schemes and electricity. They
require better information about current technology and markets and recent
information from research laboratories. All this requires money and not
endless tax loopholes, as proposed by the DA.

Institutions offering micro-finance are critical to rural development.
Therefore, we are encouraged by the announcement of the Minister to
allocate R1 billion to the new Microagricultural Finance scheme to be
announced later by the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs. Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Let me express
my sincere appreciation to both the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the
Joint Budget Committee. I followed with keen interest the debate and the
number of opinions and I’d also like to express my appreciation to all the
contributors here. I’ll deal in a moment with the value of some of those
contributions.

After the Budget, an academic advised me that the number 17 has a relation
to the Budget. That is the number of times that we used the word “decade”
in the speech. It is a very important observation because the key issue
about this Budget is the basis that it lays for the kind of South Africa we
want for tomorrow, and specifically the kind of South Africa we want in
2014.

The Budget has been well received across the country. The broad objectives
that we have set for growth and for advancing the wellbeing of all South
Africans and for narrowing the divide between rich and poor in South Africa
are in evidence in the policy choices. It is also very important that we go
back to the Constitution. It is not a Constitution that is respected by all
parties in this House, but right in the preamble to the Constitution we are
entreated to improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the
potential of each person. So that commitment to all South Africans is not
an optional extra. It is not something you bolt on. It is something
fundamental to what we must do every day of our lives, in government and in
Parliament in the kind of oversight we seek to have over all citizens in
this country. If you want to meet that constitutional objective, then
clearly you can’t stand back and hope that the market will deliver this
alone. The market fundamentalists are clearly at odds with the letter and
spirit of the Constitution as well. What it requires is an effective state
and that effective state has to have a developmental content.

Regardless of what you have read somewhere, hon Davidson, a developmental
state places the lives of its people and its Constitution at the epicentre
and works to deliver change to improve on the quality of life. That is not
an optional extra mandate. [Applause.]

Let me deal with some of the more controversial issues raised. The hon
Davidson makes a special appeal for an effective rate. Let me say again:
The corporate tax rate in South Africa is 29%. There is no such thing as an
effective rate that is different. Every country that you mentioned, hon
Davidson, has a dividend tax, which is imposted at the marginal rate. There
is one exception and that is India. The minister of finance introduced the
Budget on 28 February and there he introduced something which is called a
withholding tax on dividends distributed at 12,5% of the dividends to be
distributed. It looks like a secondary tax on companies; it walks like one;
it feels like one – it only exists by a different name. With regard to all
these pleadings by KPMG and everybody else to ignore the secondary tax on
companies, the only other thing you can do is to tax it as a dividend at
40% in the hands of the recipient. But that tax on the rich will remain in
South Africa. It is a tax on distributed income and it won’t disappear for
as long as the ANC is government. Of that I give you the assurance.

Let me turn to the way in which you put your arguments and I want you to
listen to me, hon Davidson. What you are saying is: Give a tax incentive to
people to employ others at home. What you’re looking for is a colonial
mindset. You want to be waited on hand and foot by black people who will
carry and fetch, and the more you employ the more the state will subsidise
that lifestyle. We will not do it for you in our democracy. [Applause.]

Similarly, your arguments in respect of training and the importation of
skills basically say that we should not train South Africans but import
skills from elsewhere. That is the gist of your argument. It is an
antidemocratic argument in South Africa. You should listen to yourself, hon
Davidson. [Interjections.] At the end of the day, what I have not been able
to understand is what these people are doing in the House. They don’t
believe we need a government at all. They clearly can’t believe that we
need a parliament at all. For them it is only sheltered employment because
it is antithetical to every argument I’ve heard out of this side of the
House this afternoon. [Applause.]

Let me move on to the hon Vezi, who is not in the House now. The hon Vezi,
amongst other things, said government must encourage labour- intensive
investment. Nobody discourages that. What you need to understand is what is
happening in the world right now. Every developing country and every
developed country in the world has exactly the same problem: All jobs are
going to China. This applies even to these employers who get up and plead -
I heard the hon Nkem-Abonta on this issue the other day - and need their
government all of a sudden. Take that particular company for instance: If
you go into their stores around the country, then 60% of what it is on
their shelves is imported from China. They are destroying jobs. The same
company that is pleading for special intervention from government now is a
major importer of clothing from China. So we have to listen to those who
cry wolf and deal with these issues quite differently. Also, I want to say
to the hon Vezi that the Deputy Speaker did pass to me his teacher’s story.

I’d like to deal with the issue of social grants, which was raised by the
hon Stephens, Greyling and Rajbally. The first point I’d like to make is
that the increases have exceeded inflation: For the aged, 5,4% and on child
support grants, 5,9%. This exceeds the official measure of inflation. You
may not like it, but that is the official measure of inflation. It is also
important to recognise that
10,1 million South Africans now benefit from social grants. [Applause.] The
rate of growth in one direction will always put a brake on the rate of
growth in the other direction. You’ve got to see this as part of a single
whole. Social grants now account for R72,7 billion of our Budget, or 19% of
our noninterest expenditure. It cannot grow any faster. You can only grow
it faster if you sacrifice something else with regard to what government
does and that is the choice. Budgeting is about choices and what the
electorate does is to put us here to exercise those choices on their
behalf. We have to choose wisely. We have to choose for tomorrow and the
reason we cannot grow it any faster is those constraints that exist in
reality in this economy.

Let me turn to the hon Durr. You see I don’t understand what this
demotivating race debate is that he is talking about. They are the
realities of South Africa that we have to deal with. There is a past that
still lives in South Africa today and unless we understand that we’ll pay a
heavy price going forward. So we need honesty about the nature of the
challenge and we must be able to deal with it. Also, in respect of
property, if you take all of Cape Town and you add in Khayelitsha,
Mitchells Plain and Manenberg and Hanover Park, then you can say foreigners
own less than 1% of Cape Town. If you take the Atlantic Seaboard and you
take the leafy suburbs of Newlands, Constantia and so on, then that number
is surely not 1%. It is not even 2% - the number is significantly
different. Then you can add all of these exclusive golf courses in the
Western Cape. The numbers are substantially different. What we must not do
is to polarise it. We have to recognise that every country capable of
taking decisions about these things, tends to do so.

Agb Mulder, jy weet die Afrikaans wat sal voortduur, is ’n Afrikaans wat
alle Suid-Afrikaners wil insluit. Die Afrikaans wat sal voortduur is ’n
Afrikaans wat Suid-Afrikaans wil wees. Die Afrikaans wat ongelukkig sal
sterf, is die Afrikaans wat homself sal afsonder. Dit is die Afrikaans van
mnr Roodt en u het gedeeltelik vir mnr Roodt aangehaal in u toespraak. Ek
is daardeur geskok. Ek is daardeur geskok, maar dit is ook baie belangrik
dat ons sê dat die Afrikaans wat soek vir die bydrae van die Afrikaner tot
die fiskus van die land, is die Afrikaans van afsondering. Dit is die
Afrikaans sonder toekoms. Dit is die Afrikaans van die verlede, nie die
Afrikaans wat homself voldoende Suid-Afrikaans wil maak nie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Hon Mulder, you know that the Afrikaans that will endure is an Afrikaans
that wants to include all South Africans. The Afrikaans that will endure is
an Afrikaans that wants to be South African. The Afrikaans that will
unfortunately perish is the Afrikaans that will isolate itself. That is the
Afrikaans of Mr Roodt and you briefly quoted Mr Roodt in your speech. I am
shocked by that. I am shocked, but it is also very important for us to say
that the Afrikaans that seeks the contribution of the Afrikaner to the
fiscus of the country is the Afrikaans of isolation. It is the Afrikaans
without a future. It is the Afrikaans of the past, not the Afrikaans that
wants to make itself sufficiently South African. [Applause.]]

The hon Pheko is not in the House. He talks about odious apartheid debt but
I am not sure what he is talking about. I am not sure what the source of
his figures is. Is he here? [Interjections.] Maybe he joined the DA – I
don’t know. [Interjections.] The debt service cost that we have in the
Budget documentation is 3,5% of GDP. I don’t know where he got his figures.
I can say this to him without fear of contradiction: All of that is money
that this democratically elected government had borrowed to finance the
deficit, so clearly it is not part of any odious apartheid debt.

Hon Rabie, please check the date on your speech. I think that is last
year’s speech. I am sure it is. I have heard it before. The hon Bekker is
wearing a green shirt because he spoke about the green revolution. The
question that you need to answer, sir, in all honesty to yourself, is: What
are these factories going to produce that you are talking about? These
factories that produce pig iron don’t employ people. Even our steel mills –
and you can go to Saldanha Steel and see for yourself – do not employ more
than 200 people. The key challenge is to find out what we can do
differently and better.

If we try and hang on to the past and if we try and manufacture and believe
that we will outsmart the Chinese at the low end of the market, we won’t do
it. We won’t do it. The Chinese are not going to invest here. They are
going to invest in China primarily. There is a source of imbalance in the
world. You have to step back from the issues, step back from the Budget
debate, pause for a moment and then recognise that for as long as China has
its currency pegged to the dollar, the rest of the world will be
uncompetitive. For as long as China is growing at the rate that it is
growing, it will suck up every raw material from everywhere in the world.
For as long as China is producing rich people at the rate that it is, it
will need oil. And for as long as it sucks oil from all over the world,
from every available source, the oil price will remain at the levels it is
at. We have a source of instability in the world. We have no control over
it, but we clearly need to understand it and engage with it. Stop using it
as a stick to beat ourselves because under the circumstances we still are,
in many respects, the envy of many developing countries around the world.
That is what we need to understand. That is the context of this discussion.
[Applause.]

We’re a young democracy battling in exceedingly adverse circumstances with
enormous numbers of poor people, very poor skills endowments – largely the
result of where Dr Van Dyk comes from – and that denial of skills to the
majority of South Africans is not going to be healed in only a period of 10
years of democracy. It is a lifelong challenge for all of us and we need to
understand and engage with it, and stand up and be counted in order to
effect change in respect of it. It is not going to disappear. [Applause.]
It is not going to disappear because you happen to shout at it. It is a
reality of life. We have a skills mismatch in this economy and that is what
we have to deal with. [Interjections.]

There are some members of this side of the House who might be residents of
Jurassic Park, rather than a democratic South Africa. There’s very little
point in arguing with them. They won’t listen. They sit together and
perhaps they influence each other to go down the shaft in the way that they
do. They certainly don’t contribute to the enrichment of the Budget debate
in this country. But for all of you who are not residents of Jurassic Park,
thank you for your contributions. We have a good Budget. Let us take it
forward and build democracy in South Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.

The House adjourned at 17:58.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 10 MARCH 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:


1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled:

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The Fifth Economic and Social Rights Report of the South African
         Human Rights Commission for 2002-2003 is referred to the following
         Portfolio Committees:


         (a)     Chapter 1 - "The Right to Land" is referred to the
              Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs for
              consideration and report.

         (b)     Chapter 2 - "The Right to Food" and

         (c)     Chapter 4 - "The Right to Social Security" is referred to
              the Portfolio Committee on Social Development for
              consideration and report.

         (d)     Chapter 3 - "The Right to Health Care" is referred to the
              Portfolio Committee on Health for consideration and report.
         (e)     Chapter 5 - "The Right to a Healthy Environment" is
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs
              and Tourism for consideration and report.

         (f)     Chapter 6 - "The Right to Education" is referred to the
              Portfolio Committee on Education for consideration and report.

         (g)     Chapter 7 - "The Right of Access to Adequate Housing" is
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing for
              consideration and report.

         (h)     Chapter 8 - "The Right to Water" is referred to the
              Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry for
              consideration and report.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission on the Causes and
              Effect of Mobility amongst Senior Management Service and
              Professional Staff in the Public Service [RP 195-2003].
         (b)     Report of the Public Service Commission on the
              Investigation into the Re-employment of Persons Retired due to
              Ill-health [RP 32-2004].

         (c)     Report of the Public Service Commission on the Management
              of Discipline in the Public Service [RP 141-2003].

         (d)     Report of the Public Service Commission on the Dispute
              Resolution Mechanisms in the Public Service [RP 198-2003].

         (e)     Report of the Public Service Commission on the Abilities
              of the Departments to deal with devolved authority regarding
              Remuneration and Conditions of Service.

         (f)     Report of the Public Service Commission on the Management
              of the Subsidised Motor Transport Scheme [RP 33-2004].

         (g)     Report of the Public Service Commission on Remunerative
              work outside the Public Service - An Investigation undertaken
              in the Gauteng Provincial Health Sector [RP 219-2003].
         (h)     Report of the Public Service Commission - State of the
              Public Service Report for 2004.

         (i)     Report of the work of the Interim Management Team (IMT) in
              the Eastern Cape for the period November 2002 to March 2004.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration:

         Strategic Plan of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry for
         2005-2008.


TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Health:

     Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2005-2008.

2.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation:

     Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
     for 2003-2004.


                            FRIDAY, 11 MARCH 2005

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory Council on
     Innovation for 2003-2004.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:

     Report of the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) on the National
     and Provincial Elections for April 2004.



                           TUESDAY, 15 MARCH 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly:


1.    Membership of Committees:


     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Portfolio Committees, viz:

     Health:
     Appointed: Kohler-Barnard, Ms D.
     Discharged: Steyn, Mr A C.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - INSERT ATC0315


