---
title: 'National Assembly - 22 February 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-02-22
---

TUESDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The House Chairperson (Ms C-S Botha) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mev D VAN DER WALT: Voorsitter, hiermee gee ek kennis dat ek by die
volgende sitting van die Huis sal voorstel:

  Dat die Huis –


   (1)      met innige meegevoel kennis neem van die afsterwe op 20
        Februarie 2005 van die skryfster Dalene Matthee –


        (a) wie se boeke, waarvoor sy jare se strawwe navorsing gedoen het,
              in 14 tale vertaal is;


        (b) wat deur haar Bos-trilogie die Knysnabos internasionaal bekend
              gemaak het en dié deel van ons land ook hierdeur aan duisende
              Suid-Afrikaners bekend gestel het;


        (c) wat onder verskeie toekennings ook die gesogte ATKV-prys vir
              goeie, gewilde prosa vier keer ontvang het; en


        (d) wat onthou sal word as ’n beduidende stem in die Afrikaanse
              letterkunde; en


     2) sy innige meegevoel aan haar familie en geliefdes betuig.
    (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Chairperson, I hereby give  notice  that  on  the  next
sitting of the House I shall move:
That the House -


   (1)      notes with deepest sympathy  the  passing  away  of  the  writer
        Dalene Matthee on 20 February 2005 -


           a) whose books, for which she did years of  intensive  research,
              have been translated into 14 Languages;


        (b)      who, by means of  her  forest  trilogy,  made  the  Knysna
              Forest internationally known and also introduced this part of
              our country to thousands of South Africans;


        (c)      who, apart from various awards,  also  received  the  much
              sought after ATKV award for good, popular prose  four  times;
              and


        (d)      who will be remembered as a significant voice in Afrikaans
              literature; and


   (2)      conveys its deepest sympathy to her family and loved ones.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Can I reclassify that as a motion
without notice, and not a notice of motion?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, not necessarily, we prefer it to be regarded as
a motion with notice.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): We will keep it like that then.

Mnr T D LEE: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek sal voorstel:

    Dat die Huis die onaanvaarbare gebruik van rasse-etikettering deur die
    meerderheidsparty in ’n poging om opposisiesprekers te intimideer,
    bespreek.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

    That the House discusses the unacceptable practice of race-labelling by
    the majority party in an attempt to intimidate speakers of the
    opposition.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): Thank you, hon Lee. I was going to
recognise the lady first.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Chair, on behalf of the ACDP I give notice that I shall
move:

  That the House debates the following topic: Education needs for disabled
  children and the integrated education model.


Ms H ZILLE: Madam Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

  That the House discusses the extent to which education policy is
  infringing on the right to receive mother-tongue education.

[Interjections.]

Mr M WATERS: Madam Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

  That the House discusses the challenges facing child-headed households
  and the role this House can play in helping to meet those challenges.


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, I am not rising to give
notice of a motion, but I think there is a problem with the procedures that
we, as the Whips, would really need to sort out. I do not want us to
entertain a discussion here, but I think we must come to some understanding
of how we deal with this matter of motions. I am just raising it for it to
be noted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you. So you will sort it out
with the Whips.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, may I just say that there is no problem. What we
are doing is proposing motions. This is the first opportunity this year for
us to do this, consequently there is a bit of a build-up in the party, but
what we are doing is perfectly within the agreed laws of Parliament. We
will discuss it at the Chief Whips’ Forum tomorrow.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, hon member.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

That the House -

        1) notes that political unrest in the Free State province has
           escalated since the September revolution in Intabazwe last year;


        2) notes that the root cause of this unrest is infighting between
           the elected ANC leadership and Mbeki-appointed leadership, that
           has even forced the ANC to cancel its provincial congress;

        3) notes that service delivery to impoverished, marginalized
           communities is affected by this; and


        4) resolves that the House discuss the increased incidence of
           violence within the communities as a result of the perceived
           lack of delivery at local government level.


[Interjections.] Thank you, Chair.


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, please do not debate the
motion when you give notice of it. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, it is becoming a circus
now. Please. [Interjections.] No, no, no, it is becoming a circus. Can we
ask you to please move on to the other business of the House?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair …

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): One moment, hon Whip, hon Deputy
Whip. I accept that you may find it a bit worrying, but I do not think I
have a rule with which to stop the motions. I would ask, please, hon Chief
Whip, that if there is a problem with the existing rules that you address
that in the Whips’ meeting, and that the problem be taken to the Rules
Committee please. Thank you.
Mr C M LOWE: Madam Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move as
follows:

  That the House discusses freeing small business from some aspects of
  labour legislation in order to advance skills development and promote job
  creation.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, I respect the fact that
there is no rule that you can use to stop motions being heard, but I do
believe that you have powers to use discretion. You can’t allow a situation
where a single party gives more than five notices of motion in the House in
succession. Common sense must please prevail, Madam.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Chief Whip, I have no precedence
which instructs me to allow only five motions. I will ask the party not to
make this too problematic for me, please, but you may continue with your
motions.
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, we guarantee that this will be the last motion
that we’ll put this afternoon. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you.

Mr E W TRENT: Madam Chair, I give notice that I shall move:


  That the House –


   (1)      notes that the National Assembly parliamentary service received
        a qualified audit opinion for the 2004 financial year;


   (2)      further notes that the financial affairs of the institution to
        which the executive must account should be beyond reproach;

   (3)      concludes that Travelgate, which resulted in part from a lack of
        physical discipline and clear guidelines, has seriously affected
        Parliament’s credibility, and that this must be restored;

   (4)      notes that a draft Bill aimed at regulating the financial
        administration of Parliament and the provincial legislatures was
        prepared in November 2003, and that the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance was supposed to report back on this Bill by 31 August, but
        failed to do so - there are differing opinions as to whether
        Parliament and the provincial legislatures should fall under the
        Public Finance Management Act or its own legislation ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha) Order! Member, please state your
motion.

Mr E W TRENT: I have just the final paragraph, Chair.

  and ...


   (1)      therefore resolves that a date be set for a discussion of how to
        remedy the situation and further that a deadline be set by which
        the finance committee should conclude this matter and report to the
        National Assembly.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you. That was a very long,
complicated motion. [Interjections.]

     CONGRATULATIONS FOR AWARDS TO LADYSMITH BLACK MAMBAZO AND U-CARMEN
                                EKHAYELITSHA
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chairperson, maybe it’s the
Zimbabwe blues. [Laughter.] I move without notice:

  Ukuba le Ndlu –


        1) iqaphele ukuba –


       (a)  iqela lomculo wesicathamiya, i-Ladysmith Black
           Mambazo, liphumelele imbasa ye-Grammy kwicandelo lelona cwecwe
           libalaseleyo lomculo wemveli;


       (b)  eli qela iLadysmith Black Mambazo laye lagqatswa
           izihlandlo zalithoba ligqatselwa iwonga le-Grammy, kodwa
           laphumelela izihlandlo ezibini, elokuqala liliphumelela ngo-
           1987;


       (c)  ukuphumelela kweLadysmith Black Mambazo, ethe yathengisa
           amacwecwe angaphaya kwe-6 000 000, kulenza libe liqela
           elikhokelayo kwiAfrika iphela;
       (d)  nokuba ngoMgqibelo, umhla we-19 kuFebhruwari, elinye iqela
           lalapha eMzantsi Afrika lomdlalo webhanyabhanya othi “U-Carmen
           eKhayelitsha”, nalo liphumelele imbasa ye-Golden Bear
           kumnyhadala wemidlalo yebhanyabhanya obubanjelwe eJamani;


       (e)  ibikokokuqala ukuba umdlalo webhanyabhanya waseMzantsi Afrika
           ube uphumelela imbasa ye-Golden Bear; kwaye


       (f)  ezi mbasa zibonisa ngokuphandle imfuneko yokuba abantu bahlale
           kwinkcubeko yabo, besebenzisa ulwazi lwabo lwemveli ukuze babe
           nokuphumelela; kwaye


   (2)      ivuyisana nawo omabini la maqela ngale mpumelelo ingaka, kwaye
        iyazidla ngawo.

[Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa draft resolution follows.)

  [That the House –


  (1) notes that -

       (a)  the Isicathamiya music group, Ladysmith Black Mambazo, has won a
           Grammy award for its traditional world music album;


       (b)  the group has been nominated for nine Grammys but has won only
           two, the previous Grammy award having been won in 1987;


       (c)  the group has sold over six million albums, making it the number
           one seller in Africa;


       (d)  the South African film uCarmen eKhayelitsha has won a Golden
           Bear Award at the Berlin Film Festival in Germany on Saturday,
           19 February 2005;


       (e)  this is the first South African movie that has received the
           Golden Bear Award; and


       (f)  these awards indicate that both these groups have proved the
           importance of retaining their traditional and cultural values;


  (2) congratulates both these groups on their success and for making us
        proud to be South Africans.

[Applause.]]

Agreed to.




                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                          (The late Mr R M Mhlaba)

Mr A MLANGENI: Madam Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House –


     1)  notes with a deep sense of shock and sadness the death of Comrade
        Raymond Mphakamisi Mhlaba, who passed away on 20 February 2005;


     2)  recognises that Oom Ray was a South African patriot who lived a
        selfless life, making an enormous contribution to the struggle for
        peace, democracy and social progress in our country and for humanity
        in general;

     3)  recognises that Oom Ray was a founder member of uMkhonto weSizwe
        and became the leader of uMkhonto weSizwe after the arrest of Nelson
        Rolihlahla Mandela;


     4)  notes that, having spent more than two decades on Robben Island
        with comrades such as Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu, Govan Mbeki,
        Alias Motswaledi, Ahmed Kathrada, Wilton Mkwayi and yours truly …

[Laughter.]

       ... he remained committed to this cause till the last seconds of his
       life;


     5)  notes that, for the contribution he has made, the African National
        Congress awarded him the Isitwalandwe Seaparankwe Award in 1992 and
        the South African Communist Party awarded him the Moses Kotane Award
        in 2002 for his contribution in building the party and his service
        to the working class and the poor;


     6)  recalls that Oom Ray joined the South African Communist Party in
        1943 and in 1944 he joined the African National Congress and that he
        was amongst the volunteers in the Eastern Cape who led the defiance
        campaign of 1952 and also the first to be arrested for defiance
        campaign activities, for which he earned the nickname Vulindlela;
        and
    7) further recalls that Oom Ray was the first Premier of the Eastern
       Cape from 1994 to 1996 and that he took up the post of South African
       Ambassador to Uganda from 1997 to 2001, when he retired from active
       public life.

Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Geagte Voorsitter, dit is ’n voorreg om hierdie mosie te
steun en ’n paar woorde te sê by hierdie geleentheid waar die Parlement
hulde bring aan die nagedagtenis van Raymond Mhlaba.

Die eerste openbare debat tussen ’n lid van die destydse F W de Klerk-
regering en ’n leiersfiguur in die ANC het in 1990 plaasgevind by die
Setlaarsmonument, Grahamstad. By dié geleentheid het ekself, toe ’n
Adjunkminister, en Ray Mhlaba opgetree. Ek kan vandag sê, as alle debate
maar so rustig, so sonder verbittering en so toekomsgerig kon wees, sou dit
goed gegaan het in Suid-Afrika.

Ná 1994 was ek die enigste lid van die opposisie wat in sy uitvoerende raad
in die Oos-Kaap gedien het. Ons verbintenis was dus besonder, ten spyte van
ons besliste politieke verskille.

Beide ek en my eggenote het net die hoogste waardering vir die wyse waarop
oom Ray ook vir ons geakkommodeer het. In ’n sekere sin was ons selfs
partykeer verleë oor die ereposisie wat hy aan ons langs hom en sy dierbare
eggenote Dideka toegeken het by funksies wat eintlik ANC-geleenthede was,
en nie regeringsfunksies nie. Dit het nie vir hom saak gemaak nie.

Hy kon vir homself lag, soos toe ’n polisiekolonel onverwags in die
vergadering van die uitvoerende raad ingestap het om ’n boodskap te bring,
en oom Ray sigbaar geskrik het, net om daarna verlig te glimlag en te sê:

  To think it is my own, and I still feel a little bit of shock when I see
  a senior policeman.

Hy kon dit verwerk ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr J T DELPORT: Hon Chairperson, it is an honour to support this motion
and to say a few words on this occasion when Parliament is paying tribute
to the memory of Raymond Mhlaba.

The first public debate between a member of the former government of F W de
Klerk and a leading figure of the ANC took place in 1990 at the Settler’s
Monument, Grahamstown. On that occasion Ray Mhlaba and I, a Deputy Minister
then, were the speakers. Today I can say that if all debates could be so
peaceful, without bitterness and aimed at the future, things would go well
in South Africa.

After 1994 I was the only member of the opposition who served in his
executive council in the Eastern Cape. Therefore our association was
exceptional despite our unquestionable political differences.

My wife and I both have only the highest regard for the way in which Oom
Ray accommodated us as well. To some extent we were sometimes even
surprised at the position of honour he bestowed upon us to be seated next
to him and his dear wife Dideka at functions, which were actually ANC
functions and not government functions. It did not matter to him.

He was able to laugh at himself, as was the case when a police colonel
unexpectedly walked into a meeting of the executive council to pass on a
message and Oom Ray, visibly shaken, just smiled with relief afterwards and
said:

  To think it is my own, and I still feel a little bit of shock when I see
  a senior policeman.

He could deal with it ...]

... because Oom Ray was a kind man. He bore no hatred. He only sought co-
operation, friendship and the improvement of the lives of all our citizens.
Right up to the end, in his sickness, he preached reconciliation, love and
understanding. For me he will not be remembered in the first instance as an
administrator or politician, but as a man leading others by his own example
to a better future, a future of the rainbow nation.

Van hom kan ek werklik sê:

  Stil broers, daar gaan ’n man van vrede verby.

Ons groet hom met agting. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans sentences
follows.)

[I can really say of him:

Be quiet, brothers, a man of peace is passing by.

We salute him with respect. [Applause.]]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Holomisa.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Ngisacela ukukhuluma, Sihlalo. [May I talk, Chairperson?]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I am very sorry but I
didn’t see you first. So, may I recognise the hon Holomisa whom I did see
and I will recognise you subsequent to that.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Hayi, ungathetha, mkhuluwa wam, umdala kunam. [Go ahead,
my brother, you are much older than me.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Ngiyathokoza. Egameni leqembu le-IFP, sifuna ukudlulisa
ukukhala kwethu sikubhekise kumndeni kababa uMhlaba, izihlobo zakhe zonke,
abangani bakhe bonke neqembu lakhe uKhongolose kanye namakhomanisi. Sikusho
lokhu … [Ubuwelewele.] Ayikho into ehlekisayo. Sikusho lokhu ngoba siyazi
ukuthi ukudlula kukababa uMhlaba emhlabeni kuyinxeba elikhulu ebuholini
balawa maqembu engikhuluma ngawo.

Sikusho lokhu ngoba siyazi ukuthi ulisebenzele le lizwe kwaze kwaba
sekugcineni. Ukuqokwa kwakhe ukuba abe uNdunankulu wokuqala emuva kokuthi
sikhethile ngo-1994 kwakukhombisa khona ukusebenzela isizwe nokusebenzela
izwe. Ukuqokwa kwakhe ukuthi ayomela izwe e-Uganda futhi asebenze
ngokuxhumana ne-Rwanda kwakukhombisa ukumethemba njengoba eshilo okhulume
ngaphambilini ukuthi waze waklonyeliswa ngeSithwalandwe.

Thina beqembu leNkatha Yenkululeko siyahlupheka njalo ngokuhamba kwabantu
abadala, okokuqala. Okwesibili, siyahlupheka ngokuhamba kwabantu
abanobuhlakani, abanobuholi bokwakha isizwe nokwakha ubuntu phakathi
kwabantu. Ngakho-ke sidlulisela ukukhala kwethu kuMongameli weqembu
likaKhongolose nakusihlalo weqembu lamakhomanisi nawo wonke amalungu abo.
Balahlakelwe kanye nezwe lonke laseNingizimu Afrika. Silahlekelwe sonke
ngoba ubelwela uxolo kwaze kwaba sekugcineni. Sengathi umphefumulo wakhe
ungaphumula ngokuthula. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you. On behalf of the IFP, we wish to express our
condolences to the family of Mr Mhlaba, all his relatives, his friends, and
his party, the ANC, together with the South African Communist party. We say
this … [Interjections.] There is nothing funny. We say this because we know
that the passing on of Mr Mhlaba is a big blow to the leadership of the
parties mentioned.

We say this because we know that he worked for this country until the end.
His appointment as the first Premier after the 1994 elections was an
indication of his work done in the service of the nation and the country.
His appointment as representative of the country in Uganda, and working
hand in hand with Rwanda, was an indication of trust, as the previous
speaker indicated, and that he was very highly regarded.

Firstly, we as the IFP are disturbed by the passing on of older people.
Secondly, the passing away of intelligent people, with leadership qualities
to build the nation and to engender humanity amongst people, disturbs us.
Therefore we extend our condolences to the ANC government and the
chairperson of the Communist Party and all their members. They have lost
together with the whole country of South Africa. All of us have lost a
person who fought for peace until the end. May his soul rest in peace.
[Applause.]]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Chairperson and hon members, once again we are called upon
to bid farewell to a member of that generation which was at the forefront
of the efforts to create a democratic South Africa that gives freedom and
equality to all her citizens. We extend our sincerest condolences to the
family, friends and colleagues of the late Raymond Mhlaba.

Oom Ray will forever stand in the select pantheon of leaders who were
prosecuted at Rivonia and jailed on Robben Island. We are indebted to those
leaders who were willing to face death and persecution in pursuit of
democracy and freedom for all.

Oom Ray’s contribution to our freedom did not end there. He was the first
Premier of the Eastern Cape, where he will be remembered for his
willingness to listen to all sides and consider all arguments before taking
decisions. While some were critical of his continuous search for consensus
and complained about the lengthy nature of proper consultation, history
will prove that true democratic leaders follow this route and no other.

Siya kukhumbula ukuba uTata uOom Ray ebekwangumntu owonwabisayo. Kwakhe
kwathiwa kuye kwesinye isihlandlo: “Mhlekazi, awubonakali phakathi
kwabantu.” Waphendula ngelithi: “Heyi, andingomoya oyingcwele,
andinakubakho kwindawo yonke.” [Kwahlekwa.]

Sithi ke kusapho lukaOom Ray nakumbutho wakhe, anga angalala ngoxolo,
akhatshwe kakuhle ngempelaveki. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We will remember that hon Oom Ray was full of humour. One time he was
asked why he was hardly ever seen in public places. His replied by saying,
“ I am not the Holy Ghost, I cannot be present everywhere”. [Laughter.]

We say to his family and his organisation, may his soul rest in peace, and
have a decent funeral. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Chairperson, hon members, it is with regret and great
sadness that the ACDP has learnt of the passing on of a veteran of the ANC,
the honourable Raymond Mhlaba, former Premier of the Eastern Cape.

Oom Ray, as he was affectionately known, was a man of principle. When he
became a member of the Non-European Laundry Workers Union in his youth, he
fearlessly defended the rights of workers. He took a bold stand against the
exploitation of labourers in the laundry industry, and throughout his life
he defended the poor and the oppressed.

He, alongside other veterans and Rivonia trialists such as former President
Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu, Govan Mbeki, the hon Andrew Mlangeni and
others, will be recognised by historians as amongst those who paid a heavy
price for the freedom of this nation. He was jailed with Nelson Mandela and
other Rivonia trialists for 25 years on Robben Island for his role in
resisting the policies of the government of the day. After his release from
prison, he worked tirelessly to fulfil the vision of a new, transformed and
better South Africa.

We wish to express our sincere condolences to the ANC, his close family,
friends and the loved ones of the honourable Oom Ray. Our prayers are with
his close family members during this time of grief. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr C B HERANDIEN: Voorsitter, ons neem met hartseer kennis van die tragiese
heengaan van Raymond Mhlaba Sondagaand in Port Elizabeth. [Chairperson, we
note with sadness the tragic passing away of Raymond Mhlaba in Port
Elizabeth on Sunday evening.]

Raymond Mhlaba, better known as Oom Ray, served his country with the utmost
dedication and commitment, using his vast talent and energy.
Oom Ray was die eerste ANC-lid wat in Suid-Afrika gearresteer is in die
1952-versetveldtog. Hiervoor is hy vereer met die bynaam Vulindlela …[Oom
Ray was the first ANC member who was arrested in South Africa in the 1952
resistance campaign. For this he was honoured with the nickname Vulindela
…]

… he who opens the way.

Today we bid farewell to a man who offered himself and his knowledge to the
struggle. His contribution will not be forgotten. On behalf of the NNP and
the people of South Africa I wish to express our deepest condolences to his
family, his loved ones, the ANC and the SACP. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, the ID would like to extend our condolences to
the family, the ANC and the SACP on the passing on of a great man. Every
time one of the liberation heroes passes on we are rudely reminded that a
generation that has fought so hard for the freedom of this country is
beginning to leave us one by one.

Oom Ray is certainly one of those heroes, but it is important for us to
continue building on what they have started, leading by example, showing
commitment to our country, working tirelessly for our people, and Oom Ray
certainly did that, not only during the struggle against apartheid, but
also after 1994. Hamba kahle, Oom Ray. [Go well, Oom Ray.]

Rre B E PULE: Ke a leboga, Modulasetilo. Re le mokgatlo wa UCDP, le rona re
gamaregile go utlwa ka ga loso la ga rre Raymond Mohlaba. Fa re lebelela
dingwaga tsa gagwe, re leboga Modimo gore o bo o re mo file. Rona ka
segarona re a tle re re lerapo fa le le monate kgotsa nama fa e le monate
wa e kokona. Jaanong re mo kokonne. O tlogetse ditiro tsa gagwe, re a di
bona mme re rata go tlisa matshidiso mo mokgatlong o a neng a dira le ona
wa ANC, SA Communist Party le ba bangwe ba a neng a dira le bone. Re rata
go tlisa matshediso gape mo lelapeng la gagwe gore mme le bana le losika
lotlhe ba amogele gore Modimo o ne o ba file, Modimo o tsere mme go bakwe
leina la one. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Tswana paragraph
follows.)

[Mr B E PULE: Thank you, Chairperson. The UCDP is also very sad to hear
about the death of Mr Raymond Mhlaba. When we look at his years, we thank
God for having given us Mr Mhlaba. In our language there is a saying that
translates to “when a bone or meat is tasty, we enjoy it”. We have enjoyed
being with him. He has left an indelible mark and we are witnesses to his
work. We would like to extend our condolences to his party, the ANC, of
which he was a member, the SA Communist Party and those who used to work
with him. We also wish to extend our condolences to his wife and children.
His whole family should accept that it is God who has given and it is God
who has taken, and let his name be praised. I thank you.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I regret that there was no
translation.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Chairperson, on behalf of Azapo we wish to join
the ANC and the SA Communist Party and all people who knew and associated
with Comrade Mhlaba in expressing our heartfelt condolences to his family
and friends.

Azapo remembers Comrade Mhlaba for his dedication to the emancipation of
the working class and his courage and sacrifice. He gave his entire life
for the noble goals of peace, freedom, democracy and independence. As Azapo
we salute this gallant son of the soil and freedom fighter. Sithi hamba
kahle, oom Ray [Rest in peace, Oom Ray.]! Siyophinda sibonane [We will meet
again.]! Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, the MF associates itself with conveying our
condolences to the bereaved family of the late Mr Raymond Mhlaba. His deeds
and contribution to our country in the struggle will always be remembered
and will go down in history for our future generations to remember and know
how the great Raymond discharged his duties.

Unfortunately Mr Raymond had very little time to enjoy his freedom, the
freedom of democracy. May his soul rest in peace. Hamba kahle, ndodana
yasemhlabeni wethu. [Go well, son of our soil.] Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, on behalf of the PAC we wish to express our
heartfelt condolences to and solidarity with the Mhlaba family and the
comrades movement on the occasion of the death of Comrade Raymond Mhlaba.

As illustrated by previous speakers, Comrade Mhlaba had distinguished
himself as a dedicated freedom fighter, who not only fought against
apartheid but also had the opportunity to contribute immensely to the
democracy that we have had for the past ten years.

Like the PAC, Comrade Mhlaba was committed to a society that is democratic
in form, nonracial in character and socialistic in content. Democracy we
have achieved, a society that is free of the scourge of racism is still a
work in progress, and a society that is egalitarian and socialistic is
likewise a work in progress. I think those of us who remain behind are
challenged to double and quadruple our efforts to realise the ideals for
which Comrade Mhlaba and many other comrades have sacrificed their lives.
[Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Agb mev die Voorsitter en agb lede, die VF Plus assosieer
homself met die mosie van roubeklag vir die oorledene, Raymond Mhlaba, in
die naam van die agb Hoofsweep. Ek wil graag namens die VF Plus ons opregte
meelewing en simpatie betuig teenoor sy familie, sy naasbestaandes, sy
geliefdes en ook teenoor die ANC, wat een van hul kollegas verloor het wat
’n lang pad saam met hulle in die stryd gekom het.

Dit was opvallend dat die oorledene, Raymond Mhlaba, hier aan die einde van
sy lewe baie klem gelê het op versoening, nasiebou en samewerking, en dit
kan vir ons elkeen ’n les wees, asook die vasberadenheid waarmee hy
gestreef het vir die ideale waarin hy geglo het.

Die VF Plus steun graag die mosie en ons betuig ons opregte meelewing. Baie
dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Chair and hon members, the FF Plus identifies with
the motion of condolence for the deceased, Raymond Mhlaba, put forward by
the hon Chief Whip. On behalf of the FF Plus, I would like to extend our
sincere condolences and sympathy to his family, his next of kin, his loved
ones and also to the ANC for losing one of their colleagues, who came a
long way with them through the struggle.

It is noteworthy that the deceased, Raymond Mhlaba, towards the end of his
life set great store by reconciliation, nation-building and co-operation,
and that can be a lesson to each one of us, as well as the resolve with
which he strove for the ideals he believed in.

The FF Plus gladly supports the motion and expresses its sincere
condolences. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mnu Z J KATI: Sihlalo neNdlu yePalamente, le ndoda sithetha ngayo apha,
uRaymond Mhlaba, ndaqala ukudibana nayo ngo-’52 apha embuthweni. Ngaloo
mhla, wama-26 kuJuni, uRaymond Mhlaba wayesiya kwaphula imithetho yentswela-
bulungisa, ephuma kwicawe yakwaDonki.

Wayefika evela ekhayeni lakhe. Wayengazi ukuba yayinguye owayeya kuthi
aqale aye kungena ejele. Sasisazi ukuba umntu wokuqala owayeya kungena
ejele yayinguRobert Maji. Wagula ke uRobert Maji, saze sakhupha uRaymond
Mhlaba, efika evela ekhaya, ngokomyalelo we-ANC.
Sidla ngokutsho ebantwini ukuba mabayibazele iindlebe imiyalelo ye-ANC.
Ibalulekile imiyalelo ye-ANC kuba kaloku imenza umntu afane noMhlaba,
asweleke engazange abe nazo izinto ezininzi ezisemzimbeni. URay
wayewuthobele lo mbutho.

Wangena ejele nabantu abangama-8 000 phaya eNew Brighton, eBhayi.
Wayengumntu wokuqala phaya eMpuma Koloni ukungena ejele. Ngoko ke,
ndibulela kakhulu kubantu abathe bathabatha inxaxheba apha, benza
kwaqondakala ukuba kumke igorha, uRaymond Mhlaba.

Le ndoda yaya phesheya kweelwandle ineqhuma elalilapha entloko, kodwa
yabuya selingasekho iqhuma, lisusiwe ngaMakomanisi. Yathi ukubuya kwayo
yaya kungena kwindawo ekuthiwa yi-Korsten phaya eBhayi, ikunye noWilton
Mkwayi, kanti baya kungena kwindawo eyayinomlilo ovuthayo. Ndaya kubakhupha
kuloo mlilo, ndabathatha ndaya kubalahla kwenye indawo, ukusuka apho ndaya
kungena nabo eQonce, ndaphinda ndemka nabo ndaya kubalahla eRivonia.

Ngoko ke, uRay ubeyindoda enomqolo. Wanceda amavolontiya aKwazakhele
esengxakini, evalelwe ngomonakalo owawenzeke eholweni. Ukuhamba kwenye
indodana emhlophe kwenza ukuba nakanjani uRay aphakamise umsila kuba
yayinguye yedwa inkokeli eyayisele inkulu eyayikhona phaya, kuba zonke
ezinye zazisetrongweni. UOom Ray wazama ukuba senze indlela yokuba aphume
loo maqabane.

Yindoda enesibindi kakhulu le singayo apha. Yindoda ekwaziyo ukuhlanganisa
abantu, kuba into ebalulekileyo kwa-ANC kukuhlanganisa abantu.
Ayibalulekanga into yokuba uthi, “ndiza kuvela phaya ndibe yinkokeli”.
Okubalulekileyo kukuba ususwe ezantsi ngabantu bakunyuse bakuse phezulu.
Ebeyindoda enjalo ku uRaymond Mhlaba.

Siyayibulela ke yonke imibutho yezopolitiko ethe yathabatha inxaxheba kulo
msitho wokuvakalisa uvelwano kusapho lwale ndoda. Ligorha eli singalo apha.
Namhlanje akuwanga umthi nje phaya eBhayi, kuwe umthi omkhulu. Wonke umntu
uya kuthi ehleli phaya eBhayi, nakwezinye iindawo, aqonde ukuba iMpuma
Koloni yakhiwe nguRaymond Mhlaba kunye noGovan. Lawo ngamadoda akhe laa
Mpuma Koloni nabangele ukuba ibe kulaa mgangatho ikuwo namhlanje.

Lilonke ke ndithetha ukuthi asazi ukuba siza kusala nabani. Azi ukuba
ngubani oza kusala endaweni yakhe? Kodwa ke sithi, “phambili, madelakufa”.
Akuzange kukhalwe, kuhlalwe kusongwe izandla; kukhalwa kusiyiwa emfazweni.
Masiye phambili maqabane.

UOom Ray andinakuthetha kakhulu ngaye, zinkosi. Ngumlweli wamalungelo
abasebenzi lowa. Ukuba bendingathetha ngaye uOom Ray belingatshona eli
lishushu ilanga, kuba kaloku ndimazi njengokuba naye ebendazi. Kukho
nezinye ke esingena kuzithetha … [Kwahlekwa.] Ezo zifuna mna naye, okanye
mna nawe sihleli ndaweninye, hayi nje zithethwe esidlangalaleni.

Ndithetha ukuthi ke sibulela kakhulu kule Ndlu. Enkosi, nangomso.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Z J KATI: Speaker and hon members of Parliament, I met Raymond Mhlaba
in the ANC struggle in 1952. On this day, 26 June, he was going to protest
against injustices committed by the Methodist Church in Southern Africa.

He did not know that he would be the first person to be imprisoned, until
he arrived home. The person who was supposed to be jailed first was Robert
Maji. Robert Maji fell ill and Raymond Mhlaba had to stand in on being
mandated by the ANC.

We usually urge people to heed the calls from the ANC. The mandates are
very important as they make a man stay healthy. Raymond Mhlaba respected
the ANC.

He was put in prison with 8 000 people in New Brighton, Port Elizabeth. He
was the first person in the Eastern Cape to be jailed. I thank everyone
here for supporting Raymond Mhlaba as a hero.

He went overseas with a tumour on his brain, but came back without it, as
communists had removed it. With Wilton Mkwayi, Raymond Mhlaba went to
Korsten in Port Elizabeth, a place where there were many problems during
the apartheid era. I rescued them from that situation and took them to
another place, and we went to King William’s Town and later to Rivonia.

Raymond Mhlaba was a man with backbone. He helped the volunteers from
Kwazakhele who were jailed because of some conflict in the hall. A white
man had died, which compelled him to stand up as he was the only old leader
who was not in jail. Oom Ray tried everything to have the comrades
released.

He was a brave man. He had the skill of uniting people because unity was
very important to the ANC. Being a self-made leader is not that important,
what is important is that people elevate you to the position of their
leader. The latter describes Raymond Mhlaba the best.

We say thank you to all political organisations that have taken part in
bidding farewell to Raymond Mhlaba on this occasion. He was a hero. A great
man has fallen. People in the Eastern Cape will soon realise that Raymond
Mhlaba and Govan Mbeki have developed the province. These two people
contributed to the growth of the Eastern Cape so that today it reflects
those standards.

In all, I do not know who is going to take care of us. Who will take his
place? Nevertheless, we say: Forward! to the warriors. We cannot afford to
cry and fold our arms; we must cry and go forward. Let us move forward,
comrades.

Oom Ray’s works speak volumes about him. He was a trade unionist. I knew
him very well and I can talk about him until tomorrow. There are other
issues that I cannot talk about here ... [Laughter.] I can relate those
issues outside, and not in public.

I appreciate what the House has done. Thank you, do so again. [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): The condolences of the House will be
conveyed to the family.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

              PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FINANCE TO REPORT TO HOUSE

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, I move without notice:

  That, upon the introduction of the Main Appropriation Bill, the Portfolio
  Committee on Finance, notwithstanding Rule 290(3), reports to the House
  within fourteen consecutive working days.


Thank you.

                                 Agreed to.

                      INTERNATIONAL MOTHER LANGUAGE DAY

                            (Member’s statement)

Mong M J G MZONDEKI: (ANC): Ke a leboha, Modulasetulo. Maobane e ne e le
Letsatsi la Matjhaba la Puo. Mokgatlo wa Matjhaba a Kopaneng o ne o nke
qeto ya letsatsi lena dilemong tse tsheletseng tse fetileng. Letsatsi lena
le kgethetswe ho kgothaletsa tshebediso le tshireletso ya dipuo tsa habo
rona.
Lekgotla la Afrika Borwa le thehetsweng ho etella pele letsholo lena le
kene ka setotswana mosebetsing ona, ho kenyeletsa phatlalatso moketeng wa
maobane wa ho thakgola semmuso dipuo tse molaong profensing ya Kapa
Bophirimela. Jwalo ka mokgatlo o moholo, ANC e rolela Mokgatlo wa Matjhaba
kgaebana letsholong lena la ho kgothaletsa poloko ya mafa ana a rona,
tudisano le phedisano-mmoho, le ha re fapane.

Batho bohle ba tla ba le tokelo tse lekanang tsa ho sebedisa puo tsa bona
le ho tsweletsa botjha makgabane a meetlo le botjhaba ba bona. Ho tloha ha
esale qalong, ntweng ya boitseko kgahlanong le bokoloniale mmusong wa
kgethollo, re ntse re tseka ho kgaba le ho sebedisa puo tsa rona tse neng
di nyefolwa. Ke ntho e ntle ha dilemong tsena tse 50 tsa Tokomane ya
Tokoloho, re tiisa botjha hore meetlo yohle e tla ba le tokelo tsa botho
tsa mantlha, ka ho lekana. Ka tsela e jwalo … [Nako e fedile.] [Mahofi.]
(Translation of Sotho member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M J G MZONDEKI (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson. Yesterday was
International Language Day. The United Nations took a decision about this
day six years ago. This day was chosen to encourage the use and protection
of our languages.
The South African Board that was formed to lead this campaign is hard at
work, and an announcement was made at yesterday’s party to officially
launch languages that are official in the Western Cape province. As the
majority party, the ANC salutes the United Nations in their campaign to
encourage the preservation of our heritage, togetherness in our diversity.

All the people will have equal rights to use their languages and to promote
the beauty of their cultures and traditions. Ever since the struggle
against colonialism during the apartheid era, we have been striving to use
our languages, which were despised. It is a good thing when in 50 years of
the Freedom Charter we can reaffirm that all cultures have equal human
rights. In that way … [Time expired.] [Applause.]]


                      USING THE BUDGET FOR JOB CREATION


                            (Member’s statement)

Mr I O DAVIDSON (DA): Madam Chair, the national Budget should be the most
important job creation tool in the government’s box. Yet, year after year,
the Minister of Finance Trevor Manuel presents budgets which contain
precious few direct interventions to deal with our chronic 40% unemployment
rate crisis.

 I challenge Minister Manuel, who has so successfully turned our debt-ridden
  national accounts into a well-functioning, balanced fiscus, to announce a
   bold set of tax and expenditure reforms designed to create millions of
    jobs. I offer the DA’s alternative national budget, which I presented
           yesterday, as a guide to such reforms. [Interjections.]

  Our budget delivers, firstly, tax breaks to both companies and individual
   households, to encourage them to create permanent employment; secondly,
 broad reforms on retirement funds and other taxes to encourage domestic and
 foreign investment; and thirdly, targeted interventions to grow our skills
   base through effective education, bursary and opportunity vouchers and
                            training incentives.

  If Minister Manuel breaks the Treasury’s tradition of weak answers to the
 job creation question with such bold reforms, he will set our economy on a
        new path of job creation and economic prosperity. [Applause.]

               FATAL ACCIDENTS IN THE FUEL-PRODUCING INDUSTRY

                            (Member’s statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Chairperson, in the fuel-producing industry Sasol
and Natref have experienced unprecedented numbers of fatal incidents,
causing death and misery to some of the workers and their families in the
past couple of months. Gas leaks and mechanical failures have been
responsible for these incidents.

  Workers are the breadwinners in every family unit. Life is more precious
      than gold itself. Precautionary measures are a must in every work
  situation. Workers need to be skilled and reskilled in every sense of the
                                    word.

  The IFP takes this opportunity to express its heartfelt sympathies to the
 families and relatives of workers who fell victim to these blasts and urges
 management to do all possible to avoid similar incidents in the future. We
   appreciate the efforts of the Minister of Labour and his department in
  raising his voice in condemning these incidents and calling for a speedy
                                  solution.

    The labour unions at these plants have acted swiftly, decisively and
   honourably in bringing the facts to the table and we urge management to
   consider seriously all the proposals, as such proposals are informed by
 research and experience. We hope the Compensation Commission will not delay
                        in fulfilling their mandate.

 A word of thanks goes to the Portfolio Committee on Labour for its concern
                and oversight conducted in loco. I thank you.

                RESEARCH AT WITS LEADS TO CHEAPER HIV TESTING

                            (Member’s statement)

Prof I J MOHAMED (ANC): Thank you, Madam Chair. The ANC wishes to recognise
and commend Prof Deborah Glencross and her team at Wits University for
devising an effective and reliable method of testing and monitoring immune
levels in HIV/Aids patients. The Food and Drug Administration of the USA
has accredited the South African Aids technology that radically reduces the
cost of monitoring immune levels in Aids patients.

The exorbitant cost of monitoring HIV/Aids is a major stumbling block in
treating the continent’s most devastating disease. With this groundbreaking
research, Prof Deborah Glencross will save South Africa, Africa and
countries further afield billions of rands. The World Health Organisation
is supporting Prof Glencross in establishing a quality support programme
for CD4 testing across Africa. The test will provide a cost saving of 70%
to 80% over traditional HIV testing. The test will cost R60, compared to
the current test which costs R1500.

We in the ANC join the Department of Health and health workers in general
in saluting Prof Glencross for her meritorious contribution in the great
battle against this scourge which afflicts humanity. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                         RECENT MORTALITY STATISTICS

                            (Member’s statement)

Mr J BICI (UDM): Thank you, Chair. The UDM notes with concern the recently
released Statistics SA report on mortality and the causes of death in South
Africa.

When official statistics tell us that for the period 1997 to 2002 there has
been a 62% increase in adult deaths, we ought to be seriously concerned.
Even more disturbing is the dramatic and escalating rate of deaths among
people between the ages of 15 and 55. We know from other statistics that
population growth for the corresponding period does not explain these
deaths.

As the Statistician-General has acknowledged, this report provides evidence
that the HIV/Aids pandemic is raising mortality levels and that Aids-
related diseases are on the increase. The sheer scale of this pandemic
presents a threat to the social fabric and economic prospects of our
country. As a society we need to respond with even greater vigour to this
crisis to prevent future infections and to provide treatment and support to
those already infected and affected. Thank you.

                 A PEOPLE’S BUDGET TO ERADICATE UNEMPLOYMENT

                            (Member’s statement)

Mr A HARDING (ID): Madam Chair, the tenth anniversary of the end of
apartheid and the first democratic elections in South Africa has been
widely celebrated throughout the country. The government has used this
occasion to congratulate itself on its performance in eradicating poverty
and reducing inequality. However, a report last year by the United Nations
presents a different picture to that painted by government.

The South African Human Development Report assesses progress made by the
government in social development and policy-making. The key issues of
poverty and inequality, access to basic services, environmental
sustainability, employment and economic growth were examined.

One of the most significant issues affecting working-class South Africans
is massive unemployment. Over the past nine years the rate of unemployment
has steadily increased, with between 30% and 42% of the labour force caught
in a vicious cycle of hope and unemployment. Between 5,2 million and 8,4
million South Africans are unemployed, depending on whether one applies the
official definition or an extended definition of unemployment.

The report points out that being employed does not necessarily mean having
full or adequate employment, with large numbers of people, predominantly
women, underemployed. Low-quality jobs, characterised by poor working
conditions and low wages, are prevalent in the economy, and only a small
proportion of South Africans enjoy the benefits of high-quality jobs.

It is against this background that the ID supports the call for a people’s
budget that will aim to reduce unemployment, and protect and create quality
jobs, meet basic needs, redistribute wealth, eradicate poverty, and bring
about economic and social equality. I thank you. [Time expired.]


                SAPS COMMENDED FOR EFFORTS IN FIGHTING CRIME


                            (Member’s statement)

Mr S MAHOTE (ANC): Mhlalingaphambili, umbutho wesizwe, i-ANC, wothulela
umnqwazi amapolisa oMzansi Afrika ngokuthi gqolo esebenza nzima esusa
imigulukudu nemigewu phakathi kwabantu. Le mpumelelo ingqinwa kukubanjwa
kukanqalintloko ominyaka ingamashumi mathathu ananye ngenj’ixukuxa eBhayi.
Lo mrhanelwa ubefunwa kumaphondo amathathu malunga neziganeko zokukhuthuzwa
kuxhotyiwe kunye nokuqweqwediswa kweemoto zabantu. Lo mrhanelwa sithetha
ngaye uye wavela enkundleni.

Urhulumente oxhuzula imikhala uthembise abemi beli ukuba uya kuzama ngazo
zonke iindlela, ebambisene nabahlali, ukuba wonke ummi weli ahlale
ngokukhuselekileyo naseluxolweni.

UMqulu weNkululeko kunye noMgaqo-siseko ugunyazisa ukuba ezi zinto zenzeke.
Le mpumelelo yamva nje ilandela ekhondweni lesithembiso esenziwe
ngurhulumente osezintanjeni. Sithi phambili ngokulwa ubukrelemnqa,
phambili! (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mr S MAHOTE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC takes its hat off to the South
African Police for working hard and apprehending criminals in our
communities. The early-morning arrest of a 31-year-old-criminal from Port
Elizabeth proves that efforts are made by the police. This suspect was
pursued in three provinces for armed robbery and car hijacking. The suspect
has appeared in a court of law.

The ruling party has promised South African citizens that it will ensure
that, with the co-operation of the rest of society, everyone shall live in
peace and security.

Those are the expectations tabled in the Freedom Charter and the
Constitution.

The successes achieved by the police are a result of the promises made by
the government. We say, forward to crime fighting, forward!]


           PRESIDENT MBEKI’S STANCE ON ZIMBABWE’S PRESIDENT MUGABE


                            (Member’s statement)

Mr D H M Gibson (DA): Chairperson, as a prohibited immigrant in Zimbabwe, I
object to President Mbeki’s defence of Mr Mugabe. The DA, the SACP, Cosatu
and the whole world believe that the chances of a fair election in Zimbabwe
are almost nonexistent.

Only our President and the ANC Youth League believe in Mugabe. The
President is proud of his very good relationship with Mugabe. The ANC must
be totally confused by the attitude of our President, because even our
Minister of Foreign Affairs is starting to look embarrassed. I wonder if
she knows what the President is doing.

President Mugabe is seen by most countries as a dictator and a tyrant. US
secretary of state Condoleezza Rice describes Zimbabwe as one of the six
outposts of tyranny. No one understands why Mr Mbeki continues to place his
own reputation, Nepad and the AU itself at risk by supporting President
Mugabe, who laughs at him and does what he pleases, knowing that President
Mbeki lacks the will to bring him into line. What a difference between
President Mbeki and Zimbabwe on the one hand, and West-African leaders on
Togo on the other: decisive and principled action can bring results.
[Applause.]


        ANC’S POSITION ON PARLIAMENTARY TRAVEL VOUCHER INVESTIGATION


                            (Member’s statement)

Mr D M GUMEDE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC has noted the appearance in court
on Friday, 18 February 2005, of a number of serving and former members of
Parliament in relation to the parliamentary travel voucher investigation.
It further notes the postponement of the case to June 2005.

The ANC reiterates the position it has consistently held on this matter,
namely that, firstly, the law must take its course without fear or favour;
secondly, the outstanding areas of the investigation should be concluded as
thoroughly and as speedily as possible; thirdly, the ANC remains ready to
provide whatever assistance it can to the investigation, including
encouraging the full co-operation of its members; and fourthly, the
principle of presumption of innocence until found guilty should be
respected by all.

The ANC continues to view this matter as a serious one which calls for due
process to be adhered to and respected. We furthermore support the decision
by the Joint Rules Committee to adopt a proposal by the Presiding Officers
to establish a multiparty task team to consider the findings and
recommendations contained in reports prepared by PriceWaterhouseCoopers.
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]


                           NAME CHANGE OF PRETORIA


                            (Member’s statement)

Mnr K J MINNIE (DA): Voorsitter, die ANC het die inwoners van Pretoria
jammerlik gefaal met sy emosiebelaaide veldtog om die naam van Pretoria te
verander. Pretoria is die administratiewe hoofstad van Suid-Afrika. Sy
grense is afgebaken en geregistreer by the Landmeter-generaal. Die
bemarkingswaarde van Pretoria, nasionaal en internasionaal, moet aangewend
word.

Wanneer regerings besig is om te faal, word daar na ander opsies gesoek om
mislukkings te verbloem. Die burgemeester van Tshwane voel die druk van
swak dienslewering en gebruik emosionele veldtogte om die aandag van sy
swakhede af te lei. Ons beleef weer eens die bekende kat-en-muis-speletjie
van die ANC. Wanneer die feite nie meer jou argument pas nie, verander jy
doodeenvoudig die feite.

Nie eens R1 miljard laat die ANC van sy bisarre gedagte afsien nie. In die
gees van die ooreenkoms wat in 2000 ten opsigte van die Tshwane-naam bereik
is, behoort die President persoonlik in te gryp om die naam van Pretoria te
behou. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr K J MINNIE (DA): Chairperson, the ANC has failed the residents of
Pretoria miserably with its emotion-laden campaign to change the name of
Pretoria. Pretoria is the administrative capital of South Africa. Its
borders have been demarcated and registered with the Surveyor-General. The
marketing value of Pretoria, nationally and internationally, must be
applied.

When governments are failing, they seek other ways to cover up failures.
The mayor of Tshwane is feeling the pressure of poor service delivery and
uses emotional campaigns to divert attention from his shortcomings. We are
once again experiencing the well-known game of cat and mouse by the ANC.
When the facts do not suit one’s argument any longer, one simply changes
the facts.

Not even R1 billion makes the ANC give up this bizarre idea. In the spirit
of the agreement reached in 2000 regarding the name Tshwane, the President
should intervene personally to keep the name of Pretoria. I thank you.]


                     INSTABILITY AT CERTAIN UNIVERSITIES


                            (Member’s statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Chair, the IFP is concerned about the
instability at some universities in the country. Whilst we expected birth
pains during the mergers, the alleged causes of instability call for
immediate and decisive action by both the Department of Education and the
management of the institutions concerned.

We call for constraints on the part of students while we support their
right to protest. The destruction of public property which has accompanied
such protests cannot be condoned. We also call on the Department of
Education to ensure that the equalisation process in terms of salaries,
student fees and conditions of service is fast-tracked; otherwise we’ll see
endless protests.

The previously disadvantaged universities must not be made to feel that
they are being swallowed by the previously advantaged institutions in these
mergers. Give and take is a sine qua non in these educational marriages.


                  CONGRATULATIONS TO FEMALE SOCCER REFEREE


                            (Member’s statement)
Ms S H NTOMBELA (ANC): Ke a leboha, Modulasetulo. Re rata ho phahamisa le
ho neha tlotla ho morwetsana, Matankiso Thite, ya dulang mane Thaba-Bosiu,
Qwaqwa, ho la Foreistata. Ke yena feela ka hara porofensi ya Foreistata,
motho e motshehadi, eo e leng moletsaphala wa netebolo le bolo ya maoto. Re
utlwile hore le ba lefapha la Fifa ba mo ananetse. Re re tswela pele ka ho
etsa mosebetsi o motle moo mahaeng. Lefapha la tsa dipapadi, le kopaneng le
wena ha ba ne ba le leetong la diphuputso ka Foreistata, ba re “kgabane, o
a hlompheha, Matankiso.” Ke a leboha. (Translation of Sotho member’s
statement follows.)

[Thank you, hon Chairperson. We would like to pay tribute to a young woman,
Matankiso Thite, who resides in Thaba-Bosiu, Qwaqwa, in the Free State. She
is the only female in the Free State province who is qualified as a referee
for both netball and soccer. We heard that she got recognition even from
FIFA. We say, continue with the good work over there in the rural areas.
The department of sport officers, whom you met when they were doing
research in the Free State, say; “Lady, you are indeed honourable,
Matankiso.” Thank you.]


               REFUSAL OF RELIGIOUS LEADERS TO PROMOTE CONDOMS


                            (Member’s statement)

Mr S N SWART (ACDP): Madam Chair, the ACDP commends the stance of religious
leaders who told the Minister of Health, Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, that
they could not promote the use of condoms. Instead they advocate sexual
abstinence and faithfulness to partners as elements of the fight against
HIV/Aids.

According to media reports, the Minister of Health insisted the use of
condoms was a matter of individual choice. The clash of views, according to
media reports, emerged after the Minister of Health met with these
religious leaders across the spectrum yesterday. Chairman of the Religious
Leaders’ Forum said, and I quote:

  All religious heads expressed the strong view that there should be a
  greater emphasis on faithfulness and abstinence as opposed to the use of
  condoms.

The ACDP has consistently supported the call for sexual abstinence and
faithfulness to partners, and requests that the Minister of Health follow a
similar approach of emphasising these aspects, with less emphasis on the
usage of condoms. I thank you.


                             ZIMBABWE ELECTIONS


                            (Member’s statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Sifuna ukuvakalisa njengeANC ukuba
asigungqi nokugungqa kundlela esiwuphatha ngayo umba waseZimbabwe. Le
ndlela siwuphatha ngayo lomba iphumela kumava neemfundiso esizifumeneyo
njengabantu abanonxulumano ulunzulu nabantu baseAfrika jikele,
kwananjengabantu abanephupha elinye ngeAfrika. Siyamangaliswa bobubugorhana
bexeshana obuqala ukuthi qhanbu, gqi! ngoku. Obabungazange bubekho
ngelonaxesha obabufuneka ngalo kusiliwa idabi lenkululeko kweli lizwe.

Ayizange yaviwa naphina into yokuthi unganyanzelisa uyokungena endlwini
yomntu, kungakhathaliseki ukuba wenza ntoni na endlwini yakhe. Ukuze ube
noncedo kufuneka ufumane imvume yomninimzi, ukuba ngaba uyalidinga na
uncedo lwakho.

Ukunyanzelisa kwenza ukuba sikrokre ukuba yindelelo kubantu abamnyama
leliqela labantu abamhlophe. Sizakuqhubeka ngokuthethana neZimbabwe.
Sinethenba elikhulu lokuba unyulo lwakhona lamkeleke kwizizwe zonke.
Enkosi. (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement follows.)

[We, as the ANC, want to say that we are not moving away from the manner in
which we are dealing with the Zimbabwe issue. The manner in which we are
dealing with this issue stems from our experience, and the teachings we
received as people with strong communication with people of Africa
generally, also as people sharing the same dream for Africa. We are amazed
at this heroism of the moment, which is only emerging now. This never
existed during the time it was needed when there was a struggle for freedom
in this country.

It has never been heard anywhere that someone should forcefully gain entry
into the house of someone else, and that he does not even care what that
person does in his house. In order for you to be of assistance, you need to
get permission from the owner of the house, if he needs your assistance.

To do things forcefully makes us suspect that white people are being
disrespectful towards blacks. We are going to continue negotiating with
Zimbabwe. We hope indeed that their elections will be accepted by all
nations. Thank you.]


                       ANC’S MANAGEMENT OF THE BUDGET


                            (Minister’s response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I would like to
rise on the issue of the budget raised by the DA, the DA who had ample
opportunity to influence the budget of this country for the benefit of all.
Instead, for many, many years they sought to support a system and a regime
that was using the resources of this country and the budgets for the
benefit of the minority, to the detriment of the majority. [Interjections.]

When we took over as the ANC, the economy of this country had experienced
negative growth for a decade. Since we took over the economy grew by 2,8%.
Last year it grew by 3% and this year it is growing by 4%. It’s the result
of the management of the budget by this organisation, the ANC, which is in
government today.

Interest rates are at an all-time low, inflation is low, consumer spending
is high, and the economy is growing because of the way we are managing the
resources. We have ensured that through our management of the resources,
the budget in particular, we are creating equity and equality in this
country. The DA is therefore the last party that can come and preach to us
regarding what we must do with the budget of this country. [Applause.]


                   AIDS PREVENTION AND ZIMBABWE ELECTIONS


                            (Minister’s response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, regarding the
issue that was raised by the hon member supporting the religious leaders on
their stance, I wish to indicate that it will be a sad day when we take a
one-track approach in dealing with the problem we face with regard to
HIV/Aids.

If one looks at the comprehensive plan of government to deal with HIV and
Aids, it deals with all three issues: issues of prevention, issues of
treatment and issues of care and support. I do not think anybody has said
we should not deal with issues of prevention, among which is also the issue
of abstinence. But it would be a fallacy to say that we should not appeal
to people who decide to engage in unsafe sex in their homes to protect
themselves and their partners, and therefore to say that we will stand by
abstinence no matter what happens.

I think the approach that government has taken does appreciate that for the
sake of prevention we need to strengthen the delaying of engaging in sexual
activity, abstinence where it is possible, but where it is not, condoms
must be used to protect oneself as well as others.

I should also like to support hon Chief Whip Goniwe in his indication of
the approach that government and the ANC has taken in dealing with the
issue of Zimbabwe. I think it would be a mistake if we as this country
think Zimbabwe is an extension of South Africa. I think that is a mistake.

On issues of human rights violations, this government has spoken out. We
have engaged on issues of ensuring that there is a free and fair election
in Zimbabwe, not on platforms but with the government of Zimbabwe and the
MDC. And I think it is unfortunate that hon Gibson starts attacking the
President in his personal capacity, because this is the position of this
government and the ANC in engaging on the matter of Zimbabwe. Obviously, we
might differ. We agree that on some of the matters we will agree to differ.
But I think it would be unfortunate to start isolating an individual when
dealing with matters of policy. [Applause.]


                             UNREST ON CAMPUSES


                            (Minister’s response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I am rising to speak on the matter
with respect to protests on a number of campuses throughout the country,
which was raised by the hon Mpontshane. I do not think anybody has
expressed their concern better than the Department and Ministry of
Education. We have indicated that there is no justification for violent and
irresponsible action by any student on any of the campuses of our country,
and I think that is where we must begin.

The mergers are not the cause. There is no reason for anyone to act in the
manner that we have observed on television in recent days. It is absolutely
unacceptable and I object to it.

Secondly, the mergers will not result in an equalisation of staff salaries,
campus fees, etc. That is not going to happen, because you go up, you go
down - it is a deliberate engagement of institutions that we should have in
order to decide exactly what kind of framework there should be. But the
sort of equalisation hon Mpontshane refers to definitely won’t be the
result.

We have had a number of institutions approach us, indicating that they have
difficulties with respect to the fee structure, and we have been able, when
approached, to arrive at a result that avoids the kinds of situations we
are seeing on our campuses.

A third point: We have played a role in resolving disputes. Therefore, to
call on us to be decisive shows absolutely a lack of appreciation of the
fact that our officials do not sleep, spending time on the campuses,
avoiding the kind of trouble that we have seen. I think they have to be
congratulated for the role that many of them have played in assisting to
resolve the disputes, without taking any public centre stage.

I have stressed the need for engagement on campuses, because in many of the
cases, hon Mpontshane, we find that a lot of the leadership of the
institutions have never had a proper meeting with their SRCs. If you don’t
engage the young people, where else do they express some of the concerns
that they have? The manner of expression is wrong, but the need for
engagement is right.

You cannot have an announcement about fee increases in January, when
students are already on campus, when during the entire year there has been
no meeting with students. I therefore have urged the leaders of
institutions to ensure that they do engage with their SRCs and the student
leadership on their campuses. In closing, I therefore urge the political
parties in this House to desist from seeking political capital from
situations that require maturity and honest problem-solving. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                      PETROLEUM PRODUCTS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Chair, we move that the
Bill be passed. Thank you.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                 ADOPTION OF VISION STATEMENT FOR PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Chair, I move the motion
printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party:

      That the House, pursuant to the decision taken by the Joint Rules
      Committee at its meeting on 18 November 2004, adopts the following
      Vision Statement:


           To build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to
           the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
           realising a better quality of life for all the people of South
           Africa.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson and hon members,
we rise to support the motion that Parliament adopts a Vision Statement
that commits us to build an effective people’s Parliament that is
responsive to the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
realising a better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

We believe that this vision correctly captures the role that Parliament
must play in meeting the challenge facing our whole society – that of
creating a united, nonracial, nonsexist and democratic society. A
fundamental condition for the achievement of this goal is democracy and an
abiding culture of human rights. All citizens should be guaranteed the
right to elect a government of their choice, freedom of expression, freedom
from discrimination, and other rights entrenched in the Constitution. They
should have a government not only formally based on their will, but one
that is open and transparent, and one that consults and continually
involves the people in policy formulation and implementation.

The vision that we’re adopting today provides a yardstick for measuring the
performance of Parliament and ensures the possibility of continuous
improvement of our performance and our work as parliamentarians. It will
also assist in evaluating the role of parliamentarians as representatives
of the people.
The vision provides a broad-based collective view of the direction in which
Parliament should be heading and makes it possible for parliamentarians to
develop, across party lines, a shared understanding of the core business of
Parliament. It will also provide a basis for Parliament’s planning
framework and for an assessment of the progress that we as a Parliament are
making in achieving our transformation objectives. Lastly, the vision
provides a basis on which to argue for the allocation of material resources
to Parliament.

This Vision Statement envisages a people’s Parliament that will play an
active part in transforming our entire society based on democratic values,
social justice and fundamental human rights; a people’s Parliament of
freely elected representatives building on the foundation of a democratic
and open society based on the will of the people, their participation in
and access to Parliament; a people’s Parliament educating, informing and
involving the people of South Africa in its processes, and acting as a
voice of the people; a people’s Parliament co-operating with other spheres
of government as it deepens and entrenches our democratic values; a
people’s Parliament working with continental and international bodies to
create a new democratic and participatory world order; a people’s
Parliament passing good laws, and scrutinising and overseeing the executive
action as it moves to improve the quality of life of the people of South
Africa, building a united and democratic South Africa; in short, a people’s
Parliament creating a better life for all.

The adoption of this Vision Statement is historic, coming at the close of
the year of celebrating our first decade of freedom and the start of our
second decade of freedom. Appropriately, it also takes place in the year
that we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Freedom
Charter.

We adopt this vision, having had the benefit of 10 years of experience as a
democratic Parliament, upon which we have been able to reflect and do the
necessary assessment. And the past 10 years have been momentous ones
indeed. We have written a Constitution that is recognised internationally
as one of the most advanced and progressive in the world. Our Constitution
was inspired, not only by the content of the Freedom Charter, but by the
inclusive and participatory spirit of the campaign that culminated in the
Congress of the People.

In a relatively short space of time this Parliament replaced the draconian
and oppressive legal framework of apartheid with a democratic one that was
arrived at through a legislative process characterised by transparency and
public participation.

We have transformed this Parliament from one that was of a minority, for a
minority and by a minority to one that is representative, inclusive,
participatory, open and transparent, and that actively seeks to realise the
ideals that the people shall govern and that South Africa belongs to all
who live in it.

The ANC played a leading role in this work and was guided and inspired by
the vision contained in successive documents developed by the majority of
South Africans in their struggle against colonialism and apartheid. There’s
a golden thread that runs through African Claims, the Freedom Charter,
Strategy and Tactics of the ANC, Ready to Govern, the Reconstruction and
Development Programme and many others.

In the words of the Strategy and Tactics of the ANC –


  Our commitment to open and transparent government, and to ensuring an
  informed and active citizenry, are more than just high-sounding phrases.
  They are the life-blood of democratic governance, the core values of
  people-centred and people-driven transformation. We shall therefore
  continue to strengthen relations between government and civil society,
  including nongovernmental and community-based organisations, and promote
  their role in the process of transformation.

This approach has been implemented at all levels, as witnessed by examples
of community policing fora, school-governing boards, public participation
in integrated development plans, ward committees, bodies such as Nedlac,
participation in parliamentary processes and izimbizo.

The fact that we’re adopting this vision after 10 years illustrates the
validity of the adage that theory without practice is sterile and practice
without theory is blind. We are indeed well equipped to be adopting this
Vision Statement.

Of course, crucial to the success of implementing this vision will be the
allocation of the necessary resources, because just as theory without
practice is sterile and practice without theory is blind, so the pursuit of
a vision without resources and capacity to implement is sterile and the
spending of resources without a vision is wasteful.

We need to ensure that parliamentary committees are geared to carry out the
function of assisting to remove obstacles to improving the lives of the
people and strengthening the links between the people and government. This
will include ensuring that committees have the necessary resources,
financial, human and technical, to carry out their tasks.

It will also require of Parliament to schedule its work in such a way as to
allow committees to do direct and active oversight work. Parliament will
also need to look seriously at how our committee system is managed. We will
need to make sure that there is co-operation between and co-ordination of
committees in similar clusters.

It is vital that members of Parliament play an active role in their
constituencies. We need to ask whether the resources currently allocated by
Parliament to members who do constituency work are sufficient to play a
meaningful role. We also need to ask whether the time allocated for
constituency work is sufficient and properly structured.

We need to give special attention to those members who have special needs.
Here we think particularly of veterans and members with disabilities.

Before we conclude, there are a few matters that we think require attention
and that are related to this debate. During the debate on the state of the
nation address a number of speakers tried to draw a false dichotomy between
our Constitution and the Freedom Charter. This is a false dichotomy. The
founding provisions of the Constitution provide that South Africa is one
sovereign, democratic state founded on the following values: human dignity,
the achievement of equality and the advancement of human rights and
freedoms; nonracialism and nonsexism; supremacy of the Constitution and the
rule of law; and universal adult suffrage, a national common voters’ roll,
regular elections and a multiparty system of democratic government to
ensure accountability, responsiveness and openness.

The preamble to the Freedom Charter states that South Africa belongs to all
who live in it, black and white, and that no government can justly claim
authority unless it is based on the will of the people; that our people
have been robbed of their birthright to land, liberty and peace by a form
of government founded on injustice and inequality; that our country will
never be prosperous or free until all our people live in brotherhood,
enjoying equal rights and opportunities; that only a democratic state based
on the will of the people, black and white together, equals, countrymen and
brothers, adopt this Freedom Charter; and we pledge ourselves to strive
together, sparing neither strength nor courage until the democratic changes
here set out have been won.

Far from being in contradiction to each other, the Constitution and the
Freedom Charter are bound by an unbreakable thread that runs throughout the
history of our nation’s struggle to rid ourselves of colonialism and
apartheid, and the creation of a united, nonracial, nonsexist and
democratic society.

There is an unfortunate tendency on the part of the proponents of the view
that the Constitution and the Freedom Charter stand opposed to each other.
Their unshakeable belief in their own superiority makes it impossible for
them to take seriously any views that they have not had a direct and
controlling part in formulating. Their ideological ancestors were invited
to participate in the Congress of the People. They refused. Now, years
later, when one would have thought that they would have learnt from
history, they persevere in their arrogant and stubborn refusal to hear the
voice of the people.

Secondly, both opposition parties as well as political commentators have
argued that ANC MPs are not playing a sufficiently aggressive oversight
role and that they are not challenging the executive on policy matters, but
are restricting themselves to oversight that facilitates implementation of
policies. [Interjections.]
We need to deal with these matters head-on. The ANC is characterised by a
highly participatory policy formulation process. ANC national conferences
decide on ANC policy. They are attended by delegates who are elected by
branches. Our conferences are preceded by policy discussions at branch,
regional, provincial and national level. Discussions are characterised by
vigorous and open debate. All ANC members of Parliament are part of these
structures at one level or another. These are the very same policies which
guide all ANC members, be they in the executive or in Parliament. It would
therefore be odd for members of Parliament, having participated in the
formulation of the very policies which guide the executive, to then wake up
one day and start disagreeing with these policies on the basis that this is
a sign of healthy democratic practice. [Interjections.]

Where policies are not being implemented it is the duty of ANC members of
Parliament to engage in oversight work to ensure that these policies are
implemented. This duty derives from the oath that they have taken as
members of Parliament to uphold the Constitution, as well as the oath that
they took when they became members of the ANC to defend the organisation
and its policies. [Interjections.]

Therefore, to pose the question whether members of Parliament are
performing oversight for the executive or of the executive is misplaced.
Members of Parliament must do both. The fact of the matter is that members
of Parliament and the executive have an objective interest in seeing
policies carried out successfully. Oversight does not have to be
antagonistic in order to be successful. It can and, where possible, should
be co-operative.

The Joint Rules Committee has established a task team on oversight and
accountability. This task team will be making recommendations regarding how
Parliament can conduct oversight in the most systematic and thorough
manner. We hope that all parties participate actively in this process and
ensure that we make the Vision Statement a reality.

In conclusion, we wish to thank the presiding officers, the Secretary to
Parliament and all parliamentary staff for the excellent work that they
have done in assisting us to formulate this Vision Statement.
We support the resolution. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to say that Mr Nel certainly
was at his very pompous best today, and said all the things a very good ANC
cadre would have to say in defence of his party’s stand on this particular
issue. [Interjections.]

I beg your pardon, Johnny. Let me hear that again.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: He’s never
been more pompous than you!

Mr M J ELLIS: Oh my word, Sir! Thank you very much indeed. I didn’t know
you put me in the same class as him. Thank you very much indeed.
[Interjections.]
The matter of a vision for Parliament has been debated at length by the
Joint Rules Committee, as Mr Nel indicated, but the debate came to an
abrupt halt when the ANC realised that not all parties agreed with them as
to what the vision should be. The use of party slogans and electioneering
slogans such as “people’s Parliament” and “a better life for all” in a
vision for Parliament was, quite frankly, unacceptable to the DA.

The ANC has made an amendment to its original proposal by including the
word “quality” so that the one clause now reads “a better quality of life
for all” instead of simply “a better life for all”, which was of course a
good ANC slogan. This softens somewhat the vision, and we appreciate this
amendment, but the concept of a “people’s Parliament” remains, a point that
Mr Nel certainly placed great emphasis on today.

We had hopes that greater consensus could be found, but it is clear that
consensus-seeking was generally on ANC terms only. Consequently, at a
meeting of the Joint Rules Committee late last year, the decision to bring
the matter to Parliament for debate was taken. In the spirit of the ANC’s
determination to use their large majority in both Houses to push their
choice of wording through this House and through the NCOP, consensus-
seeking, quite frankly, was once again forgotten, this despite an appeal by
the Speaker at that particular meeting of the Joint Rules Committee for
parties to try to reach consensus. We never had any further contact with
the ANC on this matter. This is a pity, because I do believe that greater
consensus could have been reached, but we didn’t hear anything more from
them until this meeting today.

What the ANC vision for Parliament does not recognise is that the time will
come when that party is no longer in power in this country.
[Interjections.] It does not recognise that the time will come when that
party is no longer in power in this country. The problem with the Vision
Statement in the hands of the ANC is that, in many ways, it represents the
sort of tribute that vice pays towards virtue. In other words, when it
suits the ANC, there is no consultation, zero transparency and an
insistence on making the ANC’s political philosophy the undifferentiated
work of Parliament. To include even one party slogan in a vision for all
South Africans is divisive and, in reality, an abuse of power by the
majority party. That is the main reason the DA cannot accept the vision as
prepared by the ANC – even with its amendment today.

We also find that the vision is vague. We do not believe that it provides
the yardstick that Mr Nel claims that it does with regard to the running of
this country, and the running of Parliament in particular.

The time between the debate on this matter in the Joint Rules Committee and
the debate in this Chamber today has certainly given us much more time to
reflect on this matter. We believe that the vision should pay far more
attention to the founding principles of the Constitution, and the chapter
on Parliament as it appears in the Constitution. It should set out that the
main role of Parliament is to be an effective legislature and that it
achieves this by representing citizens, making laws and giving effective
oversight of the executive. This is of critical importance – the whole
issue of effective oversight.

A vision for Parliament should be something with which South Africans
everywhere should feel they can associate, that creates the awareness that
Parliament is for them and that Parliament works in their best interests,
regardless of which party they voted for.

HON MEMBERS: Hear, hear!

Mr M J ELLIS: A vision for Parliament should be something that unites
people. It should create the feeling that Parliament is representative of
all its members, and those that voted for them.

The emphasis on a “people’s Parliament” panders to the few Marxists here.
The word “people” has become a pejorative because, in most cases, countries
paying lip service to the “people” are deeply undemocratic.
[Interjections.]

The DA, therefore, wants to propose an amendment to the resolution before
the House, which would read as follows:


  That all the words after the words “To build ...” be replaced by the
  words:


      An effective Parliament that is responsive to the needs of citizens
      protected equally by law, which provides a national forum for public
      consideration of issues and which scrutinises and oversees executive
      action.


This fits in with what the Constitution believes Parliament should be. We
are proposing a Parliament that provides citizens with access to decision-
making by promoting public participation in the legislative process; a
Parliament of freely elected representatives that considers and debates
national issues, resulting in legislation that enhances the quality of life
of citizens; and a Parliament that fiercely maintains its independence from
other branches of government and, in so doing, plays a crucial role in
holding the executive to account.

It is a vision of this nature that will help to deepen and entrench our
democratic values through holding government to account – a Parliament that
gives effect to the Constitution through the passing of good laws and
executive oversight as it moves to improve the quality of life of the
people of South Africa, building a united and democratic South Africa. I
urge the House to accept our proposal in this regard. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson and hon members, this Vision Statement is long
overdue. Our members have been looking at the Vision Statement for many
years. We have participated and considered proposals and yet nothing was
done. At long last the process has been taken forward. I want to commend
here our presiding officers, the Secretary to Parliament and other
officials who have been involved in this process.

The IFP also had a problem with the initial wording and we expressed our
concerns quite vehemently. We also had a problem with the fact that the ANC
slogans were being utilised. However, the IFP is a party that, we believe,
tries to come to a decision on what is right, deals with the issues that
are important and does not dwell on petty issues. We discussed this issue
and felt that it was really irrelevant what words were being used. We felt
that we should get on with the process and do whatever we have to, to have
a vision for Parliament, a vision that Mr Nel claims to be a yardstick. It
is a vision that I would say is a plan for the future. We may not agree
with all the words of this vision but we believe it is important to move
forward at this stage.

We believe it is important to have something to work towards and to ensure
that we have a Vision Statement. But more importantly, we believe that we
should legislate to ensure true democracy and a better life for all,
irrespective of race, colour, sex, creed or party affiliation and freedom
of expression to ensure that South Africans find their rightful place in
the world, so that our children and grandchildren can be proud in years to
come of the things we have done for them.

The vision is but a yardstick, as Mr Andries Nel puts it, or but a plan for
Parliament. Inspirational author Og Mandino, in his book The Greatest
Success in the World, speaks of ten commandments. The sixth commandment
reads as follows: “Thou must realise that plans are only dreams without
action.”

Parliament’s plan or vision or yardstick – however you see it – is only a
plan. For it to succeed, it must be encompassing. It must not exclude
anyone. All members of Parliament must be seen to be making a better life
for all South Africans, irrespective of their colour, race, sex, creed or
party affiliation.

To do this, there needs to be adequate resources, as has been said. Members
of Parliament do need to be empowered and we are a long way from being
where we should be, to be able to make this a success. The ninth
commandment in Og Mandino’s book says: “Thou must never forget that it is
always later than ye think.”

Ladies and gentlemen, it is later than we think. It’s time we started
moving towards making this country what we believe it is - but for all
South Africans, not just for the chosen few. Now is the time for us to
commit ourselves to the vision of the South African Parliament for young
and old and to make this a country that we can all be proud of.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, Parliament is in the process
of adopting various symbols and measures that properly reflect its
grounding in a new South Africa under a democratic Constitution. The
Constitution guarantees a multiparty democracy and a representative and
accountable Parliament. The process of reflecting this reality in the
symbols and objectives of this institution cannot override or negate the
constitutional guarantees regarding the nature of Parliament.

The proposed Vision Statement for Parliament is part of this effort.
Correctly, the operative aspect of this vision is to build. It recognises
not only our historic duty to establish a new democratic order, but it also
calls on us to continue along this path. We, and every successive
Parliament, are entreated to build an effective Parliament and continuously
to strive towards a Parliament that is evermore responsive to the needs of
all South Africans.

A Vision Statement for Parliament should be elevated beyond the realms of
party-political and partisan ideology. Each of us, irrespective of our
separate ideologies, must collectively subscribe to this greater vision.
The challenge therefore is not whether this vision currently appears
similar to a certain partisan slogan, but whether this institution can take
ownership of this vision, and thus make it transcend partisan politics.

By its very nature, a vision statement should be able to stand the test of
time and reflect the overarching goals of this institution, no matter which
parties are represented here or in what numbers. By these standards, the
UDM believes that the proposed Vision Statement is sufficient for the
purposes it was intended for. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A HARDING: Mr Chair, the ID supports the Vision Statement of Parliament
and views it as a crucial element for the promotion of the principles of
democracy in a postapartheid South Africa. The ID believes that the Vision
Statement needs to be of such a nature that it will continue to promote and
strengthen democracy in South Africa. As a result, it is crucial that the
vision should be nonpartisan or nonaligned.

Parliament’s vision must be independent of whichever political party in
power now and also those which will be in power in the future. Moreover,
the vision of Parliament must coincide with the South African Constitution,
and in particular the principles stated in Chapter 1 of the Constitution,
amongst which one of the most important is that of universal suffrage, a
national common voters’ roll, regular elections, a multiparty system of
democratic government to ensure accountability, responsiveness and
openness.

The ID believes that if Parliament does not strive to operate by this code
of conduct, dire consequences for our democracy will be the result and the
faith of the people in Parliament will be jeopardised. By adhering to and
promoting these principles as stated in the Vision Statement of Parliament,
that is, of transparency and objective legislative oversight, democratic
lawmaking will greatly improve. This will correlate with South Africa’s
ideal of an effective democratic system and realising a better quality of
life for all the people of South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M P MENTOR: Thank you, Chairperson. Before I start my speech, I would
like to thank hon Madikiza and his party, Ms Seaton - who has just left –
and her party, as well as hon Harding of the ID and his party, for playing
a constructive role in terms of the vision of Parliament.

To the hon Mr Mike Ellis of the DA: The amendments you are proposing will
never see the light of day because they are anti-people, anti-poor and anti-
marginalised. I will come back to you after I have delivered my speech, but
you know as well as I do that the role you have played consistently as an
opposition is not a constructive but a destructive role. Even the
amendments that you are proposing are in line with that destructive role
that you have chosen for yourself.

I dedicate my speech to two people. For the Northern Cape, where I come
from - which is a sparsely populated but very big geographic area, with a
lot of minerals - the issue of minerals as a national resource and
beneficiation is very important to the people of the Northern Cape. I
dedicate this speech to the first premier of the Northern Cape, Comrade
Manne Dipico, because for the ten years that he was premier he would
mention at every turn, in every one of his speeches, the issue of
beneficiation, which is now becoming a reality.

My second tribute goes to the Minister of Minerals and Energy, Comrade
Pumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her dedicated, systematic and deep-running
programme of dealing with minerals and energy, and delivering on the issue
of beneficiation in the next few weeks, as I have learnt will be happening.
I thank these two people very much, and the people of the Northern Cape are
very happy to know that government, after ten years of persuasion, is
coming closer to concluding the issue of beneficiation of minerals before
they are exported.

The vision that is being debated by Parliament today comes directly from
the Constitution, and whoever opposes it is actually indirectly opposing
what the Constitution is saying. Section 42(3) of Chapter 4 of the
Constitution, which deals with Parliament, reads as follows:

  The National Assembly is elected to represent the people and to ensure
  government by the people . . .

Therefore I find it strange today that the DA has a problem with the
concept of “the people”, which is enshrined in every tenet of our
Constitution, right from the beginning, from the preamble of the
Constitution. I just selected two parts today. The first was the issue that
deals with Parliament.

I will go to the issue of the Public Service, which puts the people at the
centre of what Parliament should be doing. So when hon Ellis and his party
say they have a problem with the word “people”, I would still assert that
they are actually against both the letter and the spirit of the
Constitution. Chapter 10 of the Constitution deals with the Public Service
and outlines the basic values and principles that should govern public
administration. Section 195(1)(e) of the Constitution reads:

  People’s needs must be responded to, and the public must be encouraged to
  participate in policy-making.

The Constitution is actually quoted verbatim in the vision of Parliament. I
therefore still maintain that, by way of a back door, the DA is actually
opposing the Constitution, because the vision derives directly from the
Constitution.

The Joint Rules Committee of Parliament is also a committee founded on the
basis of the Constitution. It has, as the previous speaker said, considered
this matter before. We have placed a new governance model for Parliament
before the Joint Rules Committee, and this model was adopted by the
committee. Part of that new governance model is the issue of the vision
that is before us, this very vision that says that Parliament should be
effective – I emphasise effective - in ensuring the centrality of the
people in its business. That is what the vision is saying, and that is what
the DA is against.

We are saying this Parliament, in terms of this vision before us, should
have the people at its centre at every step of the way and during every
activity. And when we talk about the people, as the ANC and the other
parties that I have stated, we understand the people to be especially those
who have been marginalised and those who are very poor, not necessarily
those who have access to e-mail and the Internet, those who can buy air
tickets or those who are able to read and write and petition Parliament. At
the heart of our business are those who are voiceless, those who are in the
deep rural areas where there are absolutely nothing. We are saying those
very people should be the ones who are at the centre of what Parliament is
doing, what Parliament should aim for.

When you put a vision before an institution, you are saying to that
institution or that group of people, when you deliver your day-to-day
tasks, that this is the springboard for your activities. This mission and
this vision is therefore actually saying that whatever we do as this
Parliament, we must make sure that the people are effectively placed at the
centre of what we are doing. If we do that, we will be making the Freedom
Charter’s assertion a reality, to say that the people should govern. I want
to emphasise that the people who should govern are those who have never
governed before, who have nothing, who cannot read and write, who cannot
fly in and out to the committees of Parliament. The essence is that we
should not only take Parliament to the people, but we should, in terms of
this vision, also be able to bring those people to Parliament, those who do
not have the means to come and interact with us here.

The other issue that the vision is talking about, is the issue of a better
quality of life for our people. I don’t understand the DA when they say
they have a problem with the word “quality”. They have a problem with it
simply because they think it is what the ANC has stated. We mean business
when we say that the quality of life of all South Africans, black and
white, should be improved. There is nothing wrong with saying that this
Parliament is the centre of integration, because it finds itself between
the executive and the people - if you can draw that triangle of the
executive – and the people and government departments. Parliament should be
at the centre of integrating service, which will then in turn make sure
that the executive and government departments are involved in an integrated
way in improving the quality of life of our people.

I would like to cite an example of a situation in which I was involved
before I became a member of Parliament. Early one Sunday evening, as I was
buying bread with my friend the then MEC for Safety and Security, we came
across a very rude interaction between two homeless teenagers and two SANDF
officers, who were driving a military vehicle and were wearing military
uniforms. They were speaking very rudely in Afrikaans to these two homeless
children. They were using a very rude four-letter word and referring to
former President Mandela and President Thabo Mbeki, saying that the
children should ask them for money for food. These children recognised MEC
Connie Seoposengwe. They knew her as the Minister for Safety and Security
in the province. They immediately ran to us and said: “Minister, these two
officers are insulting the former President and the current President. What
do the two Presidents have to do with us asking for money for bread from
them?” This was a clear confidence shown by a very marginalised sector of
our people, the homeless. They saw an MEC and knew that they could run to
the MEC to lodge a complaint. We agreed with the MEC that we, as the
legislature, should take it to Parliament, to the defence committee. I
would take it to the same committee as a member of the public. We wrote
several letters, the MEC in her capacity as MEC, and I in my capacity as an
ordinary member of the public, to the chair of the defence committee.
Between the two of us, we wrote about ten letters.

What I am raising with this story is that our people might be in the deep
rural areas, they might be homeless, they might be uneducated, they might
be very poor, but they know that since the roll-out of democracy they can
run to any legislature or to Parliament with whatever bothers them. And
they have the confidence that Parliament or a legislature, or an MEC for
that matter, will take their aspirations into consideration and will do
everything possible when they are offended or hurt. They also know their
responsibility in defending the democratic state. This is why they took
offence when the former President and the President were insulted. We
cannot betray their confidence.

This mission seeks to bolster that confidence. A woman who might be forced
to drink contaminated water in the deep rural areas knows that there is a
public representative, by the name of Mantuli, who is accessible to her and
who is accountable, one whom she can go to to tell her that the water is
contaminated. Because she is a member of Parliament, the matter is raised
with her and the member of the public will know that Mantuli is an
accountable member of a responsive Parliament, who will take those issues
to this Parliament and ensure that they are addressed. I hope that I still
have a few minutes because I want to deal with Mr Ellis. [Interjections.]

In conclusion, “the people” to us are especially the poor, as I outlined
before. Mr Ellis, nobody in the world has perfected pompousness like you
and your party. You are claiming that Mr Nel was pompous. He doesn’t come
anywhere close to your party, which represents those who have, and protects
the previous status quo. You know, and the whole world knows, that when it
comes to transparency, it is the ANC and its allies that have made sure
that the issue of transparency is alluded to in the Constitution itself and
in all the many Acts of Parliament. [Interjections.] Therefore it is
wishful thinking on your part to think that the ANC will not be in power in
the near future. You are fooling yourself, because the ANC is founded
amongst the people. We will be in power with the people for many hundreds
of years to come, because the people are at the centre of ANC policy and
thinking. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson and members, the ACDP agrees that our Parliament
should be responsive to the needs of the people, and that it should be
driven by the ideal of realising a better quality of life for all the
people of South Africa.

When one unpacks the vision of Parliament, it stands to reason that the
history of this nation plays an important role. I believe that the vision
of this Parliament wasn’t a vision that was dreamt up ten years ago, even
last year or two years ago, but I am sure that this vision must have been
birthed in the hearts of many people long before they even came to
Parliament.

I do not know what the vision of Parliament was before 1994, or if there
was one, but what I do know is that the previous parliament was far less
participatory, far less accessible and open to ordinary people of all
races.

President Kalam, the president of India, said at a joint session of
parliament in India in 2003, when he spoke on the vision to transform India
into a developed nation, and I quote: “No nation attains greatness without
an energising vision guiding it.”

The prime minister, in his independence day address last year, called upon
the people to strive towards the goal of transforming India into a
developed nation by 2020. This was their vision, and it was also the vision
of their parliament. So, whilst India, as a developing nation, has
struggled with a new invigorating vision for their nation and their
parliament, we also stand today before a challenge to promote a new vision.

Now, I know it was a difficult process, it wasn’t easy to get to this
vision, and as the ACDP we would have liked to have a vision that contains
maybe less sloganeering and more words that are less party-political, but
we won’t throw away the baby with the bathwater today. Therefore, the ACDP
supports the Vision Statement of Parliament, because we believe it
encapsulates the spirit of a new South Africa and a new Parliament. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, we have a problem. In the Rules Committee I
said, after the compromise was reached, that the FF Plus would support the
Vision Statement. But after I listened to the speech by the hon Mentor, I
can no longer do so, for the simple reason, and she made it very clear,
that this is not a parliamentary statement, this is an ANC statement.
[Interjections.] That is all it is; it is an ANC statement.

Now, if we want to adopt a statement for Parliament that is not supported
by everyone in this Place, then we might just as well leave it, because
this is absolutely, and only, an ANC statement.

I want to come back to the hon Mentor, because what she said is not exactly
true. What she said was, and …
Agb Mentor, ek wil graag met u praat. Die agb lid daar, as sy sal luister
ná die groot gelukwensing vir haar toespraak? Sy’t verwys na die Grondwet
van Suid-Afrika en sy het aangehaal uit …  [Hon Mentor, I would like to
talk to you. The hon member there, could she listen to me after all the
great congratulatory remarks for her speech? She referred to the
Constitution of South Africa and she quoted from ...]

... section 42(3) of the Constitution, when she referred to the National
Assembly. She quoted that the National Assembly is there to represent the
people and to ensure government by the people under the Constitution. That
is technically correct, but we are not today adopting a vision for the
National Assembly. We’re adopting one for Parliament, and I would really
recommend that next time you read the following section as well. The next
section, section 42(4), deals with the National Council of Provinces, which
represents the provinces, and the NCOP is part of Parliament.

In this vision not one word is mentioned about the NCOP that looks after
the interests of the nine provinces in the country, which are not ANC-
administrative regions only. They are supposed to be, in their own right,
provinces that have certain powers and functions in terms of the
Constitution.

The point that finally convinced me that no one could support this was when
the hon Mentor gave her interpretation of what is meant by “all the people”
as stated in this proposed vision. She says very clearly that it does not
mean all the people in this country; basically, it means the people that
the ANC identifies as their supporters. Not all the people are included.
The ANC always says that they will govern for always. I challenge you to
show me one ruler, or government, who has made the same statement, and who
is still in power. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, the advent of the third democratic
Parliament of the Republic started with new presiding officers in the
Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Secretary to Parliament. In keeping
with that, government departments are expected to have a vision and mission
statement clearly displayed.

Parliament saw that they needed to lead in seeking a vision statement. It
was a difficult task to have all parties agree to the proposed Vision
Statement, but the pleasure was that, of the two options presented, all
political parties accepted option two, with modifications as preferred.

For us in the UCDP option two is the most suitable in that it calls upon
Parliament not to be passive, but to be responsive to the needs of the
people. Its very purpose should be to realise a better quality of life for
the people of South Africa. This is a clarion call to all of us who have
had the privilege to grace a portal of this building, to serve our people
without fear, favour and prejudice. It is a challenge to all elected
representatives to cease being selfish, and to look for ways and means of
rendering service honestly to those who earnestly deserve it.

With this awesome responsibility the UCDP will support the motion that the
Vision Statement of Parliament should be adopted. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Thank you, Chairperson. The PAC welcomes the new vision of
Parliament as part of our dialectical movement away from the memories,
symbols and mindset of the bitter past into the bright future.

When the People’s Mace was unveiled last year, the PAC cautioned that the
transformation of the institution of Parliament should not stop there, that
we still had a considerable number of aspects that required change. The PAC
is happy that today we are setting Parliament on a new and higher footing,
a paradigm shift in terms of how it defines itself, and the role it
ascribes to itself. Indeed, it was long overdue, that, reflective of the
new popular democratic dispensation, Parliament’s vision and mission also
needed to take a popular character.

This Parliament, inherited from the forces of white domination, could not
be a ready-made instrument for democracy. It had to be transformed, and
this is part of such inevitable substantive changes. As elected
representatives of our people we are, in the first instance, supposed to be
responsive to the needs of those who have put us here – the people. It is
therefore only correct that Parliament should serve as a vehicle for the
realisation of the fundamental aspirations of our people. The PAC supports
the motion. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Igama lamakhosikazi! [In the name of the woman!] Thank you,
Chairperson. Much discussion has been engaged in on this matter of a vision
statement, and it is most unfortunate that criticism has been used as an
opportunity for parties to compete with one another over petty
technicalities, rather than agreeing on a mutual vision regardless of our
differences.

Our people already have a vision; the vision entails a democracy, freedom,
unity, a government committed to this, and the prosperous advancement of
all South Africans. Our national Constitution serves as the backbone of our
nation, and in these ten years of democracy we have gained, achieved and
succeeded so much. Do you know what pushed us this far? It has been our
commitment to our vision of a free, democratic and sustainable better life
for the people of South Africa.

Our vision might not have been drafted in the form of a statement for our
past ten years in government, but nonetheless the vision has been, and is,
there. Regardless of how many different parties constitute this House, this
vision has been shared by each and every one of us to some degree or
another. In such a diverse population, how can differing opinion be
unexpected, in a House so representative of such diversity?

However, the MF claims that in this diversity we have each contributed to
the advancement of our democracy over the past ten years, and that hon
members symbolise a mutual, unanimous vision for this House. So, when the
MF made submissions on the proposed Vision Statement, we did not indulge in
selfish and petty self-serving party criticism, but rather saw ourselves as
further campaigning towards the true inculcation of our national
Constitution as part of the National Assembly, serving to uphold our
representation of a people’s government. The MF supports and upholds the
Vision Statement of Parliament. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chair, hon members, comrades and the people of South
Africa, the preamble of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
correctly states:


  We, the people of South Africa,
  Recognise the injustices of our past … and
  Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
  diversity.

Therefore this institution, our national institutions, including this
Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, indeed belong and should belong
to all who live in South Africa, including those on the African continent
through their membership of the African Union.

In this debate the ANC has and will continue to recommit ourselves to the
call of the Freedom Charter that the people shall govern. As we are all
aware, the apartheid regime denied our people access to institutions of
power and governance. The ANC has since 1994 been committed to ensuring
that the people have access to this institution. In doing so we have
ensured that ANC MPs in particular are drawn from all sectors of the South
African population. We have also made considerable progress in achieving
gender equity, but more could be done in this regard.

Our position as the ANC – a people’s movement – is that the vision of
Parliament should be a vision that obviously should be in line with the
Freedom Charter’s words that, “All people should be entitled to take part
in the administration of the country”. The notion of a people’s Parliament,
as proposed by the ANC, builds on the Reconstruction and Development
Programme, and the RDP states very clearly that democracy requires that all
South Africans have access to power and the right to exercise their power.
As a movement the ANC made sustained efforts to reach out to our people and
engage them directly in the system of government, including through the
programme of izimbizo and the programmes of the Letsema campaign. The
notion of a people’s Parliament, as proposed by the ANC, builds further on
the RDP, which states that the people shall govern. That programme of
reconstruction and development requires a population that is empowered
through expanded rights, meaningful information and education, and, as an
institution, networking and fostering representative, participatory and
desired democracy.

Democracy, we all agreed, requires that all South Africans have access to
power and the right to exercise their power. This will ensure that all
people will be able to participate in the process of reconstructing our
country. Deepening our democracy in our society is not only about various
government and nongovernmental institutions. Effective democracy implies
and requires empowered citizens. It requires the people.

We have made a considerable start with programmes such as the Women’s
Parliament and the sitting of the National Council of Provinces in KwaZulu-
Natal and, of course, their visits to Mpumalanga. However, much more needs
to be done. We have to make sure that Parliament reaches all South
Africans, united in our diversity. We need to free up resources through our
committee system to make sure that all our people are reached. What this
means is, that we should make the money available to ensure that, for
example, young people in deep rural areas are able to attend the next set
of public hearings on issues which affect them. We want to make sure that
women employed in the clothing industry can come to Parliament and make
representations on the influence of tariff reductions on their livelihoods.
We want to make sure that farmworkers and farmers from Vredendal can come
to tell MPs what new export control measures will do to the wine industry.
Women from Sekhukhune in Limpopo should have the means and opportunities to
address this Parliament on issues of access to water. We want the
unemployed from Orange Farm and the elderly in Mitchells Plain, in fact,
all our people, to have complete access to Parliament.

It has been said that many of these countries that have people’s
parliaments are countries that have a particular history of parliaments.
Let me cite the example of Uganda, and in Africa in particular this is
being put to us. Uganda provides a very, very telling story. It’s an
example of what difference access to the institutions of government can
make to the lives of ordinary people.

The Ugandan Participatory Poverty Assessment Project was a three-year
process that sought the perspectives of poor Ugandans through consultations
into the formulation and implementation of policies and planning for
poverty reduction, both at district and national levels. The project began
its work in 1998 and involved consultations with the poor, both in urban
and rural areas. Not only has the resulting information been incorporated
into the poverty eradication action plan, it has indeed influenced budget
allocations. For example, as a result of communities identifying access to
clean water as a priority, a higher weighting was given to the provision of
safe water supply in budgets at central and district levels.

As South Africans, with our vast and diverse population, with the poor
making up a significant proportion of this population, we would do well to
learn from this example. In addressing people’s issues, we should take heed
from successful international examples of how unorganised communities
and/or interest groups can be involved with parliamentary processes. We
should consider that participants should be involved in defining the manner
in which to participate, and should be provided with the information they
need to make their contributions meaningful. We should also consider their
need to be informed as to the manner in which their submissions were
accounted for and how they are reflected in the decisions we make.

Moreover, this Parliament should endeavour to take on board the fact that
we are celebrating 50 years of the Freedom Charter. We think this
Parliament owes it to the people of the country to consider having
celebrations of the Freedom Charter in this Parliament also. We must also
remain mindful of the fact that we are committed to creating vehicles for
more dialogue between government and the people, and that where the people
are not involved in decisions that affect their lives, social policies and
political interventions are likely to fail.

The RDP is very explicit when it says that reconstruction and development
require a population that is empowered through meaningful information and
education. This means that our people need to know what is happening in
Parliament. To achieve this goal, we need to examine the possibility of
greater coverage of the parliamentary process in widely accessible forms of
the media, not this 2h00 - 4h00 slot. At the moment only people with access
to satellite television, a small percentage, can continuously watch the
proceedings of Parliament.

We need to give greater coverage to the parliamentary proceedings in our
community newspapers, and on our community radio stations and the public
television channels.

There were quite a lot of allegations made in terms of the position that
we, as the ANC, have taken on why we should adopt the vision that the ANC
supports. We thank the parties that have supported the view we hold as to
why we need to incorporate in the vision, in particular, the aspect of
people. I find it quite strange that today we were confronted in this
Parliament with the statement that the vision of Parliament the ANC wants
to put forward is a vision that is full of slogans, that talks of more
people here and more people there. I find it quite strange because indeed
in the Constitution, in the preamble, as I said, it does say that we need
to involve the people of this country.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I know the hon member has a lot of time. Is she
prepared to take a very easy question?

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: If there is any time left.
Dr C P MULDER: Thank you very much.

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: I want to say that we cannot understand why there are any
hang-ups. I think the FF Plus would agree with us that “people’s
Parliament” in Afrikaans is “volksraad”. What is the difficulty in
understanding something that is called “volksraad”, which in English is
then “people”? We cannot understand why there is any difficulty in
accepting that.

It is a pity that it comes from certain parties, parties that have been
here previously, that are particularly opposed to the fact that we need to
include the “people”. We understand the hang-ups that they have about
having to go back to how things were done the English way, but I think it
is important to point out to all of them that the Danish parliament, for
example, does not have the luxury of just saying that the people can
participate. In fact, the Danish parliament determines the extent of public
access in participation. The German house of representatives says the same
thing. They have the discretion of who from the public they include in
their parliament.

Uganda’s case, which has been put forward, is a telling one. Every Ugandan,
as I have stated, has the right to influence the process and policies of
the government. There is an increasing global shift towards greater public
participation in parliament. But we can understand that there is great fear
when it comes to the DA around the issue of the people.

Indeed, it has been demonstrated here today that the DA cannot stomach
people. During the election campaigns one sees them driving through Soweto
on a topless bus instead of walking around among the people.
[Interjections.] We can understand why they cannot make that connection,
and make sure that they reach out. The ANC prefers the situation of door-to-
door, where we are able to confront and engage with our people. We are not
prepared to sit on a topless bus with a number of balloons to engage our
people in that kind of way. We can only call on the DA. The Chief Whip said
to us the other day in his speech that, indeed, even in the road where the
DA leader stays, there is a bit of uncomfortableness of how the engagement
with the people should be.
It is a pity that they are saying that it is party slogans, and that the
fact that we are including the word “people” is more than just party
slogans. If that is the case, I am very concerned, because of what our
constitutional obligations are. I am really worried about whether the DA is
asking us to change the Constitution or not.

There is an allegation that we are pandering to a few Marxist ideas and a
number of examples were mentioned of countries that are more undemocratic.
We cannot understand this fear that is being put forward. This fear has not
deterred our people from voting for the ANC in large numbers. This fear
about the vision that we are espousing is not going to persuade our people.
Rather, we can only use these last few minutes to persuade them to be part
of the global village and of the entire South Africa.

In conclusion, I want to say that maybe when Parliament has the state of
the nation address again, instead of saying “make way for everyone”, we
should say “make way for the people’s Parliament”. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Chair, I wish to draw your attention, and indeed that of all
the presiding officers, to the fact that when one is speaking at the
podium, the noise from that side is so loud, and on that side there is
total quiet. [Interjections.] I am not making a frivolous point, Chair.
There is a real problem …

Mr M J ELLIS: Chair, is hon Ben Turok allowed to just stand up and make a
statement of this nature? On what Rule is he standing?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): Can I just ask you to finish your
point, Prof Turok?

Prof B TUROK: Yes, Sir. The problem is that because they are so near to the
microphone the noise is absorbed, whereas on this side there is no noise,
with the effect that a speaker cannot hear himself speak. That is the
difficulty I experienced the other day and I could see that the hon
September was in the same situation. A speaker standing there is unable to
hear his or her own voice because they are so near. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): Hon members, order!

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I should like to make a point, please. How can
you favour the hon Turok without ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): Can I just ask you to take your
seat? [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: I can’t hear what you are saying, Sir, there is so much noise
coming from that side.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): Order! Hon members, I think we all
have a duty to maintain order in the Chamber during our debates and
discussions. The issue that hon member Turok is raising is an issue that
forms part of the political management of this institution. We would ask
that the whole question of order and behaviour in the House is a matter
that Chief Whips in particular and party representatives must look into,
and take a particular focus in their discussion on that, so that we do not
experience unnecessary disturbances in the House.

I think the second point that we should take account of is the distinction
between heckling and what could then amount to interference with a member
speaking at the podium. I think that is an issue that we would like the
Chief Whips Forum in particular to pay some attention to.

Mr M J Ellis moved as an amendment: That all the words after “To  build”  be
replaced by the words “an effective Parliament that  is  responsive  to  the
needs of citizens protected equally by Law, which provides a national  forum
for public consideration  of  issues  and  which  scrutinises  and  oversees
executive action”.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


     AYES - 42: Blanché, J P I; Botha, C-S; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T;
     Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Jankielsohn, R;
     Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Lee, T D; Leon, A J; Lowe, C
     M; Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Mashile, B L; Minnie, K J; Mnyandu, B
     J; Mogale, O M; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E;
     Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Semple, J A; Sibuyana, M
     W; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W;
     van der Walt, D; van Dyk, S M; Vezi, T E; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille,
     H.


     NOES - 208: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Baloyi, M
     R; Bapela, K O; Batyi, F; Benjamin, J; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu,
     M J; Bhoola, R B ; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi,
     M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers,
     J; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J;
     Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Dhlamini, B W;
     Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dlali, D M;
     Doidge`, G Q M; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S;
     Gaum, A H; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Godi, N T; Gogotya,
     N J; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M ; Gxowa, N B;
     Haasbroek, S F; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Henderson, R K; Hendricks, L
     B; Hendrickse, P; Herandien, C B; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L;
     Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kalako, M U;
     Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kati, Z J; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K;
     Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W;
     Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Lucas,
     E J; Maake, J J; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Maduma , L
     D; Madumise, M M; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe, G B; Mahote,
     S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L;
     Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Martins, B A D;
     Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Masithela, N H; Masutha, T M;
     Mathibela, N F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D;
     Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkongi, B M; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P
     G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M
     S; Mofokeng, T R; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N
     R; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D
     M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Mpontshane, A
     M; Mthembu, B; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A;
     Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N
     D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngema, M V; Ngwenya, M L;
     Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, M
     M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D
     A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M; Pieterse, R D;
     Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe,
     D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R;
     Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M;
     September , C C; Sibande, M P; Siboza, S ; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Sikakane,
     M R; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith , V G;
     Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thomson,
     B; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I;
     Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Woods, G
     G; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


     ABSTAIN - 1: Wang, Y.


     Amendment accordingly negatived.


     Motion moved by the Chief Whip of the Majority Party put.


     Division demanded.


     The House divided:


     AYES - 210: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Baloyi, M
     R; Bapela, K O; Batyi, F; Benjamin, J; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu,
     M J; Bhoola, R B ; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi,
     M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers,
     J; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J;
     Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Dhlamini, B W;
     Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dlali, D M;
     Doidge`, G Q M; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S;
     Gaum, A H; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Godi, N T; Gogotya,
     N J; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M ; Gxowa, N B;
     Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P; Herandien, C B;
     Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson,
     C B; Johnson, M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kati, Z J;
     Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M;
     Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K;
     Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Lucas, E J; Maake, J J; Mabandla, B S; Mabe,
     L L; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Maduma , L D; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E ;
     Magwanishe, G B; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C;
     Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N
     S; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashile, B L;
     Masithela, N H; Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S
     M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C;
     Mkongi, B M; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu,
     G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mohamed, I
     J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O
     E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche,
     K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Mpontshane, A M; Mthembu, B; Mzondeki, M J
     G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
     Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N;
     Ngculu, L V J; Ngema, M V; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S
     J ; Njobe, M A A; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D;
     Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G;
     Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Rajbally,
     S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
     Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S
     P; Saloojee, E; Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M; September , C C; Sibande, M
     P; Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Sikakane, M R; Sithole,
     D J; Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith , V G; Solomon, G; Sonto, M
     R; Sosibo, J E; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tolo, L
     J; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P
     Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vezi, T E; Wang, Y; Woods, G
     G; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


     NOES - 41: Blanché, J P I; Botha, C-S; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T;
     Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Haasbroek, S F;
     Henderson, R K; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard,
     D; Lee, T D; Leon, A J; Lowe, C M; Madumise, M M; Maluleke, D K;
     Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Mnyandu, B J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Nel,
     A H; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Sayedali-Shah, M R;
     Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M;
     Trent, E W; van der Walt, D; van Dyk, S M; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille,
     H.


Vision Statement accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:35.

                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                           FRIDAY,18 FEBRUARY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 18 February 2005 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


        (i)      Minerals and Energy Laws Amendment Bill [B 1 - 2005]
               (National Assembly - sec 75)


           (ii) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2005] (National
               Assembly - sec 75)

         (iii) Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill [B   3 - 2005]
                 (National Assembly - sec 75)

         (iv) Co-operatives Bill [B 4 - 2005] (National   Assembly - sec
                75)


National Assembly


1.    Submission of Private Members' Legislative Proposals:


(1)   The following private member's legislative proposal   was submitted
      to the Speaker on 9 February 2005, in accordance with Rule 234:

(i)   Magistrates' Courts Amendment Bill (Mr L K Joubert).

In accordance with Rule 235 the legislative proposal has been referred to
the Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative Proposals and
Special Petitions by the Speaker.




COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
     Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16 - 2004] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 16 February 2005:

The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec
75) and proposed amendments of the National Council of Provinces
(Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 27 October 2004, p 985),
referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B 16A - 2004].


                          MONDAY, 21 FEBRUARY 2005



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for the year ended
     June 2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for the year ended June 2004.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     Report to Parliament on the Strategic Industrial Projects (SIP) for
     April 2002 to March 2004.


National Assembly


1.    The Speaker

     Petition from Mrs C J Kellerman praying for a pension - (Presented by
     Mr D H M Gibson).

     Referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative
     Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report.



                          TUESDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Precious Metals and Diamonds General Amendment Bill, 2005,
         submitted by the Minister of Minerals and Energy on 7 February
         2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy
         and the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


     (2)    Convergence Bill, 2005, submitted by the Minister of
         Communications on 11 February 2005. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises.

2.    Membership of committees


     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
         Committees, namely:

         Budget:

         Appointed: Manyosi, Mr A T (Alt); Mkhaliphi, Mr B J; Robertson, Mr
         M O.
         Discharged: Nyanda, Ms F.

National Assembly

1.    Membership of committees


     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Portfolio Committees, namely:

         Foreign Affairs: Subcommittee on International Affairs:

         Appointed: Camerer, Ms S M (Alt).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Social Development


     (a)    Report of the Central Drug Authority for 2003 [RP 16-2005].

     (b)    Report of the Central Drug Authority for 2004 [RP 17-2005].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     (a)    Letter from the Minister of Social Development dated 18 February
         2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
         the Central Drug Authority for 2003:

         EXPLANATION ON THE LATE SUBMISSION AND TABLING OF THE CENTRAL DRUG
         AUTHORITY (CDA) ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2003, BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
         SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, FOR THE YEAR WHICH ENDED ON 31 MARCH 2003

         In terms of section 2(11)(a)(b) of the Prevention and Treatment of
         Drug Dependency Amendment Act (Act, 14 of 1999) and Section
         65(1)(a) of the PFMA, I am required to table the CDA Annual Report
         in the National Assembly. Subsection (2)(a) further requires me to
         table a written explanation to Parliament on the circumstances
         that prevented me from tabling such a report within six months
         from the end of the financial year.

         In this regard I would like to report that I was unable to table
         the said report, in June 2003, due to the following reasons:


         1. Firstly, the CDA Chairperson, who was responsible for
              finalizing the report, in June 2003, was unable to do so as he
              was involved in the arrangements to launch the National Drug
              Awareness campaign, "Ke Moja" in Cape Town on the
              International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking.
              This project enabled the stakeholders to work together to
              combat and prevent substance abuse in the country.

         2. Secondly, the Chairperson, retired from his employment,
              Department of Justice, at the end of October 2003, before
              having finalized the CDA Annual Report. The aplogy letter to
              the National Assembly was subsequently not submitted.

         3. Thirdly, the acting Chairperson, who took over the reigns in
              terms of section 2(7)(b) of the Prevention and Treatment of
              Drug Dependency Amendment Act, (Act 14 of 1999), could
              unfortunately not finalise the report to be tabled immediately
              in 2004, due to an overload personal work schedule.

         Kind regards,

         signed
         Dr Z S T Skweyiya, MP
         MINISTER


     (b)    Letter from the Minister of Social Development dated 18 February
         2005 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
         the Central Drug Authority for 2004:

         EXPLANATION ON THE LATE SUBMISSION AND TABLING OF THE CENTRAL DRUG
         AUTHORITY (CDA) ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2004, BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
         SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, FOR THE YEAR WHICH ENDED ON 31 MARCH 2004

         In terms of section 2(11)(a)(b) of the Prevention and Treatment of
         Drug Dependency Amendment Act (Act, 14 of 1999) and Section
         65(1)(a) of the PFMA, I am required to table the CDA Annual Report
         in the National Assembly. Subsection (2)(a) further requires me to
         table a written explanation to Parliament on the circumstances
         that prevented me from tabling such a report within six months
         from the end of the financial year.

         In this regard I would like to report that I was unable to table
         the said report, in June 2004, due to the following reasons:


         1. Firstly, the CDA Chairperson was appointed in January 2004 and
              had to work on the outstanding 2003 and 2004 reports. The
              major cause for the delay is the fact that the Chairperson is
              employed elsewhere and is holding a full time position.

         2. Secondly, the chairperson was unable to finalize and table the
              outstanding reports due to a busy work schedule at his
              permanent place of employment.

         Kind regards,

         signed
         Dr Z S T Skweyiya, MP
         MINISTER


(c)   Report of Delegation to 8th Session of  African,  Caribbean,  Pacific-
European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly, The Hague,  Netherlands,  22-25
November 2004.

The 8th Session of the  African,  Caribbean,  Pacific-European  Union  Joint
Parliamentary Assembly (ACP-EU JPA) met in The Hague,  Netherlands  from  22
to 25 November 2004 As usual, the joint plenary was preceded by meetings  of
the ACP and Joint Bureaus (of which South Africa is now a  member),  of  the
ACP plenary and also  of  the  three  Standing  Committees  –  on  Political
Affairs, on Economic Development, Finance and Trade and  on  Social  Affairs
and the Environment.

The delegation consisted of Dr. Rob Davies (ANC),  Ms  Dumisile  Nhlengethwa
(ANC) and Mr Douglas Gibson (DA). We were accompanied by Mr  Saul  Pelle  of
the South African Embassy to the EU in Brussels and Ms  Grace  Constable  of
Parliament’s International Relations Unit. Ambassador Jerry Matjila  of  the
South African Mission to the EU was also with us for part of the time.

The 8th Session operated according to the rules of procedure  adopted  ahead
of the 6th session. These provide for  resolutions  to  be  tabled  via  the
Standing Committees with the possibility of only  two  “urgent  resolutions”
per session being  tabled  independently  on  topics  agreed  by  the  Joint
Bureau. The motivation for this procedure is to encourage the JPA  to  focus
its attention on the common issues of  ACP-EU  relations,  rather  than  the
bilateral  issues  that  have  in  the  past,  in  practice,  dominated  JPA
proceedings. It was agreed at the Joint Bureau meeting held in  Brussels  in
September that the “urgent  resolutions”  would  be  on  “The  Situation  in
Darfur (Sudan)” and “Hurricane damage in the Caribbean”.  The  Joint  Bureau
also agreed on debates without resolution on the situation in Cote  d’Ivoire
and in the African Great Lakes Region (the latter following a  statement  by
the EU  Special  Representative,  Aldo  Ajello).  The  plenary  agenda  also
included the customary statements by, and questions to,  the  EU  Commission
(represented by the new Development Commissioner,  Louis  Michel),  the  ACP
Council (represented by Jamaican Minister Keith Knight) and the  EU  Council
(represented by the Netherlands Minister of Development  Cooperation,  Agnes
van Ardenne-van der Hoeven). In addition there were statements  followed  by
exchanges of views with Mr Phillipe Kirsch, President of  the  International
Criminal Court and Ms  Carol  Bellamy,  Executive  Director  of  UNICEF.  As
usual, there was a formal  opening  ceremony  with  speeches  from  the  Co-
Presidents, the Mayor of the Hague and the President of the  Second  Chamber
of the Netherlands  Parliament.  The  Prince  of  Orange  formally  declared
proceedings open in a  speech  that  referred  to  challenges  in  promoting
better water management in ACP countries.

The ACP plenary, in addition to the usual discussion of the Agenda  for  the
JPA, finalized a long running discussion on  the  establishment  of  an  ACP
Consultative Assembly. This is a substantially  more  modest  proposal  than
that first put forward at the JPA session held in Cape Town in  March  2000.
Essentially, the current proposal envisages  formalizing  the  existing  ACP
plenary  through  a  “Charter”  and  “Rules  of  Procedure”.  The  main  new
developments would  provide  for  the  ACP  Consultative  Assembly  to  pass
resolutions and set up Committees covering the  same  subjects  as  the  JPA
joint Committees. The ACP Co-President and joint Bureau members  would  also
become Consultative Assembly President and Bureau  members  respectively.  A
note from the  ACP  Secretariat  indicated  that  the  Georgetown  Agreement
establishing  the  ACP  envisages  the  creation  of  an  ACP  Parliamentary
Assembly and also argued that the  current  version  “will  not  entail  any
further  financial  burdens  for  the  national  parliaments”.   The   draft
“Charter” and “Rules of Procedure”, which were seen by  the  delegation  for
the first time at the ACP plenary, had apparently been sent to Missions  and
National Parliaments with a “Note Verbale” some time ago.  They  will  again
be sent with another “Note Verbale” requesting  that  delegations  attending
the Bureau and Committee meetings in late January/early February  come  with
a mandate to approve these documents. A copy will be sent separately to  the
Speaker’s Office, but we indicated in  the  ACP  meeting  that  due  to  the
recess it was unlikely that we would have a mandate from our  Parliament  by
early February.

The ACP plenary also received reports on the mid-term re-negotiation of  the
Cotonou Agreement and on the regional Economic Partnership  Agreement  (EPA)
negotiations. The main issues under discussion in the review of the  Cotonou
Agreement are political in nature and include provisions  against  mercenary
activity,  the  International  Criminal  Court,  terrorism,  an   investment
facility and humanitarian assistance (all areas where there is a  degree  of
convergence) plus weapons of mass  destruction,  providing  for  more  joint
decision-making on the passage  from  Article  8  to  Article  96  political
dialogue,  the  establishment  of  a  dispute   settlement   mechanism   and
alternatives  for  non-Least  Developed  countries  not  able  to   conclude
reciprocal free trade agreements (all areas where there are  divergences  of
views). All 6 EPA negotiating configurations have now agreed road  maps  for
negotiations in 2005. These mostly focus on identifying  development  issues
and addressing non-tariff barriers. It is apparent, however, that while  the
ACP  wants  to  focus  on  “real  economy”   transformations   –   including
identifying  measures  to  overcome  supply  side  constraints  and  address
adjustment costs arising from the introduction of free  trade  –as  well  as
issues like the implications of the EU’s new  food  safety  regulations  for
ACP access to the EU market, the EU is eager for the  EPA  process  to  move
into tariff reduction negotiations. Once again, neither  the  Committee  nor
the plenary agendas allowed for a  thorough  debate  on  these  matters.  We
continued to press both in the Bureau  and  in  the  Committee  on  Economic
Development, Finance and Trade (on which we serve) for  more  time  to  made
available to enable the  Committee  to  hold  public  hearings  on  the  EPA
negotiations. Although this call is received  sympathetically,  it  runs  up
against a range of organizational constraints that have prevented  it  being
implemented up to now. In the meantime, more time was devoted to  discussing
EPAs in fringe meetings (organized by NGOs and a research  institution)  and
a  seminar  organized  by  ourselves  with  delegates  from  the  SADC   EPA
configuration.

Although  we  are  full  voting  members  of  the  Committee   on   Economic
Development, Finance and Trade,  the  delegation  divided  itself  to  cover
discussions in all three Committees. Ms Dumisile Nhlengethwa  also  attended
a meeting of the Women’s Forum, which seeks to promote dialogue among  women
participants in the JPA.

The resolutions emerging from Committees were on “Political  Dialogue  under
Article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement” (Political  Affairs  Committee)  and  on
“Food Aid and Food Security in ACP Countries”  (Social  Affairs  Committee).
The first resolution called for a reform of Article 8 political dialogue  in
the direction of “proactive, concrete  and  positive”  dialogue  instead  of
merely being a step towards Article 96 dialogue, which  is  the  last  stage
before suspension of the Cotonou agreement in respect of what  the  EU  sees
as “delinquent” ACP countries. In an attempt to create a  more  even  handed
political dialogue, Rob Davies in his capacity as ACP Co-Vice President  for
Human Rights submitted a report that dealt also with issues like the  impact
of the “war on terror” on human rights in the EU  as  well  as  issues  like
racism and xenophobia and their impact on migration policy. This report  was
tabled in the Bureau meeting in September. As there was then no  EU  Co-Vice
President, it was agreed after then appointing one that the two  should  use
this draft as the basis for a joint report to be tabled at the  next  Bureau
meeting in February. In The Hague, the two exchanged views on this process.

Both  the  above-mentioned  resolutions  passed  unanimously.  The  Economic
Development,  Finance  and  Trade  Committee,  however,  did  not  submit  a
resolution. The Committee has been working on  the  issue  of  “budgetising”
the European Development Fund (EDF). Most MEPs are  strongly  in  favour  of
this, as it would enhance the role of  the  European  Parliament.  Many  ACP
delegations are wary fearing it will lead to unpredictability  and  possible
reductions in development aid to some countries. This debate is  complicated
by the fact that some proposals from the Commission, which  would  at  least
partly address some ACP concerns, are being opposed by  some  member  states
that are resisting “budgetisation” because they  do  not  want  to  have  to
increase their contributions. This has led to  a  decision  to  establish  a
10th EDF based on the current system of voluntary contributions. During  the
course of the JPA,  the  two  Co-Rapporteurs  managed  to  produce  a  draft
compromise resolution on this matter, which will be put to the vote  at  the
next Committee meeting.

The draft resolutions tabled on the  “urgent  topic”  of  Darfur  were  very
divergent, with a draft sponsored by the Sudanese delegation  welcoming  the
cooperation of the Government of Sudan and blaming the rebels in Darfur  for
the continuing conflict. European Parliamentary groups, on the  other  hand,
were strongly critical of the Government of  Sudan  and  several  threatened
sanctions or embargoes. Rob Davies was asked  by  the  ACP  Co-President  to
work with Professor Ephraim Kamuntu, the delegate from  Uganda,  to  seek  a
compromise. After much negotiation, and greatly assisted  by  the  agreement
signed at the UN Security Council  meeting  in  Nairobi,  a  compromise  was
agreed. This basically reinforced calls made on all parties by  the  UN  and
AU, welcomed the Nairobi agreement and called for a joint mission  to  visit
the area  (a  suggestion  emanating  from  the  Sudanese  delegation).  This
resolution was adopted unanimously without the  tabling  of  any  amendment.
The other urgent resolution on hurricanes in the  Caribbean  was  much  less
controversial and also passed unanimously.

In the plenary, we  took  the  floor  in  the  debates  on  Darfur  and  the
International Criminal Court (lamenting US pressure for bilateral  exemption
agreements) and  on  “exchanges  of  views”  with  the  Commission  and  ACP
council. We had previously tabled questions to the Commission  (on  progress
in addressing the SACU revenue restructuring issue) and the ACP council  (on
the implications of the new  EU  food  safety  regulations).  A  feature  of
Commissioner Michel’s answer to our question and several others was that  he
said he was not happy with the formal  written  reply  and  wanted  time  to
review the dossiers on these subjects. We learnt that DG  Development  wants
to appoint a team of economists to review policy on some  issues.  The  SACU
group met with an official from the Commissioner’s office and  will  request
a  meeting  with  him  during  the  Committee  meetings   in   Brussels   in
January/February.

As usual Workshops were held on issues  pertinent  to  the  host  country  –
Health, Architecture and town  planning  and  the  Port  of  Rotterdam.  The
delegation divided itself among the various topics, which  really  took  the
form of an excursion to learn about the issues  concerned.  Members  of  the
delegation also participated in lunches  with  political  groups  associated
with their respective parties.  These  lunches,  that  have  now  become  an
established part of the programme, offer an opportunity for an  exchange  of
views across the ACP-EU divide with “like minded” political groupings.

The next Bureau and Committee meetings have been scheduled for 30th January-
2nd February in Brussels, and the  9th  Joint  Parliamentary  Assembly  will
take place in Bamako, Mali from 16 to 21 April 2005.

Rob Davies Dumisile Nhlengethwa Douglas Gibson.

Copies of the draft "Charter" and "Rules of Procedure" of the proposed ACP
Consultative Assembly are available from the office of the Clerk of the
Papers.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the World Health
     Organisation (WHO) Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, dated 22
     February 2005:

     The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the request for
     approval by Parliament of the World Health Organisation (WHO) Framework
     Convention on Tobacco Control, referred to it, recommends that the
     House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
     Convention.


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on Annual
     Reports of Department of Public Enterprises and Transnet, Eskom and
     Denel, dated 16 February 2005:

The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, having considered the annual
reports of the Department of Public Enterprises and Transnet, Eskom and
Denel, reports as follows:


A. An Initial Foray


   1. The Committee considered the annual reports of the Department of
      Public Enterprises (DPE) on 12 October, Transnet on 13 October, Denel
      on 14 October and Eskom on 27 October.


   2. The Committee did not consider the annual reports of Alexkor, Safcol
      and Arrivia.kom because of time limitations and other considerations,
      including difficulties posed by the different reporting cycles of
      Alexkor and Safcol. However, the Committee considered briefings from
      Alexkor and Safcol.  These will not be covered in this report.  The
      Committee will meet with Arrivia.kom early in the New Year.

   3. This was the first time that the Committee considered the annual
      reports of DPE and the state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Most of the
      members are new to the Committee.  There is also a new developmental
      thrust being given to SOEs. We had limited time and research support.
      We also have limited technical capacity, especially in respect of
      financial, accounting, economic and management issues. Our programme
      of empowering ourselves has just begun.

   4. The Committee is, moreover, seeking to establish what precisely our
      role should be in considering the annual reports of DPE and the SOEs.
      The Constitution, the rules of parliament, and the Public Finance
      Management Act (PFMA), Act 1 of 1999, provide a framework for the
      Committee’s role. But there needs to be greater clarity, especially in
      respect of the SOEs. Of course, the Standing Committee on Public
      Accounts (SCOPA) also considers annual reports. Essentially, as we see
      it, for now, their focus is largely on financial performance, and ours
      is mainly on the achievement of measurable objectives and on outcomes.
      Of course the two aspects cannot be crudely separated. The work of our
      committee and SCOPA needs to be complementary. We are to engage with
      SCOPA, the Finance Portfolio Committee, the Committee of Chairpersons,
      the National Treasury and other relevant stakeholders to get greater
      clarity on this.

   5.  As we see it, for now, our Committee’s concerns in considering annual
      reports revolve mainly around the following issues:

         • What were the main measurable objectives, strategy and
           programmes in the business plan of DPE and SOEs for the
           financial year under review? How does the business plan advance
           the agenda set by government and parliament?


         • What are the key aspects of the shareholder compact between
           government and each SOE? To what extent does the business plan
           of each SOE reflect the priorities in the compact?


         • How was the budget allocated to fulfill the plan?

         • To what extent was the plan fulfilled and why? In particular, if
           objectives were not achieved, why is this so and what is being
           done to ensure that they are met?

         • How was the money allocated in the budget spent?

         • What lessons were drawn from implementing the plan of the
           previous financial year for the implementation of the plan for
           the current financial year?

         • What progress has there been in the six months since the end of
           the financial year and now? What are the projections for the
           remainder of the current financial year? What are the
           projections for the longer term?

   6. Obviously, the Committee did not expect clear and comprehensive
      answers to all the questions in section 5 above this time around.  The
      Committee is also acutely aware that DPE and the SOEs are currently re-
      defining their mandates to take account of the new emphasis the
      government is placing on the role of SOEs in economic growth,
      development and service delivery. Major investment plans are being
      finalised. But, over time, the Committee is to engage in appropriate
      consultation with all the relevant authorities and stakeholders,
      including the Ministry, DPE and relevant SOEs, and secure greater
      clarity on how annual reports should be considered by a parliamentary
      committee. The Committee will certainly be clearer about its role and
      what it seeks to do in considering annual reports reasonably soon.


   7. In view of the considerations set out here, the Committee decided to
      be strategic in our approach and choose to take on only so much as we
      can mange in this first attempt at considering the annual reports of
      DPE and the SOEs.  Our approach must be understood in terms of the
      Committee’s programme,  “Towards Developing a Longer-Term Programme:
      Setting the Foundations”, adopted on 4 August 2004. Our aims have been
      modest. We have a phased approach to dealing with the issues in our
      portfolio. Essentially, we have sought through these briefings to:

       • Get a feel for the issues.
       • Express our initial views.
       • Set the foundations for a more rigorous consideration of the
         annual reports next year.
       • More clearly identify our role and responsibilities.
       • Begin to shape our overall programme for next year.


   8. Of course, the financial year being considered is 1 April 2003 to 31
      March 2004. In view of the new emphasis being placed on SOEs, the
      Committee did not focus too much on the extent to which DPE and the
      SOEs fulfilled the objectives set out in their strategic and business
      plans; in future years the Committee will be far more concerned about
      this. But, inevitably, an assessment of the past financial year cannot
      be crudely separated from current developments and projections for the
      rest of this financial year and beyond.


   9. Of course, a key concern of the majority in the Committee in these
      briefings is the contribution of DPE and SOEs to the goals of job
      creation, fighting poverty and reducing the gap between the “first”
      and “second” economies.  These briefings represent our first
      consideration of this.  We understand that DPE and the SOEs are still
      finalising plans, programmes, and budgets on this.  In future
      briefings, we will pursue these issues more rigorously.


   10. This report does not dwell on the new investment plans for SOEs. The
        first tranche of this, the R165 billion proposed for Eskom and
        Transnet, was announced by the Minister of Public Enterprises just
        as the final briefing on annual reports was being considered by the
        Committee. These investment plans will be considered by the
        Committee in due course.

   11. This report is longer than it should, ideally, be. The overviews
        provided of the submissions of DPE and the SOEs on their annual
        reports to the Committee are perhaps too detailed. But the extent of
        detail is partly related to the fact that this was our initial
        consideration of annual reports and we need to quickly come to terms
        with our portfolio. However, the report still provides no more that
        an overview of the submissions. A fuller account of the
        presentations to the Committee is to be found in the annual reports
        and submissions received by the Committee. These can be obtained
        from the Committee Secretary, Mr Chris Thisani.

   12. In a way, this report is as much about the Committee shaping its
        identity and role as it is about the Committee’s views on the annual
        reports of DPE and the SOEs – and so, inevitably, it must be for
        now!


   B. Department of Public Enterprises


      1. The Department was represented by Director General, Dr M Eugene
         Mokeyane; Deputy Directors General, Ms Portia Molefe, Mr Tebogo
         Mphuti and Mr James Theledi; Chief Director: Communications and
         External Liaison, Mr Andrew Aphane; Director: Analysis and Risk
         Management, Mr Mvikeli Ngcamu; Director: Policy, Mr Denzil Matjila;
         Chief Finance Officer, Mr Mario van der Walt; Chief Operations
         Officer, Mr Mandla Mazibuko; Parliamentary Liason Officer, Ms Dudu
         Mhlongo; and Ministerial Spokesperson, Ms Gaynor Kast.


      2. Dr Mokeyane explained that DPE’s vision is “excellence in
         shareholder management” and its mission is “to provide an enhanced
         shareholder management system, inclusive of restructuring” to
         promote economic efficency.  DPE’s key objective is to develop a
         “coherent approach to restructuring and transforming SOEs to ensure
         improved economic and social impact”. DPE seeks to “systematically
         monitor the performance of SOEs to ensure the alignment of their
         activities with government policies”.

      3. DPE’s “strategic goals” for the 2003-4 financial year were:


         • Clear mandates with SOEs regarding the operating parameters
           between government and the SOEs.
         • Performance criteria and a process of monitoring performance on
           a regular basis.
         • Ensuring that SOEs adhere to corporate governance principles.
         • Developing and implementing an effective communication process
           with all stakeholders.
         • Restructuring of SOEs.


      4. The Department had organised its work around four programmes to
         achieve these goals: administration; restructuring of SOEs;
         performance monitoring and shareholder management; and alternative
         service delivery. The Department felt that it had made significant
         progress in advancing these goals. In particular, it had
         strengthened its oversight role over the SOEs, especially in ways
         that overlapped with the government’s more recent “strategic shift”
         of emphasis on the crucial role of SOEs in investing in the economy
         and contributing to economic growth and development. Among the
         achievements pointed to were the following:


            • Development of a new shareholder management model.
            • Progress in finalising a Risk Management Policy Framework for
              SOEs.
            • Creation of Restructuring Frameworks for SOEs.
            • Alienation of  “non-core, non-strategic” assets.
            • Development of a Guarantee Exposure Monitoring System (GEMS)
              to monitor guarantees issued to SOEs on a quarterly basis.
            • Establishment of an SOE database of quarterly and annual
              results of SOEs.
            • Development of an “Investment Map” to monitor SOE
              investments.
            • Progress in terms of broad-based Black Economic Empowerment
              (BEE).
            • Development of an IPO (Initial Public Offering) Reference
              Manual based on the Telkom experience.
            • Development of new skills within DPE to effectively implement
              the strategic shift in emphasis.
      5. In order to play its role more effectively, the Department had
         strengthened its internal structures and streamlined its
         operations. With the “strategic shift”, the Department had also
         been restructured. It now had four Deputy Directors General for
         Analysis and Risk Management; Governance and Policy; Corporate
         Strategy and Structure; and Corporate Finance and Transactions.
         Currently, the staff is made up of 82% Africans, 6% Coloureds, 2%
         Indians and 10% Whites.  53% of the staff is female.


      6. DPE had been allocated a budget of R88,1 million for 2003-4. DPE
         had underspent by 5%. National Treasury’s benchmark is 3%.  For the
         fourth year in a row, DPE had received an unqualified audit from
         the Auditor-General.

      7. The Director General explained that the “government has repeatedly
         maintained that we are not going to have a bargain basement,
         wholesale sell-off of state assets”.  But the government was going
         to do everything to encourage private sector participation in state-
         owned enterprises through a variety of other forms. In transport,
         the state would mainly retain control of the infrastructure, but
         the operations will be largely in private hands. In the energy
         sector, 30% of new electricity generation will be provided by an
         independent power producer. Generation and transmission within
         Eskom will be ring-fenced. A multi-market model for wholesale
         electricity trading is on the agenda.  A South African Power
         Exchange is to be established. The government had decided to shelve
         for now getting a strategic equity partner for Denel. A strategy
         for Denel is being worked on.

      8. The Department feels that since the elections in April, it has made
         significant progess in clarifying the “strategic shift” in
         emphasis, finalising new SOE investment plans, and restructuring
         the Department and appointing new senior managers. The Minister had
         also concluded a new performance contract with the Director General
         and senior managers. A process has also begun of ensuring more
         regular contact between the Minister and the Chairpersons of the
         SOE Boards, and between the Director General and the CEOs of the
         SOEs. The Director General explained that DPE’s progress towards
         achieving its measurable objectives was set out in its website, and
         the Department would be prepared to give the Committee a quarterly
         report on this.  The Director General said that attempts are being
         made to brand DPE more effectively as it is not seen to be visible
         enough.

      9. Overall, the Committee feels DPE made valuable progress in the 2003-
         4 financial year. It is to be commended for the way it has dealt
         with the “strategic shift” in emphasis, and it has certainly made
         significant progress in the financial year to date. The new
         structure of the Department seems to be more consistent with the
         “strategic shift”. The Committee feels too that the composition of
         the Department’s staff is very consistent with the requirements of
         the Employment Equity Act 55 of 1998, and is particularly impressed
         with the fact that 53 % of the staff comprise women. The Committee
         welcomes the Department’s Employee Wellness Programme and hopes
         that it will contribute to ensuring the stability of the staff. The
         Committee commends the Department for the unqualified report it
         received from the Auditor-General and for its minimal under
         spending.


     10. While welcoming the progress in the strengthening of DPE’s
         oversight role over the SOEs, the Committee feels this needs to be
         taken further. The Committee will offer concrete suggestions in
         this regard within the next six months. The Committee would also
         like DPE to in future spell out more clearly in its presentations
         on its annual reports to the Committee the shareholder compacts
         concluded with the SOEs and how precisely DPE monitored the
         progress of SOEs in fulfilling the objectives and other aspects of
         the compacts. The Committee believes that consideration should be
         given to tabling the shareholder compacts in parliament. This would
         also serve to clarify the oversight responsibilities of the
         Committee in respect of both DPE and the SOEs. The Committee feels
         it would be useful to have a workshop with DPE within the next six
         months on corporate governance of the SOEs and the new shareholder
         management model being developed.


     11. The Committee would also like a briefing from the Department on the
         development of its SOE Risk Management framework within the next
         six months. The Committee is concerned at the inadequate sanctions
         for SOE Board members and officials who take hedging and other
         decisions which lead to huge financial and other losses.  While
         appreciating the complexities, the Committee would like the
         Minister and Department to clarify what is being done to avoid a
         recurrence of these unsound decisions and what sanctions,
         consistent with the PFMA, will be applied to those responsible,
         should they occur again.


   C. Transnet


   1. Transnet was represented by the Board Chairperson,  Mr  Phaswana;  and
      Group Chief Executive Ms Maria Ramos; the CEO of  Spoornet,  Ms  Dolly
      Mokgatle; the CEO of the National Ports Authority (NPA), Mr  Siyabonga
      Gama; the CEO of South African Port Operations (SAPO)  Mr  Tau  Morwe;
      the CEO of Petronet, Mr Charl Moller; the  Group  Executive:  Strategy
      and Transformation, Mr Pradeep Maharaj;  the  SAA  Executive  Manager:
      Strategy and Planning;  Mr  Mohan  Vivekanandan  and   Transnet  Group
      Executive: Legal, Mr Vuyo Kahla.


   2. Ms Ramos explained that Transnet’s  role  is  to  “contribute  to  the
      sustainable economic development of South Africa by providing the best
      connected and efficient transport network  run  by  world-class  rail,
      pipeline and port operators.” It seeks to reduce  the  cost  of  doing
      business, make South Africa more globally  competitive  and  stimulate
      job-creating economic growth.  It  aims  to  provide  “an  integrated,
      seamless transport and logistics solution to its customers and users”.
      It seeks to respond to  the  challenges  posed  by  globalisation  and
      integrate the needs of the first and second economies in our country.

   3. In 2003 the transportable production in the economy amounted to 745
      million tons. Mining accounted for 49%, manufacturing 45% and
      agriculture 6% of this. (In 1998, the total amount was 580 million
      tons.) The total transport costs associated with this production to
      the economy was R135 billion. With an associated logistics cost of R45
      billion, the total logistics cost was R178 billion, which was 14,7% of
      GDP.

   4. Transnet has nine main divisions and a number of subsidiaries and
      related businesses. Currently, Transnet’s key businesses are Spoornet,
      NPA, SAPO, Petronet and SAA. It also has several other operating
      divisions, including Freight Dynamics (dealing with road freight),
      Metro Rail, Autopax (dealing with inter-city and cross- border road
      passenger services), Marine Data Systems (disposed of subsequently),
      Virtual Care (pharmacies that have subsequently been disposed of),
      Transtel (telecommunications), and Transnet Housing, Transnet has
      assets in excess of R70 billion and over 77 000 employees.

   5. Transnet faces huge challenges in fulfilling its role. During the 2003-
      4 financial year, Transnet suffered a R6,3 billion loss.  Its
      operating profit fell to R187 million from R5,1 billion the previous
      year.  Cash flow and capital reserves were down.  Turnover increased
      by only 5,7% to R43,6 billion. Transnet carried a debt of R27, 8
      billion. Its gearing ratio was 83%, when 55 to 60% is a more
      reasonable benchmark.

   6. Transnet attributed its weak financial position to “inadequate
      corporate governance, lapses in financial discipline and risk
      management which resulted in poor operating performances and
      substantial financial impairments in many businesses within the Group.
      Inefficiencies, low margins, investment backlogs, aged assets and
      infrastructure as well as the maintenance costs of under-utilised rail
      networks and port infrastructure are undermining operational returns”.

   7. A key explanation for Transnet’s financial position is SAA’s R15
      billion net loss over the past two years.  These losses stem largely
      from hedging activities undertaken by SAA as well as a significant
      downturn in the global aviation sector post-11 September and the
      outbreak of SARS.  There also had to be a large adjustment in the
      valuation of SAA’s aircraft due to a drop in market value of aircraft
      in view of exchange rate differentiations and the poor airline
      business environment. The hedge book was closed off on 30 June 2004.
      SAA’s current net exposure is $100 million. SAA was technically
      insolvent at year end and requires further capitalisation of R4
      billion with a further R1,5 billion credit line of credit from its
      parent company  to enable SAA to continue operations over the current
      next year.

   8. Transnet’s losses also have to be explained in terms of the new
      accounting standards in terms of which it has to report, particularly
      AC128 and AC133, which deal with asset impairments and fair value
      adjustments and the valuation of embedded derivatives related to
      customer service contracts.

   9. Post-retirement liabilities continue to plague the financial position
      of Transnet with the unfounded obligation at year end valued at R7,6
      billion.

   10. Spoornet experienced a loss of R668 million in 2003- 4, as against a
        profit of R400 million in the previous year. This was mainly due to
        changes of commodity prices in respect of the iron-ore contract and
        high operating costs and increases in maintenance costs, an ageing
        workforce and loss of valuable skills also made their mark.

   11. The NPA increased profits before tax by 31% to R2,1 billion. SAPO
        posted a profit before tax of R348 million as against a reported
        loss of R86 million the previous year. Petronet increased profits
        before tax by 99% to R239 million.

   12. To improve its financial position and ensure that it fulfills its
        crucial role, Transnet is undergoing major restructuring.  It is to
        be transformed from “a diversified conglomerate into a focused
        freight transport and logistics provider”. Its core business is to
        be rail, ports and pipelines. SAA is to be removed from the Transnet
        stable. Transnet recognizes that there are significant shifts in the
        South African economy that require a change in supply chains. South
        Africa has to reduce logistic costs by a third to sustain its
        competitiveness. There is a need to “focus on strategic clusters and
        strategic corridors”. It is also necessary to have long-term
        planning that anticipates demand.


    13. Transnet has a 4-point turn-around plan:


       1. Redirecting the business.
       2. Restructuring the balance sheet.
       3. Implementing and adopting strict corporate governance principles.
       4. Adhering to a vigilant risk management process.

   14. Transnet’s revised industry positioning focuses on:


         • Vertical separation of operations and custodianship of
           infrastructure in its core businesses of rail ports and
           pipelines.
         • Inter-modal co-ordination to ensure seamless integration between
           rail and ports.
         • Non-core operations to be housed in an investment portfolio for
           potential future divestment.
   15. Other aspects of its strategy include increasing operational
        efficiencies; changing the organisational culture; developing new
        skills; raising productivity; radically restructuring the head
        office and reducing costs; developing a strong customer orientation;
        and addressing the legacy of post-retirement benefits. The aim is to
        have a lean, well-functioning, more focused holding company with
        infrastructural and operational arms, which would be corporatised in
        time. A key aspect of the strategy is to have greater synergy
        between Spoornet, NPA and SAPO, and to integrate investment
        strategies.


   16. There is a multi-year plan under way. In 2004-5 the focus is on
        “Building a Solid Foundation”, with the emphasis on operational
        efficiency, vertical separation; corporate office restructuring; and
        divestment. The focus in 2005-6 will be on “Implementing A New
        Business Model”, with the focus on operational synergy between SAPO,
        NPA and Spoornet, and a restructured portfolio. The focus in 2006-7
        will be on “Delivering the Mandate”, with the emphasis on
        operational integration of the ports and rail with the private
        sector; and local and global partnerships for growth.  None of these
        phases are mutually exclusive and will be run concurrently.

   17. Transnet believes that the implementation of its new strategy will,
        over time, improve its financial position. It will substantially
        reduce its borrowings if it divests its non-core assets and
        restructure its balance sheet. By strengthening its balance sheet,
        it will be able to raise fresh capital in the market and use this to
        strengthen its core business.

   18. Ms Ramos explained that she could not at this stage spell out the
        impact Transnet’s new strategy will have on jobs within the company.
        But any job losses will be negotiated with the trade unions in terms
        of the National Framework Agreement. Transnet’s key contribution to
        job-creation was through reducing the cost of business and assisting
        the economy to expand so that more jobs can be created.

   19. Spoornet is a “stagnant business warranting fresh solutions”. It has
        been losing market share to the roads which accounts for 82% of the
        value of transport in the economy.  Since 1990 there has been
        minimal growth in the total freight tansported by Spoornet. For over
        60 years, there has been no new railway constructed in South Africa.
        Spoornet is to be revitalized and has engaged in a “re-
        strategisation programme’. This will revolve around customer
        service, operational efficiency, safety, profitability and skills. A
        key component of the strategy is to better understand the needs of
        the customer base. Resources will be used in a segmented way with
        the focus on large paying customers. To increase density on the
        lines, new locomotives with on-board signalling and changes to
        signal spacing, especially on the Sishen-Saldanha corridor are
        planned.  Metrorail and Shosholoza Meyl  are to be ceded to the
        Department of Transport. There is a three-phase strategic direction
        spanning the next five years. Phase 1 focuses on “Fixing the
        Basics”, phase 2 on “Growth” and phase 3 on “Adding Value. A
        National Operations Centre is to be established to ensure planning,
        co-ordination and implementation. The CEO, Ms Dolly Mogkatle, is
        actively in the field herself, constantly engaging with customers
        and staff in different parts of the country.

   20. Based on the new strategy and with the aim of investing R14 billion
        in upgrading infrastructure over the next 5 years, the aim is to
        increase Spoornet’s freight capacity by 30% in 5 years.

   21. The NPA is to be strengthened as the custodian of the country’s seven
        commercial ports. It will have landlord, maritime and control
        functions. It will set and monitor efficiency standards to meet
        customer expectations.  The NPA will have to adjust its operation in
        line with the impending introduction of a port regulator.  Aspects
        of the NPA’s strategy include ring-fencing of assets,
        corporatisation, private sector participation, and funding plans.
        The aim is to invest R16,3 billion in ports infrastructure over the
        next 5 years. The NPA’s challenge is to reduce tariff income while
        increasing capital investment.

   22. SAPO operates 13 terminals in 6 ports with assets of R3,2 billion.
        Its revenue of R3,2 billion in the 2003-4 financial year is expected
        to grow by 9% per annum. It aims to reduce operating costs by 10%
        per unit of volume in the 2005-6 financial year. It will also seek
        to diversify revenue streams through partnerships with the private
        sector to grow the revenue in real terms by 2007, anticipate market
        demand to plan timeously, and create a performance management
        culture.

   23. Petronet’s core business is the bulk transportation of energy, which
        includes a range of petroleum products and gas. It does this though
        3 000 kms of high-pressure, underground steel pipelines.  Petronet
        transports about 40% of the country’s refined fuel requirements and
        all of Natref refinery’s crude oil requirements, which is 21% of
        South Africa’s total crude requirement. About 80% of Johannesburg
        International Airport’s requirements are supplied by Petronet’s
        Avtur pipeline.

   24. SAA serves over 600 intercontinental, 30 African and 21 domestic
        destinations, and offers 358 daily frequencies.  Intercontinental
        routes account for 60% of passenger revenue. About 50% of SAA’s
        sales are generated outside South Africa. By 2005, SAA will have 61
        aircraft. All but 7 of them will be on lease. Despite its major
        financial challenges, SAA clearly has the potential to become
        successful. Currently, it is ranked among the top ten transatlantic
        airlines in the world. A strategy for SAA’s renewal is currently
        being worked out.

   25. The Committee welcomed the frank and comprehensive presentation
        offered by the Transnet Group CEO and her team.  The Committee
        agrees with Ms Ramos that it will not do to expect dramatic changes
        overnight and that it will take time to effect the strategy. The
        Committee appreciates the enormous challenges that confront
        Transnet, but believes that the clear, measured, creative, wide-
        ranging strategy Transnet set out has much to commend it. The
        Committee is very encouraged by the determination of the Chairperson
        of Transnet’s Board and the senior managers who were present at the
        briefing to make Transnet work. While appreciating the difficulties
        it could cause, the Committee thinks it is commendable that the
        Group CEO and all the senior managers have not taken a salary
        increase or incentive bonuses this year in view of Transnet’s
        financial challenges.

   26. While expressing strong support for the new management of Transnet,
        the DA believes more space should be given to the use of private
        sector capital in the financial restructuring of Transnet.

   27. The Committee feels that the major challenge now is phasing in the
        strategy appropriately and implementing it effectively.  It would be
        vital to negotiate maximum support for the strategy from Transnet
        managers, the staff, trade unions, business, public representatives,
        and civil society and other stakeholders. The Committee is aware
        that Transnet has in recent years devised grand strategies, but has
        simply not implemented them. This time Transnet has to implement its
        strategy, plans and programmes effectively, and has to be given all
        the necessary support to do so. While the Committee appreciates the
        difficulties, we would like to see in Transnet’s presentation on the
        annual report next year more specific measurable targets that were
        decided on and the time-frames that were allocated to achieve these.
        The same would apply to the projections for the future that Transnet
        sets out.

   28. The Committee also wants greater clarity on the financial
        implications of Transnet’s restructuring. There is also a need for
        greater clarity on how Transnet is going to fund its proposed R37
        billion investment programme.


   29. The Committee is keen to get greater clarity on the following, among
        other issues:

       • The impact of Transnet’s restructuring and the investment plans on
         job-creation.
       • Transnet’s broad-based Black Economic Empowerment policy and
         programme.
       • The synergy being effected between Spoornet, NPA and SAPO.


   30. The Committee is especially keen to find out what the new risk
        management framework of Transnet is and how it will seek to avoid a
        recurrence of the financial losses experienced in recent years. As
        raised in section  B11 above, the Committee feels that appropriate
        sanctions, consistent with the PFMA, should be applied to those
        responsible for such decisions that could be avoided. The Committee
        will arrange with Transnet appropriate briefings with it and its
        subsidiaries to take further issues raised in the briefing on the
        annual report.


   D. Eskom


   1. Eskom was represented by CE, Mr Thulani Gcabashe; Finance Director, Mr
      Bongani Nqwababa; Managing Director: Distribution, Mr Mongezi
      Ntsokolo; Managing Director: External Relations Division, Mr Joe
      Matsau; Liasion Manager: External Relations Division, Ms Pravashini
      Govender; and Eskom spokesperson, Mr Fani Zulu. An apology was
      tendered on behalf of the Board Chairperson, Mr Reuel Khoza, who was
      away from the country.


   2. Eskom’s “strategic intent” is to be “the pre-eminent African energy
      and related services business of global stature”. Its mission is to
      “grow shareholder value by exceeding the needs of local and foreign
      customers with energy and related services”.  Its “key competency” is
      “the ability to develop and manage the extended electricity value
      chain so as to deliver high quality, low cost electricity, using low-
      grade and scarce resources (e.g. coal and water) in a challenging
      business, social, natural and political environment”.  The key
      objective of Eskom is to “provide the most people with the safest and
      lowest cost electricity”.  Eskom generates 95% of South Africa’s
      electricity and over 50% of the electricity consumed in Africa. It is
      the 11th largest utility in the world in terms of generation capacity
      and the 9th in terms of sales.

   3. Eskom focuses on sustainable development, in terms of a strategy to
      ensure integrated achievement of economic, environmental and social
      goals. Eskom measures and reports on its performance in a single
      integrated sustainability report covering the following 4 key aspects:

         • Socio-economic: electrification; BEE.
         • Technical: plant availability; plant reliability; system
           minutes.
         • Financial: profit before tax; return on assets; debt-equity.
         • People, Safety, Health and Environment: Peoples measures; HIVand
           AIDS; Eskom Fatalities; Specific Water Consumption; relative
           particular emissions.

    4.  Eskom Holdings Limited is a vertically integrated utility that is
       split into:


         • The Regulated Businesses:  This entails generation;
           transmission; distribution; key sales and customer services; and
           corporate divisions.
         • The Subsidiaries: Eskom Enterprises (Pty) Ltd; Eskom Finance
           Company (Pty) Ltd; Escap Limited; and Gallup Insurance Company
           Limited.

    Eskom Enterprises and its subsidiaries carry out all Eskom’s non-
    regulated activities. Its “core lines of business are infrastructure
    development, energy business operations, specialised energy services and
    the pursuit of key opportunities in related or strategic businesses such
    as information technology and telecommunications”.  Eskom Enterprises
    has its own Board, as do all Eskom’s other wholly-owned enterprises.


   5. Eskom has 13 coal-fired stations, 2 gas turbines, 6 hydroelectric
      stations, 2 pumped storage schemes, and a nuclear power station. Eskom
      serves more than 3,5 million customers by means of 336 270 kms of
      power lines of all voltages. 3 million of these customers were
      connected in the past 10 years.  Eskom electrified 7 976 schools and
      clinics since 1994. Eskom’s theme for the year is “Corporate Delivery
      in a Decade of Democracy”.  Currently, more than 70% of South Africans
      can have access to electricity. Eskom estimates that about 80% of them
      are active customers.


   6. Eskom received the Platts Global Energy Award for the “ Community
      Development Programme of the Year” in 2003.

   7. Eskom has about 32 000 employees. It ranks high on the Human Resources
      Sustainability Index at 91,8%, well above the threshold of 80% and the
      previous year’s score of 89,9%.  The Human Resources Sustainability
      Index combines 25 weighted measures in the areas of employee
      satisfaction, competence, equity, and health and wellness, to reflect
      on a company’s ongoing ability to achieve its human resources
      objectives.  In terms of representivity, the percentage of Blacks in
      the managerial, professional and supervisory levels increased from
      54,6% in 2002 to 56,3% in 2003. Women at these levels increased from
      24,5% to 27,8% and people with disabilities from 0,16% to 1,4%. Blacks
      in managerial, professional and supervisory positions increased from
      8,9% in 1994 to 56,5% in 2003. Women in such positions increased from
      10,4% to 27,8%.

   8. Eskom’s financial reports cover the period 1 January 2003 to 31
      December 2003. In line with the request from the Department of Public
      Enterprises, the Board of Eskom has approved the change of its
      financial year end from 31 December to 31 March.  Eskom reported a
      Group profit after tax of R3,5 billion in 2003. The profit was R3,7
      billion in the previous year. There was a 4,8% growth in electricity
      sales in 2003. The growth was 3,5% in 2002. Debt-equity ratio improved
      from 0,30 in 2002 to 0,46 in 2003. Total productivity improvement for
      the year increased from 1,6% in 2002 to 2,5% . Eskom’s real rate of
      return declined from 1,69% to 0,53%. The delay in the issuing of the
      licence prompted the Eskom Board to raise an important provision of
      R649 million against its investment in the second national operator.
      The Eskom Board also raised a provision of R154 million relating to
      the Eskom Enterprises investment in Mountain Communications (Pty) Ltd,
      a Lesotho registered telecommunications company. Overall, Eskom’s
      assets are worth about R100 billion.

   9. Eskom spent R7,3 billion on procuring goods and services from BEE
      companies in 2003. Since 1997 Eskom has spent more than R20 billion.
      Eskom spent R714 million with Black women-owned enterprises since
      2002. Eskom has a comprehensive strategy to deal with “fronting”,
      including unannounced visits to companies to verify information given
      to Eskom to qualify as BEE companies.

   10. Eskom has a major programme on HIV and Aids. Tests conducted in 2000
       and 2002 found that 11% of the staff was found to be HIV positive.
       The company has a multi-pronged approach, and provides information,
       education, testing, counseling, free condoms, and a medical aid
       package including anti-retrovirals.  Eskom has contributed R67
       million towards research to develop an Aids vaccine and has allocated
       a further R45 million until 2007 for this.

   11. Eskom’s safety record has improved with a reduction in public
        electrical fatalities and injuries, and the lowest work-related
        fatalities in 30 years.  Eskom improved its environmental ratings in
        2003.  Many parts of Eskom have received ISO 14001 certification,
        while the remainder of the group demonstrated compliance during
        2003, through third-party audits. Eskom made a commitment to reduce
        overall particulate emissions to an average of 0,28 kg/MWh sent out
        by the end of 2003.  This target was achieved.
    12. Mr Gcabashe stressed Eskom’s commitment to NEPAD and the related
        energy projects on the continent. Eskom’s strong emphasis is on
        providing energy in the Southern African region. The possibilities
        of hydro energy in the region are being explored. Obviously, there
        are risks entailed in Eskom’s engagement in the continent, but Eskom
        is sensitive to this, he said.


    13. Eskom explained that at the current growth rate for electricity
        demand, and in the absence of any corrective measures, South Africa
        will run out of excess peaking capacity in 2007.  A major
        restructuring of the whole electricity industry is under way, and
        major investment plans are being finalised for new electricity
        generation capacity. Eskom will meet most of these needs, but there
        will be room for an independent power producer. Eskom is in the
        process of returning to service 3 of its mothballed coal-fired
        stations. In line with the Cabinet decision of the 20 October 2004,
        Eskom will lead South Africa’s drive to create new electricity
        generation capacity.

    14. Eskom explained that the entire country cannot be provided
        electricity from the grid. South Africa’s topography in the rural
        areas makes this very difficult.  Eskom is in discussion with the
        Department of Minerals and Energy to discuss other non-grid options,
        especially for some of the remote rural areas.   Solar non-grid is
        one of the options discussed.  Mr Gcabashe explained that Eskom
        would like to increase the pace of delivery of free basic
        electricity services, but that negotiations with municipalities
        often took too long. Eskom would prefer to be allocated money
        directly from the national fiscus to deliver the free services,
        instead of the money being allocated through the municipalities.

     15. Eskom does not anticipate any job losses through the disposal of
         its non-core assets, as part of government’s restructuring
         programme. These non-core businesses are viable and would be sold
         as going concerns. Many of them are potential BEE companies with
         room for expansion. Eskom will inform the Committee shortly about
         the number of jobs that will be created through the re-
         commissioning of the 3 power stations. It is too early to say how
         many jobs will flow from the major investment drives being
         finalised, but these figures, too, will be sent to the Committee as
         soon as they become available.

     16. Eskom explained that illegal electrical connections occur mostly in
         areas not set aside as residential areas (informal settlements and
         unproclaimed areas). Eskom estimates that it loses 18% of its
         domestic household sales as a result of illegal connections. The
         financial impact is low but the hazard and nuisance factors are
         high. Eskom is working with municipalities to reduce these illegal
         connections and also has a major advertising campaign to do this.

     17. The Committee congratulated Eskom on its many successes and
         expressed the hope that it will rise to greater heights. Apart from
         Eskom’s many well-known achievements, the Committee was interested
         to hear about the company’s advanced HIV and AIDS programme, and
         commended Eskom for this.  From what the Committee can tell, it
         seems that Eskom’s BEE programme is also encouraging, even if they
         still have a long way to go.

     18. The DA believes that the government had earlier planned a phased
         privatisation of Eskom, and expresses its disappointment that the
         original target of 30% of generation capacity being provided by an
         independent power producer has been down-scaled to 30% of new
         capacity.

     19. In order to get a better sense of Eskom’s achievements and to
         facilitate MPs constituency work, the Committee would like Eskom to
         in future provide a provincial and municipal breakdown of the
         statistics it provides, where possible. With major investment plans
         pending, the Committee appreciates that there will be pressure to
         increase Eskom’s tariffs, but stresses the importance of deciding
         on a price structure that does not burden the poor or impede the
         delivery of free basic services. The Committee will pursue this
         further with Eskom. The Committee also needs to understand better
         the financial implications of the restructuring of the electricity
         industry for municipalities. A joint meeting of the Public
         Enterprises, Minerals and Energy, and Provincial and Local
         Government portfolio committees to consider this further is
         proposed for early next year. The Committee will also raise with
         the Provincial and Local Government Portfolio Committee Eskom’s
         concerns about the slow pace of negotiations with municipalities on
         the delivery of free basic services. While appreciating the many
         complexities, the Committee feels that more should be done to
         extend electricity in the rural areas. The Committee is interested
         in developments on the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor project. The
         Committee is also interested to get a better understanding of
         Eskom’s role in the rest of Africa, and will pursue this further.


E. Denel


   1. Denel was represented by Board Chairperson, Mr Sandile Zungu; and CEO,
      Mr Victor Moche; Group Executive Director: Commercial and IT Business:
       Director of Finance (Acting); Mr Pottie Potgieter; and Chief of Staff
      in the CEO’s Office, Ms Cassandra Gabriel.


   2. Mr Zungu stressed that Denel sees it as very valuable to engage with
      the Portfolio Committee and welcomes the decision of the Committee to
      formally consider its annual report each year from now on. He
      explained that contrary to media reports, it was not true that Denel
      had concluded a contract for artillery systems in India.  Denel is in
      partnership with an Indian company for the self-propelled version of
      the Howitzer gun, which makes up about 25% of the contract.  However,
      the Indian government had not yet awarded the contract.  If it is
      approved, it would be worth about R6 billion.  However, the positive
      effects of this would only be reflected in Denel’s balance sheet in 2
      to 3 years’ time.

   3. Mr Moche explained that the manufacturing arm of Armscor was hived off
      to form Denel in 1992 as a state-owned commercial company.  Armscor
      remains as the procurement division of the SANDF (South African
      National Defence Force). Denel defines itself as a “technology-based
      company with a strong emphasis on high technology research,
      development and manufacturing of defence products and the provision of
      services”. It “commands a wide spectrum of management, research and
      development, engineering, and manufacturing capabilities in the
      defence industry”. The “key focus areas of the business are in
      Aerospace, Land Systems and commercial businesses, mainly industrial
      properties”. Denel aims to “create economic value by transforming its
      technological capabilities into superior quality defence and
      commercial products and related services for the global market. It
      aims to achieve this by “international partnering, international
      market penetration and maintaining the position of key supplier to the
      SANDF”.

   4. Denel has 23 major divisions and subsidiaries spread over 3 provinces.
      The 3 major business lines of Denel are Aerospace, Land Systems, and
      Commercial and Information Technology (IT).  Among its key Aerospace
      products and services are missiles and guided weapons; helmet-lighting
      systems; the Rooivalk attack helicopter; aircraft parts manufacture,
      repair and refurbishment; flight test facilities; unmanned aerial
      vehicle observation systems; and target drones. Among its key land
      systems products and services are artillery systems; artillery
      propellant charges and projectiles; plant manufacture; infantry
      weapons; and small and medium calibre ammunition.

   5. Denel’s non-military products include humanitarian demining; mine
      action; hunting and sporting ammunition; rock-breaking and mine
      drilling equipment; marine distress flares; hilti industrial
      percussion products; and micro-gas generators used for triggering
      airbags in the motor industry.


   6. Denel’s non-core businesses include an Arrivia.kom  shareholding (IT),
      SPP (soya processing plant), Irenco (plastics and electronics), Sybase
      (IT), Voltco (household electronics ), Bonaero Park (property),
      Cosource (IT) and Dendustri (aluminium).

   7. Denel currently has a staff of 9 742: 50,1% is Black and 24,3%
      comprise women. In 2003-4, Denel had a staff of 10 925, of which 51,6%
      were Black and 25,6% women. The number of Black executives and senior
      managers increased from 35 in 2002-3 to 65 in 2003-4. The number of
      women senior managers increased from 4 to 25. 70% of Denel’s employees
      are technical staff, engineers and scientists. Denel believes that it
      is challenged by a shortage of engineers and technicians, an ageing
      skills base, and a lack of employment equity.

   8. Apart from DPE, Denel also works with the Departments of Defence,
      Finance, Foreign Affairs, Labour, Science and Technology,
      Intelligence, and Trade and Industry. Denel is bound by international
      conventions and agreements signed by the government, including the
      Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, Biological and Chemical Weapons
      Convention, Mines Ban Treaty, and the Non-proliferation of Weapons of
      Mass Destruction Act.

   9. Denel’s highlights for the year under review included:

      Aerospace


         • Contracted by  BAE  Systems/Saab  for  design,  development  and
           supply of helmet tracking system for Eurofighter-Typhoon and the
           export version of Gripen.
         • OTB involvement with NASA’s Mars rover mission.
         • Installation of manufacturing cell and start  of  production  of
           Boeing commercial airplanes detail  components  for  The  Boeing
           Company.
         • Further exports of Ingwe anti-armour missile.
         • An international award for best live demonstration at IDEX  2003
           exhibition in Abu Dhabi.

     Land Systems

         • Despite the  strengthening  of  the  rand  and  postponement  of
           awarding of a major contract (Kingfisher),  Denel  Land  Systems
           achieved its profit and cash flow budgets.
         • Six sites have ISO 9000 quality certification.
         • Five sites have ISO 14000 environmental certification.
         • Four sites have NOSA NOSCAR gradings, and two sites  have  five-
           star awards for safety, health and environment (SHE).
         • The Naschem division at Potchefstroom was awarded first place in
           the NOSA Top 100 International award  for  compliance  with  SHE
           management.

Commercial and IT Activities

         • Good business performance by the properties group.
         • Solid financial performance by Dendustri.
         • A centralised property management model for  Denel’s  industrial
           properties has been implemented.
         • Rigorous risk management processes have resulted in  low  claims
           ratio and good business performance for Densecure (Pty) Limited.


   10. 42% of Denel’s revenue comes from sales to the SANDF, 20% from the
        Middle East, 15% from Europe, 11% from Asia, 5% from South America,
        4% from Africa and 3% from North America.

   11. Denel posted a loss of R377,5 million from total  revenues of R4,4
        billion in 2003/4. In the previous year, the loss was R72,6 million
        and revenues were R4,3 billion. Current liabilities amount to R2,4
        billion and non-current debt to R832 million.  Denel’s assets are
        worth just over R4 billion.

   12. Denel identified the following immediate reasons for its financial
        difficulties:

        a. Implementation of accounting standard AC133, which reduced
           Denel’s possible profit and reserves by about R270 million.
        b. The reduction in value of non-productive assets by R65,4
           million.
        c. The strengthening of the Rand by 26% against the US dollar.
        d. Major losses from non-core businesses.
        e. Retrenchment costs of R22,9 million.
        f. The write-off of research and development costs of R64,7
           million.

   13. Other reasons cited for Denel’s unfavourable financial position
        include:

         • Operational inefficiencies.
         • High overhead costs.
         • Decline in orders from the SANDF.
         • Decline in Research and Development funding.
         • Investment in and losses from the Rooivalk programme (about R2
           billion over 9 years).
         • An unsuccessful commercial diversification strategy (about R900
           million).
         • The global economic slowdown.
         • Intensified international competition.

   14. Both the Board Chairperson and CEO stressed that Denel was severely
        disadvantaged by the open tender policy of Armscor, which forced it
        to compete with foreign companies for tenders from the SANDF.  Denel
        is completely opposed to this policy and claims that very few, if
        any, countries with a defence manufacturing industry has such a
        policy; the defence industry is highly protected.  Denel even says
        that “domestic orders often exceed the national requirement, but
        tend to secure the industry, which is seen as a strategic entity
        with export potential”.  Denel also feels that foreign defence
        forces would be discouraged from buying from Denel if the domestic
        defence force is not doing so.


   15. Denel holds that it was partly forced to venture into non-defence
        commercial businesses because of the decline in SANDF orders. At the
        time that Denel was formed, there was a decline in international
        defence spending, and many defence companies turned to non-defence
        commercial activities to survive.


    16. The CEO explained that the Rooivalk combat helicopter has been
        developed for 20 years now. Very few countries have been able to
        build a sophisticated helicopter like this. In terms of “aerospace
        technology, this places South Africa in the same state-of-the-art
        league as the United States, France, Germany, Italy, Britain and
        Russia”. The Rooivalk was ranked in the top three internationally,
        in terms of capabilities.  It is considered better than its American
        and Chinese counterparts, and foreign defence forces showed much
        interest in it. There was a need to speed up the process of putting
        a finished product in the market. It requires an injection by the
        Department of Defence of R661 million until 2007 to be completed,
        and a further R283 million until 2007 for support. If the flow of
        funds through Armscor is managed properly, Denel will complete the
        Rooivalk in three years.

   17. Denel is implementing a new strategy of turn-around interventions. It
        is selling off its non-core businesses. It defines its core business
        as  “the manufacturing, refurbishment and maintenance of land and
        aerospace defence systems, products and components”. However,
        activities not directly defence or aerospace related, such as
        project management and electronic or engineering manufacturing will
        be retained because of the cost-effective synergies derived from
        them for the core businesses. But Denel’s food and plastic
        manufacturing, IT investments, household electronics and commercial
        property businesses are to be sold.

   18. The core businesses will also be restructured and rationalised. For
        example, Vektor will be integrated into LIW (engineering plant)
        saving millions of rands by avoiding duplication of management, and
        operational structures and resources.  Support services were
        provided separately in each of the 23 divisions of Denel. These
        services are now being centralised and consolidated. They include
        finance, procurement, marketing, IT, human resources, legal services
        and communication. Products are also being reviewed to ensure that
        Denel’s product base remains internationally competitive.  The
        Aerospace and Land Systems business lines are being restructured.
        Programmes of cost-cutting, rightsizing, business process re-
        engineering and contract re-negotiation have been implemented. Other
        elements of the restructuring include better alignment of skills;
        more effective performance management; “zero tolerance” of fraud,
        corruption and mismanagement; and aggressively growing new markets.

   19. Denel has already successfully turned around some loss-making
        businesses, including Somchem (explosives and propellants), Menchem
        (landmine clearance) and PMP (small calibre ammunition).


   20. Recognising the importance of developing mathematics, science and
        technological skills among South Africans, especially those
        historically disadvantaged, Denel established the Denel Centre for
        Learning and Development in March this year. The Centre has 4
        schools: the School of Business Leadership, Marketing and
        Management; the School of Aerospace; the School of Land Systems; and
        the Denel Youth Foundation Training Programmes. Denel offered
        bursaries of R4,3 million in 2003-4 for students doing engineering
        and related courses.  About 200 students each year are being
        sponsored by Denel and the SANDF.  Denel also runs a tuition
        programme for matriculants with inadequate mathematics and science
        passes to assist them to meet the requirements to enter mathematics
        and science courses at university.  Denel has also started an
        outreach programme at schools to encourage learners, especially girl
        children, to become interested in Denel-related careers.
   21. Denel spent R136,5 million on procurement from BEE companies in 2003-
        4, out of a total procurement spend of R1.07 billion.  Denel
        believes this to be far from adequate.  To improve spending on BEE
        suppliers, Denel is implementing the following initiatives: training
        for BEE entrepreneurs, verification of BEE credentials, publicising
        opportunities in Denel and externally, and sanctions for “fronting”.
        Denel noted the following BEE challenges: continued BEE credential
        verification, rewarding achievement of BEE targets, developing
        current and potential BEE companies, educating employees on the
        importance of BEE in the economy, and supporting the adoption of the
        Defence BEE Charter.

   22. Denel explained that with its divestment it will obviously end up
        with fewer employees. Its projections are that it will have 8 928
        employees by 1 April next year, down from the current 9 933. Most of
        these employees will be retained by the companies being sold.
        Denel’s  restructuring also raises the  need to address issues
        around the skills mismatch, redeployment, development of new skills
        and other related matters.  Over 40% of revenues are spent on
        salaries. Denel believes that this is too high, and should ideally
        be 30% for a manufacturing company like Denel. Denel is seeking to
        address this by increasing revenues and efficiencies, which includes
        ensuring the right people in the right jobs and the right numbers of
        people in the different areas.

   23. In terms of its turn-around strategy, the Board and the management
        has essentially identified the following key objectives:


         • Completion of disposal of non-core businesses.
         • Finalisation of turn-around of Denel Aviation.
         • Continued restructuring for efficiency.
         • Continued cost reductions.
         • Joint ventures at business unit or product level.
         • Positioning for future major SANDF and global projects.
         • Incentivising and modernising the workforce.


   24. Denel has requested the government as its shareholder to consider the
        following:
         • Review Armscor’s preferential procurement policy to benefit
           local industry and secure a base load on consumable products.
         • Increase research and development funding to benefit Denel and
           the local defence industry.
         • Recapitalisation of Denel: remove balance sheet risks and
           position Denel for future growth.
         • Divestiture and recapitalisation to renew certain critical
           plants.
         • Review Armscor’s requirement for costly bank guarantees on major
           Denel contracts.


   25. Denel reported that it had estimated that it lost over R1 million
        through fraud and corruption in 2003-4, and was pursuing criminal
        action against those responsible, even if the process is extremely
        slow. A materiality and significant framework is currently being
        developed to report material losses through criminal conduct and
        irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure, as well as for
        significant transactions that require reporting to the Minister as
        envisaged in section 54(2) of the PFMA.

   26. Denel’s projections of its financial situation are that it will
        reduce its loss to R283,6 million in this financial year and to R2,2
        million in 2005-6, and make profits of R81,4 million in 2006-7,
        R361,5 million in 2007-8 and R459,7 million in 2008-9.


   27. The Committee acknowledges that Denel faces major challenges and that
        there are no easy turn-around strategies. The CEO and senior
        managers addressing the challenges have been in Denel for just 18
        months. The majority in the Committee feels that, overall, they are
        to be commended for evolving the new turn-around strategy and
        interventions. The Board Chairperson and CEO were very frank and
        open in their engagement with the Committee and conveyed a strong
        sense of their awareness of the challenges facing Denel. The
        majority in the Committee hopes that the potential of the present
        leadership of Denel to address its challenges conveyed to us will be
        fulfilled.


   28. The DA, however, has reservations about the performance and future of
        Denel under the present management.  The DA feels that there is no
        need for the government to own Denel and that it should be sold to
        the private sector. The DA certainly does not support any government
        funding for Denel.


   29. Some of the issues, especially about defence policy, that Denel
        raised with us are more appropriately dealt with by the Defence
        Portfolio Committee and will be referred to them. The Committee has,
        anyway, raised with the Minister of Public Enterprises Denel’s
        concerns about Armscor’s open-tender policy and its view that
        government should provide funding for Denel’s recapitalisation, the
        Rooivalk and research and development, and has been assured that
        these issues are being addressed through interaction with Denel and
        other stakeholders.

   30. The majority in the Committee recognises the overall value of Denel’s
        turnaround strategy. But the Committee as a whole would like to see
        more clearer, time-bound measurable objectives and the programmes of
        action to implement them, and will pursue this further with Denel.
        The Committee is also concerned about the negative effect of Denel’s
        balance sheet on the prospects of getting export orders.  The
        Committee is not sufficiently clear about the basis on which Denel
        has prepared its financial projections for the next 5 years, and
        will need to engage with this further.  The Committee would also
        like greater clarity on the outcome of Denel’s divestment on jobs
        and the composition of Denel’s new staff structure. Clarity will
        also be sought on Denel’s pension and provident schemes.


F.On SOEs in General

  1.  As the Committee sees it, Transnet and Denel are seriously
       challenged, and Eskom is doing very well, but also faces major
       challenges ahead.  However, all of them have huge potential to, over
       time, meet their challenges.  To the Committee, the leaders of these
       SOEs seem very impressive; they came across as clear, innovative,
       determined.  Of course, in briefings such as these, Committees will
       not get “the whole story”, but “parts of the story”, usually the
       positive parts, but we feel, anyway, that the SOE leaders engaged
       with us in a commendably open and frank manner.  The Committee
       believes that these SOEs play a very crucial role in our economy and
       society and it is vital that the huge potential conveyed to us is
       realised.


2. In general the Committee feels that the overall strategies of the SOEs,
  which are, in a broad sense, similar, are sound.  The Committee believes
  that it is vital that these new strategies are appropriately negotiated
  with the widest range of stakeholders.  While appreciating the magnitude
  of the challenges being addressed, and that the SOEs are still in an
  early phase of evolving the new strategies, the Committee would like to
  see the SOEs set out more specific business plans and programmes with
  more specific measurable objectives and time-frames by the time of the
  next presentation of annual reports to the Committee, in the fourth
  quarter of next year.  It is in the business plans, programmes of action
  and deadlines for achieving measurable objectives and the fulfillment of
  these, that a strategy is ultimately assessed.  More specific business
  plans, programmes, objectives and time-frames will also provide greater
  clarity on what the Portfolio Committee is monitoring and contribute
  towards a clearer framework for interaction between the Committee and the
  SOEs.


   3. As explained in section B 10 above, the Committee believes that
      consideration has to be given to the shareholder compacts concluded by
      the Ministry and DPE with the SOEs being tabled in parliament.  This
      will also provide greater certainty on what the Portfolio Committee is
      monitoring in respect of the SOEs.

   4. Given the government’s “strategic shift” of emphasis on SOEs, DPE will
      also be more actively fulfilling its oversight role over SOEs.  While
      recognizing the staff, resource and other constraints of DPE, and the
      need for DPE to respect the necessary autonomy of the SOEs, the
      Committee feels that it is vital that DPE is more active in its
      oversight of SOEs.  This will also assist the SOEs to become clearer
      about what government and parliament expects of the SOEs.  The
      Committee will certainly be more actively monitoring DPE’s
      implementation of its oversight role over the SOEs and in this sense
      too also be monitoring the SOEs. 
   5. The Committee feels that in parts the SOE submissions were far more
      technical than they need be.  The SOEs should explain issues in a more
      useful way, and focus mainly on their relevance to the major questions
      raised in section A5 above.
   6. Of course, the Committee also has a direct oversight responsibility
      for SOEs and we mean to fulfill this more effectively over time.  As
      part of the process of doing this, we need greater clarity on the
      following, among other issues: 
      • The ways in which our oversight role is influenced by the fact that
        funds are not directly allocated from the national fiscus to SOEs. 
      • The ways in which our oversight role over the SOEs overlaps with
        and is distinct from that of the Transport, Minerals and Energy,
        Defence Portfolio Committees and SCOPA, so as to avoid
        duplication. 
      • The ways in which our oversight role over the SOEs is distinct from
        that of DPE. To what extent and in which sense, if at all, would
        the notion of “shareholder activism” apply to a parliamentary
        committee as distinct from government.
      Greater clarity on these issues will assist the SOEs to better
      understand the manner in which they are accountable to our Portfolio
      Committee, other Portfolio Committees, DPE and other government
      departments. 
   7. The Committee appreciates that the annual reports of the SOEs are
      prepared in terms of the Companies Act 61 of 1973, the PFMA and other
      relevant legislation, and long-standing norms and conventions, and
      they address the concerns of a wide range of stakeholders.  But these
      reports can be challenging to read and do not necessarily address some
      of the specific concerns of the Portfolio Committee.  The Committee
      will, of course, consider these annual reports as a whole.  But we
      feel very strongly that the SOEs should make available a user-friendly
      summary of the key features of the annual report to the Committee at
      least 7 days before they brief the Portfolio Committee, usually in
      October each year.  These summaries would also be of value to other
      stakeholders.  The cue could be taken from National Treasury, which
      produces a very helpful user-friendly summary of the national budget
      each year so that the lay-person can understand its key aspects.  The
      summaries from the SOEs should seek to address the concerns of the
      Portfolio Committee set out in section A5 above and related concerns. 
      To encourage a more productive exchange between the Committee and the
      SOEs, the Committee will explore the possibility of general guidelines
      or a format being made available to SOEs to prepare for their
      briefings of the Committee on their annual reports.  The Committee
      will discuss this matter with the House Chairperson, SCOPA, Joint
      Budget Committee, DPE, National Treasury, the SOEs and other
      stakeholders.
    8.The SOEs argue that the primary way in which they can contribute to
      job-creation is through contributing to economic growth, mainly
      through reducing the costs of doing business.  They explain that if
      they are restructured to become more efficient and productive and
      fulfill their new responsibilities effectively, they will probably
      have to shed jobs.  The Committee is clear that if job losses are
      unavoidable altogether, this should be negotiated appropriately with
      the trade unions and dealt with in terms of the National Framework
      Agreement (NFA).  The Committee needs to get a better understanding of
      how the SOEs are going to deal with the possibility of job losses. 
      The Committee is very interested to find out what the impact is going
      to be on job-creation of the proposed investment plans.  To what
      extent, for example, will the SOEs be stressing labour-intensive
      building of infrastructure?
   9. The Committee appreciates that it can be very challenging to appoint
      suitably qualified and representative Boards of SOEs.  Those appointed
      to the Boards often have many other responsibilities and cannot give
      the SOEs the attention they deserve.  But the Committee feels that the
      Boards of the SOEs have to be far more effective and meet the
      requirements of the PFMA and other relevant legislation.  The Ministry
      and DPE are urged to assist the Board, and empower Board members,
      where necessary, to fulfill their role much more effectively.  The
      Committee believes that the chairperson of the Boards, or if they are
      absolutely not available, another non-executive member of the Board
      should be present at the briefings to the Committee on the annual
      reports of the SOEs. 
   10. The Committee recognises that the remuneration packages of senior
        managers and Board members raise many complex issues.  Among other
        issues relating to the remuneration of senior managers, the
        Committee is aware of the following: 
        • Market forces obviously influence the remuneration packages. 
        • SOEs have to compete in particular with the high remuneration
          packages available in the private sector. 
        • As the responsibilities of the SOEs increase, there will be
          increasing pressure for higher remuneration packages for senior
          managers.
      The Committee welcomes the government’s decision to develop a
      framework for the remuneration of senior managers and Board members in
      the SOEs and looks forward to its release.

11. The Committee is very concerned that the Boards and senior managers are
     not    being made to take full responsibility for decisions they made
     that have had extremely negative consequences for the SOEs.  While
     recognizing the complexities, the Committee feels very strongly that
     the Minister and DPE should take appropriate action in terms of the
     PMFA and other relevant legislation.  As raised in section B 11 above,
     the Committee would like DPE to discuss its new risk management
     framework with the Committee.  We  also want the SOEs to address the
     Committee on their risk management frameworks.

 12. As the Committee held a briefing on “The contribution of SOEs to
      Women’s Empowerment” in August, this matter was not pursued in detail
      with the SOEs during these briefings.  But as agreed in the report we
      adopted on this, there will be a follow-up briefing in the first half
      of next year.

13. The Committee did not sufficiently explore the challenges posed by
     fraud and corruption in the SOEs – and will raise this matter more
     fully in future    meetings with the SOEs.

14. Overall, the Committee is very encouraged by its exchanges with the
     SOEs, and we are motivated to fulfill our oversight role in a helpful
     and effective       manner.  We do not believe that our oversight role
     consists in just monitoring the performance of the SOEs.  As is
     appropriate for a portfolio committee we should also, where possible,
     through our parliamentary, constituency and party political work, also
     contribute to the implementation of the programmes and the achievements
     of objectives of the SOEs.  Obviously, we respect the operational
     autonomy of the SOEs.  We will not seek either to micro-manage the SOEs
     or reduce our oversight role to mere verbal exchanges with the SOEs; we
     will try to strike a sensible path in between, that is consistent with
     parliament’s definition of the oversight role of a portfolio committee
     – and we will shape this path through consultation with all the
     relevant stakeholders, including the Ministry, DPE and the SOEs.

G.The Way Forward

    1. This report, together with our programme adopted in August, “Towards
       Developing a Longer-Term Programme: Setting the Foundations,” will
       be important in shaping our programme for 2005 and beyond. 

      2. In February next year we should have a workshop with the Ministry
         and DPE to establish what their programme for 2005 is.  This
         workshop will assist us in clarifying our programme for 2005.  At
         the workshop we should also seek a response from DPE to this
         report.  It would be useful to have such a workshop with the
         Ministry and DPE in February each year so that we are clearer
         about our respective programmes.

    2. If we are to play our oversight role effectively, it is important
       that we are empowered.  As part of this, we should have an education
       and training programme.  Flowing from our consideration of the
       annual reports of DPE and the SOEs, the following are among the
       workshops we should try to organise in 2005:


           • Evaluating the budgets and financial statements of government
             departments and SOEs.
           • Towards greater understanding of the PFMA, the Companies Act,
             other relevant legislation and the King II Report as they apply
             to SOEs. 
           • Shareholder management models and corporate governance. 
           • The lessons of restructuring of SOEs in Africa and other
             developing countries. 
           • Different forms of private sector participation in SOEs.
           • Towards greater clarity on the oversight role of the Portfolio
             Committee in respect of SOEs.


   4. The Committee has to finalise the appointment of a suitable full-tim
       researcher for the Committee as soon as possible.


   5. The Committee needs to take further its study tour of    SOE sites
       next year.

H. Appreciation for Co-operation


  1. The Committee expresses its appreciation to the Director General of
     the DPE, the Board Chairpersons and CEOs of the SOEs, and their teams
     for their co-operation on the briefings on the annual reports.


  2. The Committee also thanks Mr Ekhsaan Jawoodeen, Mr Nickie van Zyl and
     Mr Victor Ngaleka from Parliament’s Research Unit (Information
     Services Section) for their initial research reports on which this
     report drew.

