---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 14 June 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2005-06-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 JUNE 2005
                                    ____


                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING

                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:02.

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces took the Chair and
requested members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.


                          CALLING OF JOINT SITTING


The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces announced that the
President had called a Joint Sitting of the National Assembly and the
National Council of Provinces in terms of section 84(2)(d) of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa and Rule 7(1)(b) of the Joint
Rules of Parliament in order to deliver a message to Parliament.

                            ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson of the NCOP, Madam Speaker, hon
members, fellow South Africans, five days ago we assembled in this Chamber
to pay tribute to Justice Arthur Chaskalson and the new leaders of our
judiciary, Chief Justice Pius Langa and Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang
Moseneke.

I want to thank you, Chairperson and Madam Speaker, the leaders of the
parties in Parliament and hon members for the opportunity we all had to
give expression to the profound esteem in which we hold our judiciary, as
an important arm of our system of government and a central pillar of our
statehood.

I am therefore greatly obliged to our presiding officers and hon members
for giving me this opportunity to address another joint sitting of the
Houses of Parliament so soon after we met in this form.

It was my view that we should once more assemble in this manner because of
a matter that relates to the common sentiment we all articulated during the
unique and pioneering occasion last Friday. As hon members would know, the
primary function of the President of the Republic and the executive is to
regulate the nation’s affairs in a manner that promotes the realisation of
the ideals enshrined in the Constitution. Among others, these include:
building a society based on democratic values, social justice and human
rights; ensuring that government is based on the will of the people and
that every citizen is equally protected by law; improving the quality of
life of all citizens and building a united and democratic society enjoying
its rightful place among the nations of the world.

I believe that the executive should, at all times, position itself
diligently to discharge these responsibilities unencumbered by major
distractions and deficiencies that might diminish this focus. It was for
this reason that during the debate on the Vote of the Presidency, I paid
particular attention to the work that we are doing to improve the capacity
of the government to meets its obligations to the people.

The Constitution enjoins the President in particular to uphold, defend and
respect the Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic, and to promote
the unity of the nation and that which will advance the Republic.

It further prescribes that all spheres of government and all organs of
state should -

   ... respect the constitutional status, institutions, powers and functions
   of government in the other spheres.

Among others, and relevant to the reason I requested this Joint Sitting,
the executive must discharge its responsibility within the context of the
rule of law, which includes respect for the integrity and the independence
of the judiciary and presumption of innocence of any person pending
findings of the courts. Similarly, we also have to respect decisions of our
Parliament.

These obligations are expressly reflected as personal undertakings and are
immanent in the Oath of Office for those taking up executive positions in
government. They are especially important with regard to the President of
the Republic, who, in terms of our Constitution, is the head of the
national executive and in whom the executive authority of the Republic is
vested.
Shortly before I left for Chile last week on a state visit, the GCIS
announced that on my return I would study the judgment handed down by the
Hon Mr Justice Squires of the Durban High Court at the end of the case of
The State vs Schabir Shaik and 11 Others, and announce such decisions as
may be necessary arising from that judgment.

I have since carefully studied the judgment. I did this fully to inform
myself about Justice Squires’ findings, given the fact that the issue of
the relationship between the Deputy President, hon Jacob Zuma, and the
accused had been canvassed during the trial.

In this regard I must emphasize that I studied this judgment not to make
any determination whatsoever about its merits or demerits, about whether it
was wholly or partially right or wrong. Indeed, such conduct does not fall
within our constitutional mandate as the executive. This task belongs to
the higher courts, the organs of state that would hear any appeal that
might be lodged.

Accordingly, any actions we may take arising out of Justice Squires’
judgment would arise merely from the fact that a court judgment exists,
which our Constitution enjoins us to respect. As hon members would know,
the judgment contains detailed matters of fact and inference against which
penalties have been meted out. At the same time, proceedings pertaining to
a possible appeal to higher courts are still pending. However, the judgment
contains some categorical outcomes.

These are that the court has made findings against the accused and at the
same time pronounced on how these matters relate to our Deputy President,
hon Jacob Zuma, raising questions of conduct that would be inconsistent
with expectations that attend those who hold public office. In this regard,
I would like to emphasize two basic pillars of our jurisprudence, namely
equality before the law and the right to be presumed innocent until proven
otherwise.

We are of the firm view that this principle applies to the Deputy
President, not merely as a matter of principle and common decency, but also
in deference to the individual occupying such office and the service that
he has rendered to the Republic and its people before and after the
attainment of our liberation. Unambiguous as the judgment may be about an
assumed unsavoury relationship, the Deputy President has yet to have his
day in court.
Also, noting the fact that there are processes underway to lodge an appeal,
we are obliged to allow the steady grind of the due process of law to run
its course without let or hindrance, respecting the provisions of our
Constitution in this regard.

Hon members, as we reflect on these matters, we should also remind
ourselves of the major issues, which were the original source of this
trial. Some three and a half years ago, the Joint Investigation Team of the
Auditor-General, the Public Protector and the National Directorate of
Public Prosecutions completed its work and released to Parliament a report
on the Defence procurement process. This team came to the conclusion:


   No evidence was found of any improper or unlawful conduct by the
   government. The irregularities and improprieties ... point to the conduct
   of certain officials of the government departments involved and cannot
   ... be attributed to the President or the Ministers involved in their
   capacity as members of the Ministers’ Committee or Cabinet. There are
   therefore no grounds to suggest that the Government’s contracting
   position is flawed.

With regard to matters of the cost of the procurement, the investigation
team concluded as follows:

  What was achieved by the affordability team and the international offers
  negotiating team is unprecedented in the international credit market.

On each of the allegations of impropriety with regard to the primary
contracts, in which government played a pivotal role, the investigators
found that there were cogent technical and/or strategic reasons behind the
decisions taken.  The team identified some weaknesses in the procurement
process and made recommendations which are being followed up, the better in
this regard continually to improve our work as government.

It also called for investigations on matters pertaining to secondary
contracts, in which, though government may have formally played a role to
ensure reliability and cost-effectiveness, the arrangements were
essentially between the companies chosen as primary contractors and third
party corporate subcontractors.

We refer to this matter in some detail because we believe that it behoves
all of us to recognise that the investigations that resulted in the court
case that has just been concluded, were not only recommended in that Joint
Investigation Team report, but were also supported by the whole of
government, including the hon Deputy President.

These further investigations do not contradict the fundamental conclusion
about the integrity of the decisions of government with regard to the
Defence procurement. No facts were adduced during the trial in question and
no findings were made that are inconsistent with the report of the Joint
Investigation Team submitted to Parliament, a report whose recommendations
the government accepted.

Having said all of this, it remains for us to answer the question as to how
we should respond to some of the issues raised in the judgment handed down
by Justice Squires.

It seems self-evident that arising out of the judgment in the Durban trial,
there will be continuing legal processes in the higher courts. These
processes will have a bearing on normal enquiries that the law enforcement
agencies may wish to undertake and on follow-up that Parliament may embark
on in relation to any of its members. The executive will therefore await
the outcome of these processes.

Both the Deputy President and I are acutely sensitive to the
responsibilities we bear as prescribed by our Constitution. We understand
very well that we should at all times act in a manner that seeks to
“uphold, defend and respect the Constitution”, as required by the same
Constitution.

As I have already indicated, this includes, among other things, the need to
“respect the constitutional status, institutions, powers and functions of
government in the other spheres”, to quote the Constitution once again.

We have had no precedent to guide us as we considered our response to the
judgment by Justice Squires. We have therefore had to make our own original
determination on this matter, guided by what we believe is in the best
interest of the hon Deputy President, the government, our young democratic
system and our country.

I am fully conscious of the fact that the accused in the Schabir Shaik case
have given notice of their intention to lodge an appeal. I am equally aware
that a superior court may overturn the judgment handed down by Justice
Squires.

However, as President of the Republic I have come to the conclusion that
the circumstances dictate that in the interest of the hon Deputy President,
the government, our young democratic system and our country, it would be
best to release hon Jacob Zuma from his responsibilities as Deputy
President of the Republic and member of the Cabinet.

Necessarily, we will continue to monitor and respond to all developments in
relation to this and other relevant legal processes.

Personally, I continue to hold the hon Jacob Zuma in high regard, and I am
convinced that this applies to most members of Parliament. We have worked
together under difficult and challenging conditions for 30 years. In this
regard, I wish to thank him for the service he has rendered as part of the
executive at national and provincial levels, sparing neither strength nor
effort to ensure that with each passing day, we build a better life for all
South Africans.

I am certain that I speak on behalf of all who have served with him in
Cabinet when I say that we shall remain friends, colleagues and comrades in
the service of the people. And as government, we shall continue to draw on
his experience and expertise where the need arises.

In due course, I shall announce the necessary changes in the executive to
take account of the void that the departure of Deputy President Jacob Zuma
has created.

I thank the hon members for their presence at this Joint Sitting of the
Houses of Parliament and for the attention they have paid to what we had to
say to address a difficult situation.

I trust that what we have done today, and will do in future, together, will
continue to strengthen our democracy, reinforce the accountability of those
who hold public office, and deepen the confidence of the masses of our
people in their elected representatives and our organs of state. I thank
you, hon Chairperson and hon members. [Applause.]

The Joint Sitting rose at 14:19.

