---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 February 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-02-17
---

THURSDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2005
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 15:03.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                ANNOUNCEMENT

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Order, please! I would
like to welcome everyone back to the National Council of Provinces after
the festive season, and I wish you belated greetings for the festive
season.

Hon members, I would like to announce that Ms A N Mchunu and Ms N F
Mazibuko were appointed to fill the vacancies that had occurred in the
delegations from KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng respectively. The two members
were sworn in in the Chairperson’s boardroom on 8 December
2004. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the hon members.
[Applause.]
                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

  That the Council –


     (1)    notes with sadness and shock that a 68-year-old female patient
         was shot dead in Rietvlei Hospital near Umzimkhulu in the Eastern
         Cape earlier this week, and that in a separate incident a nurse
         was stabbed to death at Mokopane Hospital in Limpopo the week
         before;


     (2)    calls upon the relevant authorities to investigate these
         incidents thoroughly so that the perpetrators are brought to book;


     (3)    acknowledges that the security measures in state hospitals needs
         to be reviewed urgently so that similar incidents can be avoided
         in future; and


       4) offers its deepest condolences to the families of the deceased.


Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the House:
      That the Council –


         (1)     notes the results of a by-election held in Evander, Ward
              18 of the Govan Mbeki Municipality in Mpumalanga on 26 January
              2005, and congratulates the DA on a resounding victory over
              the ANC and FF Plus, in that the DA achieved 76% of the vote,
              the ANC 22% and the FF Plus a mere 2%; and


         (2)     further notes that this achievement represents a technical
              regain for the DA in that the ANC garnered a majority of 55%
              of the vote in this ward during the April 2004 elections.

                           MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE


                     FIELD RANGER ATTACKED BY CROCODILE


                             (Draft Resolution)


Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Madam Deputy Chair, I move without notice:

  That the Council –


     (1)    notes that on 13 February 2005, while crossing the Black
         Umfolozi River in KwaZulu-Natal, Field Ranger E Ngcobo was
         attacked and pulled down by a large crocodile;


     (2)    further notes that Field Ranger S Nxumalo, who was accompanying
         Field Ranger Ngcobo, bravely attacked the crocodile and pulled the
         victim to shore and then proceeded to perform basic first aid
         before Field Ranger Ngcobo was airlifted to hospital;


     (3)    also notes that Field Ranger Ngcobo is in a stable condition but
         that his left hand had to be amputated as it was badly injured;


     (4)    wishes him a speedy and full recovery; and


     (5)    congratulates Field Ranger S Nxumalo for his extreme bravery in
         saving his colleague from certain death.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                             VISIT TO MPUMALANGA


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson of the Council,
I wish to move the Draft Resolution in my name that notwithstanding Rule
(21)(2)(c), the Council in terms of Rule 21(2) resolves that in the
interest of enhancing public participation as provided for in section
72(1)(a) and (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, Act
108 of 1996, as from 14-18 March 2005, the Council will conduct public
hearings, hold meetings and conduct oversight visits in Mpumalanga. The
NCOP will sit in plenary on 18 March 2005 from approximately 10h00 until
the conclusion of the business. I so move.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): As there is no
speakers’ list, I shall now put the question. The question is that the
motion be agreed to as the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

I shall first ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s votes. Are all the delegation heads
present? Yes.

Question put.

Mr A WATSON: On a point of clarity, I’ve heard the motion and
we will not object to it, as is our right, but it’s the second visit and
it’s a very important visit. May I just enquire why have we for the second
time waived Rule 21(2)(c) which determines that the costs of such a visit
should be ascertained.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): In accordance with
Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to make their
declarations of vote, if they so wish. We shall continue.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour, or against or abstain from voting.

Mr A Watson: On a point of order, Madam Chair: My question was not replied
to or even acknowledged.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you very much, hon Deputy Chair, but
this matter has been discussed and deliberated upon more than several times
in the multiparty Whips’ meetings, in the Programming Committee meetings,
where all parties sit, and have a say. It is not the first time that it has
been raised. We have even gone into further detail than the actual amounts
in terms of the visit to Mpumalanga.

So, though, I don’t blame the member for not receiving the information from
the respective or relevant party representatives who are supposed to report
back to their caucuses - I’ll not blame him for his ignorance when he comes
to this House ignorant of that fact - the matter however has been
deliberated upon more than several times. Thank you, Deputy Chair.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you. I object to being called ignorant; I get the
minutes of all the Programme Committee meetings and in none of them   - and
I get reports of the Whips’ meetings - was any amount in terms of this
visit mentioned. So, I really ask that the Chief Whip withdraw the remark
that I am ignorant otherwise I will accuse him of misleading the House.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: My simple understanding of English is that
if a person doesn’t have information, he or she is ignorant.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Thank you, sir. We
shall now continue. Eastern Cape?

Mr A WATSON: May I ask your ruling on that, Madam Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): I rule you out of
order. Thank you. Mr Watson, will you please sit.

We shall proceed. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re a thega. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


               CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON KWAZULU-NATAL VISIT


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Madam Deputy Chair, I thank you for the
opportunity given to me to participate in this debate. As you would be
aware, last year on 30 June 2004 we had approved what we call a programme
of action called Vision 2000. In that programme we committed ourselves to
that most of our time and most of our resources will be pledged to our
oversight role; and the NCOP is going to proceed with that vision or
programme of action precisely because that is the work we are called upon
to do and the programme has to succeed.

Since 1994, during this first decade of our democracy, Parliament has
passed quite a number of laws that seek to transform  society and ensure
that the change in the lives of our people is being met or made better.

Now, at the end of the beginning of the second decade our democratic
Parliament should focus and ensure that instruments that we have put in
place actually benefit the people on the ground. This is why we need to
focus on the monitoring and implementation of these policies of government
programmes in order to speed up delivery to our people, more especially
those who stay in the rural areas and  squatter settlements.

I think it is our duty as a House that we should go out there and do that.
Our imperative therefore is to ensure that our people, wherever they find
themselves, benefit from the positive changes that are taking place in our
country.

The NCOP has certain programmes and activities that assist us to fulfil
oversight roles. This includes community work that we normally undertake
from time to time. It includes provincial visits and also public
involvement initiatives, amongst other things.
In the area of public involvement, our mainstay programme of taking
Parliament to the people will continue to serve as a key element in our
strategy of promoting popular participation in the affairs of Parliament
and government. As a result we will continue to ensure that the NCOP uses
this programme as a platform for our people to air their opinions to
Parliament.

Because of the skewed distribution of resources amongst our people, as a
result our racist past, one will find many of our people still being unable
to interact directly with the institutions that support democracy.
Parliament remains accessible mainly to those who have the resources to
travel to Cape Town or Parliament. We will not allow this to disadvantage
our people who do not have the necessary resources to do so.

Now, through the programme of taking Parliament to the people, we are to
listen to the ideas of the people on the ground, their comments and
suggestions that are made to us. In this way they do not have to wait for
us to see them at a later stage, but we interact with them even during
these periods of our sitting in Parliament.

Our programme of taking Parliament to the people was launched, as you would
know, in 2002 when we went to the Eastern Cape. We went to North West last
and last year we went KwaZulu-Natal, and the report I’m getting is that the
people on the ground are very happy about this programme.

I was speaking to a number of radio stations yesterday, for a whole hour,
and everyone who called in commended the taking of Parliament to the
people. It’s becoming one of the vehicles that really makes us interact
very effectively with the people on the ground.

Now coming to the subject for today, a visit to KwaZulu-Natal, I just want
to mention a few things. I will allow other people also to participate in
this debate through the speakers list.

Our programme in KwaZulu-Natal focused on some of the important issues in
the development of genuine equality in the country. These include
education, promotion of agriculture, social development, the youth, women,
people with disabilities as well as local government. This afternoon’s
debate provides an opportunity to look at the issues raised during the
visit to Empangeni and the surrounding areas. It also provides us with the
opportunity to look at trends with regard to service delivery and the
challenges that our provinces are facing.

As we roll out our programme to more and more provinces, we should be able
to look at such trends and begin to come up with proactive mechanisms to
assist provinces that are facing similar challenges. This programme must
have the required impact to change the lives of our people on the ground.
Our committee therefore has the responsibility to identify issues
particularly in this report that is being presented before us today, that
relate to the portfolios and come up with tangible plans to solve those
problems.

It is important that as a House we provide space for the review of the
programme report to see what kind of impact we are making. We must see in
what way we have been able to address the challenges and issues raised by
the people on the ground in KwaZulu-Natal.

Some of the important issues, which the President has raised in Empangeni,
were the following: The NCOP should do an assessment on how it could
enhance its role in encouraging public participation. He further said how
the NCOP could play a role in accelerating the process of transformation;
how to ensure through the implementation of policies that we are able to
ensure that their outcomes are visualised. That’s a crucial thing and it’s
not just a question of visiting and seeing what is happening, but it is a
question of really visualising it so that people can see those things that
we are talking about: to render its support to municipalities, build the
necessary infrastructure, develop institutional capacity and systems to
ensure that they discharge their constitutional mandate or constitutional
obligation.

The President also expressed the need for our local government system to
provide the platform for popular participation in the affairs of our local
councils, as well as the need for transparency in local government
structures. Through the participation in this House, we hope that the
representatives of local government will, within local government, join the
debate started by the President. This is very important if we are to
promote a democratic and developmental local government, which empowers our
people to act as their own liberators.
But just to touch on the issues of education quickly, when we visited
schools in KwaZulu-Natal, those who were in my delegation will agree that
we have been made aware of the amount of work that still needs to be done
in order to overcome some of the legacies of the past. The stories that we
heard and the things that we witnessed should not make us despair, but
instead should give us the energy to pursue our genre for delivery.

We have noted serious challenges facing government in the area of education
in the province. These issues are a backlog in the provision of classrooms,
the lack of ablution systems and water facilities, teenage pregnancies,
learner drop-out and long distances that pupils have to walk to school.

While government promised to look seriously into these challenges, we
should not down-play the role that parents and communities can play in
coming up with a practical solution to the challenges facing these schools.
For instance, issues such as vandalism and crime, which were also raised
during the visits, can best be dealt with by parents and communities,
together with government, in order for the communities to reclaim their
schools.

In terms of agriculture, small and emerging farmers told us about the
difficulties that they are experiencing in their quest to stake a claim in
the cultural and farming sector. Some of these include the lack of training
of new farmers, which has resulted in poor management of co-operatives and
poor road infrastructure for the transportation of agricultural crops to
mills and markets.

Small-scale growers also told us that the requirements of labour
legislation such as minimum wages and other conditions of employment often
led to the loss of jobs and other costs, which they cannot afford. We need
to assist our small entrepreneurs. However, we should not allow a situation
whereby the rights and dignity of workers could be undermined.

During the state of the nation address last Friday, the President expressed
government’s intention to review the regulatory framework as it applies to
small, medium and micro enterprises. This review is meant to bring the
necessary relief to our small entrepreneurs by giving them space in which
to develop.

In terms of awareness, another important aspect we have noted form our
engagement with the people of KwaZulu-Natal is that it is very important
for the government to create more awareness around the programmes that are
designed to assist the people. While the government has got programmes to
assist, for instance, women in business with access to finance and
technology training, there is limited knowledge amongst women about this
programme.

This is the same with regard to some of the initiatives of the various
government departments. This is a challenge to us; we need to assist in
making sure that the people are being made aware of the programmes provided
by the government, and Members of Parliament could play a vital role in
this.

We will continue to draw on the lessons that these visits provide us with
as public representatives and use them to benefit our people even more. We
will continue to look at issues such as corruption in the Public Service,
which our people have raised during all three visits. We have already
undertaken as the NCOP to view these issues in a serious light.

Public servants are there to serve the people and not to prey on them; this
is an important thing. We need our select committees to be vigilant to
ensure that the issues that we are picking up and those that our people are
telling us about are actually followed up.

Now in terms of the future visit, in order to ensure that our programme of
taking Parliament to the people becomes more effective and that we add
value to our work, our programme should provide for a special session for
members to discuss critical issues raised during the public meetings. They
must then give direction in terms of the steps that the House should take.

From now on our programme will include special sessions for Members to
debate the issues that came up during the public proceedings. We should
have at least two such sessions during a week-long visit in those areas.
Our report, as it stands, does not give us much in terms of the direction
that the House should take. We are a political institution; and as such we
need to factor in political input in our report.

These will assist our committees when they pick up the issues from the
report that relates to their areas. It will also help us as a House during
the review process to see whether we have been able to follow up on the
things on which we said we should follow up. So, when picking up this
report and reading it, one should be able to say that these are the issues
that have been raised for the NCOP; they are the things that the NCOP
should be doing and we must be able to ask whether have they been done,
because I think that’s a very critical issue.

I want to propose to this House that the Chair of Committees should begin
to put together a process where our committees, which deal with the
respective issues raised in the report, must go back to KwaZulu-Natal after
recess and follow-up. That is my proposition that I want to put to this
House. And we must lift up those things from the report and go back to the
area of Empangeni and follow up and make sure that those things are
happening on the ground.

In conclusion, our visit to KwaZulu-Natal was a great success. However, we
must not limit the success of a programme of this nature to how
successfully it was carried out. We should measure its success by its
impact on the lives of the people, because their lives must change. Our
question should then be: What change has been brought to the people who
came to share their stories with us? That is an important thing and that is
why I am proposing that those committees should go back to KwaZulu-Natal.

In this way we will be able to see the contribution of this programme in
the process of speeding up delivery and improving the quality for our lives
and even making them better on the ground. Deputy Chairperson, I thank you.

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, let me start by saying
that today I dedicate my speech to the late Chairperson of the NCOP. Thank
you. [Applause.]


Go tloga ka la 1 go fihla ka la 5 Nofemere 2004, setšhaba sa Empangeni se
ile sa ba le boitemogelo le go kwešiša gore ke go reng ge go thwe ``The
People Shall Govern!’’ Se, se diregile ge Khansele ya Bosetšhaba ya
Diprofensi e be e išitše Palamente tikologong yeo gore batho ba fao ba
tšeye karolo mererong ka moka yeo e amago maphelo a bona, ditlhologelo tša
Freedom Charter le mmušo wo etilwego pele ke ANC, woo o hlabollago maphelo
a batho ka moka le go ba hlohleletša go ba karolo ya Palamente le go kgatha
tema mererong ya yona. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)


[From the 1st to the 5th of November 2004 the people of Empangeni
understood what it meant when it was said that “the people shall govern”.
This took place when the National Council of Provinces took Parliament to
this community, so that the people of this area could participate in
discussing all the matters affecting their lives, the aim of the Freedom
Charter and the ANC-led government, which transforms the lives of all
people and encourages them to be part of parliament and to participate in
parliamentary business.]

As we need constantly to review the manner in which we have been doing
things to ensure that as a movement we have a strategic response to the
challenges of the next five years and the coming decade up to 2014, the
words of Comrade Nelson Mandela, when he addressed CODESA on 20 December
1991 about the will of the people, are as true today as they were then. He
said:

   Today will be indelibly imprinted in the history of our country. If we,
   who are gathered here respond to the challenge before us, today will mark
   the commencement of the transition from apartheid to democracy. Our
   people, from every corner of our country, have expressed their yearning
   for democracy and peace. CODESA represents the historical opportunity to
   translate that yearning
   into reality . . .

   South Africans of many persuasions recognize that this environment, and
   its constitutional product, CODESA, is the fruit of their sacrifices and
   struggle. They have a justifiable expectation that CODESA will set our
   country on the road to democracy.


It is because of that ``justifiable expectation’’ that the NCOP, amongst
other things, decided that Parliament should be taken to the people, and
its first port of call was KwaZulu-Natal for this third term.

This exercise was also in total acquiescence with what James Madison, once
said:

  Knowledge will forever govern ignorance, and people who mean
  to be their own governors, must arm themselves with the power which
  knowledge gives.

James Madison again concurs with our President, Thabo Mbeki, who during his
opening address of the 51st Congress of the African National Congress in
Stellenbosch said:

  The people of South Africa have made the common determination that
  our country belongs to all who live in it, black and white. It says that
  the people of South Africa, black and white, are committed to live up the
  pledge they made to themselves, to refuse
  to be enslaved by the divisions and antagonisms of the past.


The principle of Taking Parliament to the People embodied, amongst other
things, adherence to the clause, ``the people shall govern’’ in the Freedom
Charter - whose 50th anniversary we celebrate this year.

We must also imbue in our people the vision of an alternative society to
the society that we inherited. It should also be borne in mind that it is
democracy that citizens should be continuously engaged in governance
through interaction with those who make decisions. And, I can say with
aplomb that through this ANC-led government that is continuously happening.

Having a ballot box once every few years is an important element of
democracy, but it is only one step in the process of building a society
that genuinely serves the interests of all its people. It is because of the
fact that we have to fulfil our onerous task and commitment as members of
Parliament who are elected to make laws and policies on behalf of the
people that the NCOP, as required, fulfilled its mandate to consult
continuously with the citizens on whose behalf we act unapologetically.

It was pleasing to note the excitement of the people and the candid
interaction they had with all of us during our visit to KwaZulu-Natal in
Taking Parliament to the People. It was also emotionally moving also to
notice the lack of information on programmes and policies made by this
government for the benefit of our people. As one of the responsibilities of
the exercise was the dissemination of information to the people, it is
pleasing to note that the results indicated a positive impact of the
exercise on the people of the area we visited.

As processing of the identity documents was identified as a key issue
during the visit, it is also pleasing to note that since the visit 40 823
identity documents were issued at 31 service points across the province
from November 2004 to January 2005.

We are rather concerned about the figures provided by the Department of
Home Affairs that show that at 11 other service delivery points no identity
documents were issued. The reason for the major concern is that successful
processing of identity documents enables our people to access child grants,
but more importantly, it allows our people access to the wealth that the
country has to offer. This wealth is both in terms of material wealth and,
most importantly, in terms of being included in a democratic process of
overseeing the implementation of policies that ensures a better life for
all our people.

In addition, there were schools where children were taught under the trees.
The parents have now started a programme to build three extra classrooms in
one of the schools.

Baswana, ka Sepedi, ba re: Kgomo go tsošwa ye e itsošago. Batho ba KwaZulu-
Natal ba itsošitše. [The old people say in Sepedi: The person who tries to
help himself or herself will also get help from other people. The people of
KwaZulu-Natal have tried.]

We are urging the Department of Education in the province to assist parents
of that community in their efforts.

It is this new patriotism displayed by these active democrats in KwaZulu-
Natal that also our President was referring to in his state of the nation
address last Friday. We salute our people who show that they are ready to
govern, ready to voice their feelings, ready to work as a united nation of
winners in a transforming country.

We raised expectations in KwaZulu-Natal, and as we ourselves always say
that a lot still needs to be done, we are proceeding to other provinces,
but let us always ensure that as we go about that we make a difference, as
we touch the lives of . . . [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Deputy Chairperson, allow me to start by adding my
personal congratulations to that of my party to both you and our hon
Chairperson on your elevation to the high office of this House. Let me
pledge the fullest support of the DA in all your lawful undertakings.
[Laughter.]

May I also say that I wish to start by saying that my party and my
colleagues are in full support of provincial visits, and that we look
forward to fully participating also in the coming visit to Mpumalanga. So
please don’t see the fact of our insistence earlier today on working to the
Rules as a negative observation.

The object of this debate is, however, to reflect on a week in which we,
the Upper House, took Parliament to the people of KwaZulu-Natal, and let me
hasten to congratulate the compilers of the report on a job well done.

Yet, whilst I have no desire to dwell on the less pleasant aspects of the
visit which came to the forefront, particularly during the plenary
sessions, I do think that the plenaries and particularly the subjects
debated should have formed part of the report, especially in regard to the
substance of those debates.

One such example is the address and reply of the hon President on 4
November 2004 because it contained a very important message which spoke
directly to us as members of the NCOP, and contained no less than an
instruction to spend most of our time in the provinces, and in particular,
to get more involved with local government and related programmes.

If we therefore wish to reflect on our visit and our actions thereafter, we
should actually contemplate our involvement in that sphere of government; a
sphere that is closest to the people who elected us as their
representatives; a sphere that was designed to be at the forefront of
delivery and in reality the service agent of government. But alas, it is
also a sphere of nondelivery and corruption which is no longer on the brink
of explosion but which has indeed exploded and is burning.

Yes, indeed there was burning: Ask the people of Bronkhorstspruit, ask the
people of Mpumalanga and Henneman, ask the people of Clocolan, ask the
people of Siyabuswa, and so I can carry on!
And why? Because that sphere of government is simply not delivering as it
should be and instead of constantly working for the betterment of our
people, it is a sphere that is constantly plagued by corruption and
incompetence.

Dit het tyd geword, agb Voorsitter, dat ons, as die verkose
verteenwoordigers, moet erken dat plaaslike regering eenvoudig nie oor
genoegsame kundigheid beskik nie. Die kundiges is weggedryf en vervang deur
onbevoegde amptenare en verteenwoordigers vir wie eie belang van groter
waarde is as dienslewering.

Ek kan talle voorbeelde noem, waarvan die koerante ook vol is, maar kom ons
kyk net vir ‘n oomblik na een voorbeeld. As ek dan lieg, Meneer . . .
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The time has come, hon Chairperson, for us, as the elected
representatives, to admit that local government simply does not possesses
sufficient expertise. The experts have been driven out and replaced by
incompetent officials and representatives for whom self-interest is of
greater value than service delivery.

I can mention numerous examples, which also appear in the newspapers, but
let us look at only one example for a moment. If I am lying, sir . . .
[Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Are you rising on a
point of order, hon member?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: No, it is not a point of order, Chair. I am
rising on a point which we raise every time in this House – that one of
interpretation, because there was no interpretation. I will not respond to
that nonsense.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, I hope that the interpreting service has not stolen my
time and that you will make provision for me to complete my speech.

Ek sê ek kan talle voorbeelde noem, waarvan die koerante ook vol is, maar
kom ons kyk net vir ‘n oomblik na een voorbeeld, dié van Govan Mbeki
Plaaslike Munisipaliteit - een van die drie grootste munisipaliteite in
Mpumalanga.

Die munisipale bestuurder, ‘n onomwonde ondersteuner van die ANC, het pas
die hoeveelste hofsaak gewen om, na die onbillike ontslag deur sy
“comrade”, die burgemeester, weer in sy pos herstel te word! Die ANC-
burgemeester weier egter weer volstrek om hom terug te aanvaar en het so
pas opdrag gegee dat sy salaris gestaak moet word. Dit, agb Voorsitter,
terwyl dieselfde burgemeester en sy ANC-raad, in opdrag van die ANC-
beheerde provinsiale regering, weens talle aanklagte van ongerymdhede
ondersoek word.

Waar is dienslewering dan nou daar? Nee, daar is geen teken daarvan nie en
dis geen wonder dat die DA in hierdie munisipaliteit so pas ‘n wyk loshande
van die ANC, in Evander, afgeneem het nie.

Ek is egter trots om te kan vermeld dat die leier van die DA en die leier
van die amptelike opposisie in Mpumalanga gister aan die Premier en sy LUR
‘n skrywe gerig het om te eis dat hierdie belaglike toedrag van sake nou
aangespreek kan . . . [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[I am saying I that I can mention numerous examples, of which many also
appear in the newspapers, but let us just look at one example for a moment,
that of the Govan Mbeki Local Municipality – one of the three largest
municipalities in Mpumalanga.

The municipal manager, a staunch supporter of the ANC, has just won the
umpteenth court case once again to be reinstated in his post after his
unfair dismissal by his comrade, the mayor! However, the ANC mayor
absolutely refuses to take him back and has just given instructions that
payment of his salary must be stopped. That, hon Chairperson, while the
same mayor and his ANC council, at the instruction of the ANC-controlled
provincial government, are being investigated because of numerous charges
of irregularities.

Where is the service delivery there then? No, there is no sign of it and it
is no wonder that the DA in this municipality has just taken a ward from
the ANC in Evander with ease.

However, I am proud to be able to say that the leader of the DA and the
leader of the official opposition in Mpumalanga yesterday wrote a letter to
the Premier and his MEC to demand that this ridiculous state of affairs
should now be addressed . . . [Interjections.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I now have the interpretation, and I
have listened carefully to what they are interpreting. The hon member is
not debating on the report of KwaZulu-Natal. He is now mentioning other
issues beyond that particular report. Most of the time he is always very
strong on the point that we must concentrate on the subject of the matter.
I think he will also do likewise. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Please keep to the
Rules, hon member.

Mr A WATSON:  Madam Chair, I think I am keeping to the Rules. I am
referring to the instruction given by the highest authority in this country
– the President of this country – that we must get involved in local
government and get it right. That is what I am now talking about – the
local government and service delivery that is not taking place. So, that is
not the object of the point of my . . . [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, you don’t use the instruction
of the highest authority opportunistically. The debate is about KwaZulu-
Natal, and not about all the other things the hon member wants to talk
about. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Order! You may
continue, hon member.

Mnr A WATSON: Ek het gesê ek is egter trots om te kan vermeld dat die leier
van die DA ‘n skrywe aan die Premier gerig en gevra het dat die vraag
opgelos moet word. Dis nie ‘n vraag of daar probleme is nie, agb
Voorsitter. Die vraag is: Wat is die rol van die Nasionale Raad van
Provinsies? Watter rol moet ons vervul om die probleem op te los?

Die opdrag van die President was baie duidelik. Die taak is voorhande. Maar
as die ANC nie die wil het om te luister na die probleme nie asook nie oor
die vermoë beskik om die probleem op te los nie, dan sal die DA maar die
pad aanwys. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A WATSON: I said that I was nevertheless proud to be able to mention
that the leader of the DA had written a letter to the Premier asking that
the problem should be solved. It is not a question of whether there are
problems, hon Chairperson. The question is: What is the role of the
National Council of Provinces? What role must we play to solve the problem?

The instructions of the President are quite clear. The task is clear. But
if the ANC neither has the will to listen to the problems nor possess the
ability to solve the problem, then the DA will just show the way. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mnr F ADAMS: Voorsitter, Adjunkvoorsitter, agb lede, laat my toe om
gelukwensing uit te spreek. My party het dit reeds gedoen. Ek wil beide die
Voorsitter en u, die Adjunkvoorsitter, gelukwens met u verkiesing om
hierdie Huis te lei. Voorsitter, ek weet julle is bekwame mense en ons weet
ons is in bekwame hande. Ek sidder net om te dink as die DA ooit eendag die
Huis moet lei, want dan weet ek nie wat sal gebeur nie. Dan sal ons
vergaan! (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, hon members, allow me to
convey my congratulations. My party has done so already. I want to
congratulate both the Chairperson and you, Deputy Chairperson, on your
election to the leadership of this House. Chairperson, I know that you are
competent people and we know that we are in competent hands. I shudder just
to think about the DA ever leading this House, because I do not know what
will happen then. We shall perish then!]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Order! Thank you.

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, the year 2004 was the end of a decade of freedom
and democracy. The theme of taking Parliament to the people in KwaZulu-
Natal was celebrating unity in diversity. The first decade of freedom and
democracy has demonstrated the capacity and willingness of our people,
drawn from all sectors and all races, to act together and confront the
national challenges that we face.

I quote from the speech of our President, Thabo Mbeki, on 5 November 2004
in KwaZulu-Natal:

  A matter on which we are all concentrating is the issue of the
  acceleration of the process of transformation, focusing on the objectives
  of a better life for all our people and improving, as quickly as possible,
  the quality of life for all our people.

Not just simply a few people like the DA, but all our people.
The central challenge that we face from the report is the task of
implementation. As the President also said in KwaZulu-Natal, we all know
that there are many problems in our country that we have not solved. It is
going to take us some time to solve them. We must continue, as we begin our
second decade of liberation, to commit ourselves to doing everything
possible to push back the frontiers of poverty and expand access to a
better life for all, to realise the people-centred process we have to
achieve.

I want to thank the Presiding Officers, the Secretary, and all the staff
members of the NCOP as well as the researchers for such a comprehensive
report and for the programme we had in KwaZulu-Natal. Our cluster 4, under
the chairmanship of the Rev Peter Moatshe and the hon member Raseriti
Johannes Tau, is going back to Empangeni to do a follow-up, as we have been
instructed and as it is expected of us. I want to conclude with a quote
from the Freedom Charter:

  We pledge ourselves to strive together, sparing neither strength nor
  courage until the democratic change, as set out, has been won.

[Applause.]

Mrs L G NGCOBO (KwaZulu-Natal): Madam Chair, it’s my great pleasure to come
here and voice the feelings of our legislature and possibly of the people
of KwaZulu-Natal after the NCOP’s visit to our province late last year.

We are very happy that they were able to present the face of Parliament to
the people as they live their lives, and to draw them closer to the
programmes and aims of Parliament at national level. Of course, this has
raised great hopes among the people of that region. Of course, I will
emphasise that it is the people of that region, because the people who have
really benefited are the people of the Empangeni region. One wonders, from
where we are, whether we are going to be able to reach the rest of the
province and be able to do also for all of them what has been done for the
people of Empangeni.

As the Chairman of the NCOP has mentioned, we specifically looked at the
schools on that occasion. The problem of the shortage of classrooms –
which, more or less, is found in every part of the province – and the
shortage of teachers are things that are drawing back our progress in this
area. However, I’m also happy to acknowledge here that it is not all gloom
and doom in that many of the schools that suffer these disabilities are, in
fact, doing very well.

In that report we have at least one school, and we know many more, that’s
been able to actually get a pass rate of 100%. So, I have all the
admiration for them and I want to mention here that our people are in great
difficulties and we are doing all we can to make things better, but many of
our people are doing their best and we should, at this kind of platform,
acknowledge that. I’m happy to be able to acknowledge it, as indicated in
the report.

They suffer a lot of inconveniences, such as the lack of toilets; there is
a lot of crime and abuses and we, in our province, are experiencing a wave
of drug peddling, which is affecting our schools. I would wish our
government to pay a lot of attention to this problem while perhaps we can
still manage to control it. Durban, being a port, seems to be a very
attractive area for the dispersing and the sale of these drugs, and the
drugs are getting into our schools and are beginning to be a real concern
in our schools.

Another area that impressed me very much on those visits was the visit to
the women’s projects. Many of them are encouraging. We are going to need a
lot of money to try and give them the necessary tools with which to
progress in their programmes, and they need a lot of knowledge. Those are
some of the things that I’m hoping these undertakings will provide for the
women.

We are also hoping to benefit from the legislation that is the battery of
the various laws that we have passed in the last few years, although some
of them have not yet really penetrated the fabric of life in our province.
I think there is a step that we are missing. We are unable, at this point,
to actually make these laws acceptable and user-friendly to the women, and
perhaps Parliament could take this as a challenge. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, ake ngigcwalisele nami ekukubongeleni ngesikhundla
owenyulelwe kuso. Ngiyazi iqembu lami lakuhalalisela kodwa asigcwalise nje
ukuthi-ke siyakuhalalisela ngokuthi wenyukele kuleso sikhundla.
[Chairperson, let me also add my congratulations to you on your appointment
to this position. I am aware that my party has congratulated you already on
your appointment, but let me also congratulate you on your promotion to
this position.]

Getting down to the business: Deputy Chairperson and hon members, the
report tabled before us is but a part of an ongoing programme. The purpose
envisaged was to take Parliament to the people. KwaZulu-Natal was a very
fortunate province to experience such an opportunity and have the first
bite of the cake. The reason why I say this is because, among other things,
the plenary sittings did take place and some of the Bills were debated and
passed in that plenary.

The Council was engaged in various activities. It was engaged in
consultations at its imbizos, where people had to put questions directly to
the national Ministers as well as the MECs. The Council visited various
areas, including schools and other institutions.

If I could elaborate on the visit to schools, this was part of an
initiative to ensure that no learner will be educated under a tree. It is
unfortunate that approximately 6 000 schools are in poor condition. Over
90% of these schools are in the rural areas.

The IFP welcomes the move the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal, uMazankosi Sbu
Ndebele, has made at Copesville, where he suggested the use of prefab slabs
to build a school. Well done. We applaud that. However, this was the idea
of the erstwhile KwaZulu-Natal government. They engaged themselves in
encouraging the people to build schools by various methods. If this project
of prefab slabs could be community-driven, the Extended Public Works
Programme would eventually be seen getting off the ground and eradicating
poverty.

In conclusion, I must say that some of the things seen during the various
visits . . .

. . . zazinyantisa umzimba kodwa ngoba lokhu umbiko wezinto esazibona,
kunethemba lokuthi umbono ophelele ngezimo ezimbi ezabonakala nokho ezinye
zazo izinto ezingakwazi ukuthi zilungiswe maduze. Ngoba isikhathi asikho,
Sihlalo ngizokongela nje isikhashana esincane. Siyabonga. Angigeqi magula
angemuki. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[. . . although such things were not good for sensitive people, but that
was a report of what was observed. We hope that a complete picture of the
bad events that were observed would emerge, and that some of them would be
rectifiable soon. Chairperson, due to a lack of time I shall save you a
little time. Thank you. I am not going to say much. [Applause.]]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Thank you, Chairperson. Allow me firstly to add my voice in
congratulating both you and the Chairperson in your appointments to lead
this institution, the NCOP. Secondly, I am not surprised that the hon
Watson had nothing to say about the KwaZulu-Natal visit, because he has
nothing to say. One cannot say something if one hasn’t got anything to say.

The concept of taking Parliament to the people has been, and still is, the
culture and tradition of the ANC. The visit of the ANC to KwaZulu-Natal was
therefore the reaping of the fruits of the struggles waged by our people
and their insistence that the ANC must govern. It was and it is still only
the ANC that could deliver.

This visit proved that prior to 1994 sectors such as women, youth,
children, and people with disabilities, were not catered for. This year, as
well as the NCOP’s visit to KwaZulu-Natal, only serve to endorse the
Freedom Charter and the fact that South Africa belongs to all who live in
it. Hence this year we celebrate the adoption of the Freedom Charter, which
was adopted at the Congress of the People in Kliptown on the 26 June 1955.

On sectoral meetings, in particular meetings with women, a lot was
achieved. We witnessed the success of the sight visit of Phezukwemkhono
Women’s Co-op, which seized the opportunities provided by the government.
Structures and institutions have been set up by this government to improve
the quality of women. There are quite a number of opportunities that are
now available for women. However, there are still some major challenges in
this regard, such as implementing government policies that must be
monitored by our committees, as it has been alluded to.

Some of the shortcomings that were identified in this sector were education
and training, economic empowerment and participation in all structures. On
the issue of the youth sector, in this sector a number of challenges were
identified by the youth. These challenges include monitoring resources
earmarked for the youth, interference in youth programmes, fees at tertiary
institutions and access to funds.

One of the clauses of the Freedom Charter provides that the doors of
learning and culture shall be open. Hence this government has established
the student financial aid scheme to assist needy students. The students of
KwaZulu-Natal have made use of this opportunity. Generally the young people
in KwaZulu-Natal from all corners showed that they have confidence in this
government.

On people with disabilities, key areas were identified, such as
accessibility to roads, structures and transport, education and training,
and economic development. A lot of progress has been made in this sector,
starting from the adoption of the government’s Integrated National
Disability Strategy. This sector noted a huge change in government policies
and the inclusion of all different types of people with disabilities in all
government departments and spheres. This really proves that all are now
equal.

A site visit to Jabulani Craft Centre, which the Deputy Chairperson of this
House also attended, showed that there are still a few crumbs of the old
regime who are still hell-bent on sticking to the past, and are still
exploiting the poor and especially those with physical disabilities.
However, this government is doing its best to attend to the situation.

The site visit to Amangwe village, which was one of the success stories of
the private-public partnership and the government’s programme of caring for
the sick, especially those people affected and infected by HIV/Aids,
uncovers the clause, “ there shall be peace and friendship”. That really
showed that when there is friendship among people, there is also caring.
The government’s food parcel programme is also highly appreciated, even
though there are challenges and one is that it is being used as a political
stick in certain areas.

The meeting with farmers, which has been alluded to, really proved that the
people shall share in the country’s wealth. Farmers were happy and
supportive of the government’s programmes such as developing SMEs, liming
and salt fertilising, dam building, eradication of alien weeds, and many
more.

All these programmes create thousands of job opportunities. Generally the
challenges in these sectors were access to finance and infrastructure,
which would include roads. These challenges are being faced head on.

In conclusion, Chair, the NCOP visit to KwaZulu-Natal, for the people of
KwaZulu-Natal, was an eye opener for all of them, even for certain members
of this House. The mandate that the people of KwaZulu-Natal gave to the
ANC, and South Africa generally, is enough proof that only the ANC has got
policies that can advance the struggle for the total elimination of all the
backlogs.

President Thabo would say that the people have spoken. And I am therefore
proud to say that the people of KwaZulu-Natal have spoken. They have said:
Viva NCOP!  They are proud to say that if they notice something they will
report it to the NCOP. [Applause]. They don’t mind saying, even though it
is painful: “Sit down, Mr Watson” or, in memory of the late Comrade Joyce
Kgoali, “the people shall govern!” I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Rev E ADOLPH: Thank you, hon Chairperson. The Independent Democrats will
support the ruling party for the honest programme that they are
implementing and creating jobs for our people, in the poorest of the poor
communities. We will also take collective responsibility to reconstruct
this country because we all belong to this beautiful country of ours.

I think everybody with an open mind in this House will admit and give
credit to the NCOP for bringing and taking government to the people for the
first time in decades, especially since the previous regime people did not
see Parliament at the local level. However, I have a question. Having said
that, we all have to admit that there is a great lack of capability, and
there is a great lack of experience in terms of financial management at
local government level.

I think this House needs to cascade down the skills to our provinces and
local government so we can enhance service delivery. The chance of the NCOP
is really to become an institution of excellent service delivery; So I
thought today we are going to debate a progress report tabled for us by the
task team on oversight and accountability. That to me is a follow-up, but
it didn’t happen. I am concerned that we need to redefine our role and
function of doing oversight in the provinces.

I was very disturbed yesterday, or the day before, when we did some
oversight functions in North West. At least 73 disabled people were forced
together into a four-roomed house. My question to the NCOP is: What are we
going to do? How are we going to remedy the situation for those sufferers?

I am convinced, and I am speaking from my heart now, that we have the
resources. We can make a change in people’s lives. We just need rigorously
to implement the instruments of implementation. You have to admit and agree
with me also that this institution has few mechanisms to ensure
accountability of people. What we need is a dedicated task team or unit, to
monitor on a regular basis and go back to those people and see and check
imbalances, and then say: Did we deliver to our people?

It is good and well if we go for oversight and become visible. The
question, however, is: Did we manage to change the lives of those people,
the sufferers, the poorest of the poor?  I think that stands to reason that
each and every member of this House is challenged. Forget about your
political affiliation, forget about differences, but focus on the major
crisis in our country currently, which is poverty.

How are we going to address this, and how are we going to bring tangible
and concrete changes into those people’s lives? We will be judged by
history, whether we succeeded in changing those people’s lives. We wont be
free unless our people are free. Thank you. [Applause]

Mnu M MTHIMKHULU (KwaZulu-Natal): Asibonge kuMphathisihlalo. Kuyinjabulo
enkulu ukuthi kule ntambama nje sizoba nale nkulumo yokuhlaziya umbiko
wokuhambela kwalo Mkhandlu esifundazweni sakithi kwaZulu-Natal ngonyaka
odlule.

Siyathanda ukuthi sibonge kakhulu okokuqala nje, uSihlalo ongasekho owahola
ithimba lalo Mkhandlu ngempumelelo emangalisayo, kwenzeka umsebenzi
nanamhlanje okusakhulunywa ngawo laphaya esifundazweni sakwaZulu-Natali.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows)

[Mr M MTHIMKHULU (KwaZulu-Natal): Thank you, Chairperson. It is a great
pleasure this afternoon to have an overview discussion on the report of the
visit last year by this Council to the province of KwaZulu-Natal.

Firstly we would like to thank the late Chairperson, who led this House
with great success, in doing a job that is still mentioned in daily
discussions in KwaZulu-Natal.]

Hon Chair, it was the first time that the people of that province
experienced first-hand how a democratic parliament operates. It was the
first time that they experienced what was meant when it was said that the
people shall govern. It became very clear that people are really governing
and we have all the reasons to appreciate the step that was taken by this
hon House to take this Parliament to that part of KwaZulu-Natal. Yes, as a
vast province we would wish that we could have another visit to other parts
of that province ... [Applause.]

. . . ngoba okwenzeka ngalesiya sikhathi ukuthi abantu baba nethuba lokuthi
basho izinto ezibakhathazayo. [. . . because what happened that time is
that people had an opportunity to say what their problems were.]

Yes, it is a province that still has enormous challenges; for instance, it
still has high levels of poverty, illiteracy and underdevelopment. But I
would like to assure this House this afternoon that the new era is dawning
in KwaZulu-Natal; and that, for the first time, the people of KwaZulu-Natal
are experiencing peace and stability. Contrary to the recent reports
alleging that there is still political violence in KwaZulu-Natal, I want to
assure this Council that KwaZulu-Natal is on the path of prosperity,
development and stability.

Surely, we are optimistic that those concerns that were raised by the
people during the visit of this Parliament to KwaZulu-Natal will be
addressed by means of our determination through our provincial government.
And, the provincial growth and development strategy is now in place in our
province. So, we have a reason to be optimistic that gone are the days when
KwaZulu-Natal was regarded as a province of doom and uncertainty.

Chairperson, in conclusion I want to say again that we would wish that this
Council would also take a decision to bring Parliament again to KwaZulu-
Natal because it is a vast province, and if it would then go to other parts
of the province it would help us a great deal. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chair of Chairs, and the hon House, the taking of
Parliament to the people of KZN was received with excitement and jubilation
from all quarters of that province. This gave us a sense of relief and
comfort in a province previously strained by political conflicts. Our
colleagues from that province were all smiles and, of course, we similarly
returned the good gesture.

As the report correctly reflects, we were divided into groups headed by
leaders, and we visited some schools ranging from primary to high schools
in order to see for ourselves what the needs and challenges were on the
ground. This is in line with the presidential decree that by the close of
the year no learner should be taught under trees or in dilapidated
structures.

However, the challenges and problems of KZN were no different from the
challenges and problems of my province or of any other province. My party,
the UCDP, is committed to supporting all genuine efforts and endeavours
towards the solution of these problems and the delivery of services to our
people.

Another interesting session was the open session in which people could put
forth their questions in respect of any issue or concern. These were
responded to by the relevant MECs and members of the respective committees.
That session was very vibrant and it related to real issues and concerns
that touched the lives of the people concerned.

We also visited the agricultural projects of the emerging farmers. The
skills development programme of our people should be intensified in order
to enable them to perform better in this line of operation. The Select
Committee on Health and Social Services had presented four Bills, which
were all passed at that plenary in KwaZulu-Natal. It was interesting for
our people to note that passing a national Parliaments Bill is not
dependent on the location at which it is passed, but on the observance of
all the relevant procedural systems connected with it. In conclusion, I
need to state that the UCDP supports this report. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, Deputy Chair, the hon Chief
Whip of KwaZulu-Natal, Comrade Mtholephi Mthimkhulu, and hon members in
this august House; I will not leave out our special delegates from Salga.
We very much appreciate your coming to this important debate. I must say
that from the start, as the wheels of democracy are rolling, taking
Parliament to the people starting from the Eastern Cape going north through
KwaZulu-Natal, not all the people will appreciate it. There are of course
those who will be making complaints on the side. Of course, it reminds me
of an old Chinese saying – it is unfortunate Ms Chang is not here – that
one tree falling makes much more noise than the rest of the forest growing.
[Laughter.]

Those trees are growing and people are starting to reap the fruits of the
trees of the struggle. And the forest will grow unstoppably so. We are very
much confident that we will not be diverted from our focus. If the two
special delegates, in particular, the chief whip of the whole provincial
legislature of KwaZulu-Natal including the DA are saying to us they wish we
come back as of yesterday, it confirms that our visit to KwaZulu-Natal was
quite a success. Of course, we will not pretend about those who were
engaged in other activities rather than participating proactively, because
the party to which Mr Watson belongs was engaged in a marathon of caucuses,
to try to wake up that tree which has fallen, and people have not even seen
that one, because the people were seeing the trees of democracy.

They were seeing parliamentarians coming to them to interact with them, to
listen to them, to hear their interests, to hear their needs, to take their
views, to take their recommendations. They saw national Ministers; they saw
MECs there. They saw parliamentarians there but they didn’t see you because
you were engaged in this marathon of caucuses. And you missed the point
that people were making.

I want to say Mrs Ngcobo that we very much appreciate your words of
encouragement because you spoke as a politician rather than a person coming
from a particular party to say you wish that our visit could have been
extended to other areas. Of course, due to logistical constraints we could
not, but we also wished to do so. One member of the House is so much
concerned about the financial constraints. We do, however, wish that we
could make these visits every fortnight to be there with the people.

But I must say that we had very constructive inputs and debates from all
parties in this House - except one. If you listen to Rev Adolph, even he
has made a very constructive input into this debate. The same went for the
hon Adams.

But let me preface my prepared speech by . . . I was still speaking about
the KwaZulu-Natal visit but I have never gone beyond that. While I am still
speaking about the KwaZulu-Natal visit let me quote the Freedom Charter
where it says:


  We the people of South Africa declare for all our country and the world
  to know that only a democratic state based on the will of all the people
  can secure to all their birth right without distinction of colour, race,
  sex or belief.

It further goes on to a say that the people shall govern and all people
shall be entitled to take part in the administration of the country.

That is what we are doing with this programme of taking Parliament to the
people. That was further confirmed by the President on 5 November - and I
quote him where he says:


  I would like to congratulate the NCOP for taking their sittings to the
  various provinces thus taking government to the people and opening space
  for our provinces to interact with their public representatives. This is
  important because these interactions do ensure that we are better able
  together to address the many pressing challenges that confront our
  people.

If you analyse this statement as made by a mature politician you will
understand that we do appreciate that there are still challenges facing our
people. That’s why also the President further spoke at length in terms of
our role as the NCOP, the oversight that we need to play in terms of the
last or the third sphere. Let me say the “third sphere,” because it is not
the last. It is equally as important as the other two spheres of local
government and mention was made of Project Consolidate which amongst other
things aims to focus on the following areas: one, to ensure community
development that would empower communities and encourage the participation
of our people in the spirit of Letsema and Vuk’uzenzele; secondly to ensure
that we implement the integrated human settlement approach that was
announced by the Minister of Housing; thirdly, the implementation of free
basic services to poor households ensuring that there are proper and
appropriate billing systems and working for the reduction of municipal
debt; and last, to mention among the many which are there, the setting of
systems and mechanisms that will root out corruption.

We should also appreciate the fact that there was a survey conducted by the
Department of Provincial and Local Government and in that report it says
241 municipalities have more than 30% of those households who have some
form of an income, earning less than R1 600 per month. That also reflects
the capacity in terms of revenue generation that those local municipalities
can collect, which also poses challenges, because the input also dictates
the output of those municipalities.

It does not need anyone to go to the university of Sussex to understand the
point we are stressing. There is a whole range of things, if you have
carefully listened to the speech of the President. But the other one say
226 municipalities have more than 50% of indigent households. If you have
grown up in poverty-stricken communities you will understand what that
means to that particular local municipality in terms of the challenges
which it is facing. However there are those who have the slogan: What is
bad for South Africa is good for us. But what we are saying is that those
challenges which are there need all of us to take them head-on so as to
have them as our collective responsibility to assist one another; and we
must spare neither courage nor strength to see to it that everyone gets a
better life for all. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That concludes the debate. I shall now put
the question, and the question is that the report be adopted. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution I shall
first ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the chamber
to cast their province’s vote. Are all delegations present?

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declaration of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to the
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
The delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour, against or abstain from voting.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Eastern Cape?

Mrs B N DLULANE: I-Eastern Cape iyayamkela. [Eastern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr M MTHIMKHULU: KwaZulu-Natal votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Mrs H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga iyayemukela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr K SINCLAIR: Northern Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Steun. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All nine provinces have voted in favour,
therefore I declare the report adopted.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

. . . nale Ndlu, ngiyafisa ukuthi ngokombiko waKwaZulu-Natali ngisho ukuthi
amakomidi aye ahlangana ase ebheka ukuthi yini ebhekelene nekomidini
ngalinye. Ngikhuluma nje ngesonto likamhlaka-28 kuya kumhlaka-4
kunamakomidi azoyobheka KwaZulu-Natali ukuthi ngabe ikhona yini inqubekela
phambili emveni kokuba uMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe kade iKwaZulu-
Natali. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[. . . and this House, in terms of the report from KwaZulu-Natal, wishes to
report that the committees came together to determine the duties of each
committee. As I am speaking, during the week of the 28th to the 4th, there
are committees that are going to KwaZulu-Natal to establish whether any
progress has been made since the visit by the National Council of
Provinces.]

And therefore I want to assure you, Chairperson, that as committees we are
making sure that we do follow-ups on whatever activities we have done.

Ngalawo mazwi sekuphelile ebesikudingida ngakhio indlu iyaguqa. [That
concludes the business of the day. The House is adjourned.]
The Council adjourned at 16:26.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          TUESDAY, 25 JANUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Public Investment Corporation Bill [B 6B - 2004] - Act No 23 of
         2004 (assented to and signed by President on 11 December 2004);


     (2)    Dental Technicians Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2003] - Act No 24 of
         2004 (assented to and signed by President on 25 November 2004);


     (3)    Public Audit Bill [B 1 - 2004] - Act No 25 of 2004 (assented to
         and signed by President on 14 December 2004);


     (4)    Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 21 - 2004] - Act No 27 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 1 December 2004);


     (5)    Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] - Act No 28 of
         2004 (assented to and signed by President on 14 December 2004);
         and


     (6)    National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 23B - 2004] - Act No
         29 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 11 December
         2004).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


         (i)     Minerals and Energy Laws Amendment Bill [B 1 - 2005]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 26778 of 17 September 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 18 January 2005.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     Report of the visit of the National Council of Provinces to Empangeni,
     KwaZulu-Natal, 1-5 November 2004:


Executive Summary


During 1-5 November 2004, the National Council of  Provinces  (NCOP)  had  a
sitting in the  KwaZulu-Natal  Province.  This  initiative  was  part  of  a
strategic inclusive process  of  involving  communities  within  the  Taking
Parliament to the People project. The sitting also  encompassed  the  NCOP’s
Vision  2009  Strategy,  which  seeks  to  expand  the  Council’s  oversight
activities over the next five years.

The Council undertook various meetings and site visits with the  communities
in the greater Empangeni area. Various recommendations were made during  the
course of the meetings and site visits to strengthen the role of  the  NCOP,
Government departments and key role-players to effect  and  enhance  service
delivery.

    • During the session on co-operative governance and issues  of  poverty,
      rural development and health it was emphasised  that  the  interaction
      between Members of the Provincial Legislature, Members of the National
      Council of Provinces and National Ministers would boost the quality of
      legislation and  enhance  effective  parliamentary  oversight  at  all
      levels of government. The  insight  of  National  Ministers  regarding
      issues with which the province is grappling would be further enhanced.
      Statistical information on socio-economic conditions in  the  Province
      was presented to underline the  urgency  of  the  need  to  counteract
      underdevelopment. It was noted that  extreme  levels  of  poverty  are
      being exported to informal settlements as people  try  to  escape  the
      unpleasant conditions in the rural areas. Such movement to rural areas
      then creates the new problem  of  unplanned  urban  resettlement.  Any
      effort at correcting these problems will only  succeed  when  combined
      with integrated rural sustainable development.


    • The visits to schools constituted part of an initiative to ensure that
      no learner will be educated under a tree. A document  on  the  current
      conditions at all schools in KwaZulu-Natal has been prepared and  this
      estimates that a total of approximately 6  000  schools  are  in  poor
      condition. The majority of these schools (90%) are in rural areas, and
      the  Department  of  Public  Works  will  be   responsible   for   the
      construction of additional classroom facilities. Other challenges that
      emerged during the course of the site  visits  include:  the  drop-out
      rate of learners can be ascribed to poor facilities and the  financial
      position of parents, many  schools  have  no  ablution  facilities  or
      running water, many schools do not have sufficient classrooms and high
      levels of poverty result in alcohol abuse and teenage pregnancies.

    • The NCOP meeting with  local  women  focused  on  the  structures  and
      institutions set up by Government over the course of the past 10 years
      to improve the quality of women’s lives. The presentations touched  on
      the legislation introduced to give effect to gender equity and some of
      the Government initiatives to enhance women’s lives. Some of  the  key
      challenges that still obstruct  the  political,  social  and  economic
      empowerment of women were highlighted and some potential solutions  to
      some of these were discussed.

    • The site visits to the cane and citrus farm and  women’s  co-operative
      and the meeting held with farmers served to highlight several critical
      issues. Problems such as inadequate market  access  to  emerging  cane
      growers, the inadequate infrastructure to move merchandise to and from
      the cane fields, inadequate training and capacity-building initiatives
      and high levels of  unemployment  which  often  exacerbate  the  crime
      levels were discussed in some detail. Despite these  challenges,  many
      of the participants cited some levels  of  success  in  creating  jobs
      through their commercial ventures.

    • The  public  hearing  on  the  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme  and
      sustainable subsistence farming highlighted the manner  in  which  the
      programme will create jobs,  develop  skills  and  alleviate  poverty.
      Through the creation of opportunities using labour intensive  methods,
      significant numbers of unemployed people will be drawn into productive
      work and gain skills, thereby increasing their  capacity  to  earn  an
      income. To date, it has been reported that 38 000  work  opportunities
      have been created between April and June 2004, since the launch of the
      EPWP. Concerns were raised  about  the  manner  in  which  people  are
      employed on these projects as well as the  difficulties  in  accessing
      funding for projects and securing tenders.

    • The public hearing on poverty alleviation and educational  and  social
      needs  pointed  out  that  the  most  important  focus  of  government
      programmes was the reduction of poverty in conjunction  with  ensuring
      greater access to health  and  other  social  services.  Presentations
      focused  on  the  poverty  alleviation  projects  implemented  by  the
      different departments, as well as those programmes  meant  to  address
      not only income poverty, but also quality of life more generally.  The
      focus is also developmental in nature, and  acknowledges  that  people
      must be able to contribute to the development of their own lives. Very
      little reference was made with regard  to  educational  needs  in  the
      context of poverty.


    • The meeting with the youth and people with disabilities focused on the
      mandate and challenges faced by the  National  Youth  Commission,  the
      mandate and challenges of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund, initiatives in the
      Presidency to deal with  youth-related  issues  and  the  mandate  and
      challenges faced by the Disabled People South Africa.

    • The meeting with councillors on local  government  matters  reinforced
      the fact that the most significant way in which the NCOP  can  respond
      to the challenges faced by local government is  by  strengthening  its
      oversight work. Through its oversight work the NCOP plays  a  critical
      role in ensuring that provincial and national government continues  to
      provide the institutional support to local government that it needs to
      discharge the constitutional obligations it is  entrusted  with.  This
      includes  making  sure  that  municipalities  have  the  capacity   to
      implement social and  economic  development  programmes  such  as  the
      Expanded  Public  Works  Programme  to  help  government  achieve  its
      objective of halving unemployment and poverty by 2014. The  Department
      of Provincial and Local Government (DPLG) has recognised that none  of
      the role players in this sector  can  adequately  deal  with  all  the
      challenges facing municipalities on their own. In recognition of this,
      DPLG  has  embarked  on  Project  Consolidate,  a  targeted   hands-on
      engagement programme to deal with problems  facing  local  government.
      Through this initiative,  municipalities  that  require  the  greatest
      support have been profiled.  The intention is to mobilise national and
      provincial government, state-owned enterprises and the private  sector
      to support local government.

1.    Introduction



This report reflects the key issues that emerged during the  course  of  the
visit of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) to KwaZulu-Natal during 1-
5 November 2004. This visit constituted part  of  a  broader  initiative  to
“Take Parliament to the People” and to  engage  in  parliamentary  oversight
initiatives. This report is therefore constituted of several  subreports  of
each of the various meetings that  took  place  during  the  course  of  the
oversight visit.  It is structured as follows:

    • Session on  co-operative  governance  and  issues  of  poverty,  rural
      development and health (1 November 2004).
    • Visit to the Macekane Primary and Bhekulwazi High Schools (1  November
      2004).
    • Visit to the Thanduyise High School, the Amangwe  Primary  School  and
      the Dover Combined School (1 November 2004).
    • Meeting with women (1 November 2004).
    • Visit to Thathunyawo  Cane  and  Citrus  Farm  and  the  Phezukomkhono
      Women’s Co-operative (2 November 2004).
    • Meeting with farmers (2 November 2004).
    • Public hearing on the Expanded Public Works Programme and  sustainable
      subsistence farming (2 November).
    • Public hearing on poverty alleviation and educational and social needs


    • (3 November 2004).
    • Meeting with youth and people with disabilities (3 November 2004).
    • Meeting with councillors  on  local  government  matters  (4  November
      2004).


2.    Visits to schools


2.1   The rationale for visiting schools

      • The visits to schools stem from the NCOP’s  “Taking  Parliament  to
        the People” initiative and the President’s commitment that by 2005,
        no learner will be educated under a tree.


      •  The  MEC  for  Education  in  KwaZulu-Natal  indicated  that   the
        department had prepared a comprehensive  document  on  the  current
        conditions at all schools in the province – in total  approximately
        6 000, most of which were in a bad condition.

      • The majority of these schools (90%) are in  rural  areas,  and  the
        Department of Public Works is responsible for the  construction  of
        additional classroom facilities.


2.2   Visit to the Macekane Primary School and the Bhekulwazi High School


The visit to the schools took place on 1 November 2004  and  the  delegation
was headed by the Honourable Ms JL Kgoali  and  included  the  KwaZulu-Natal
MEC for Education  as  well  as  Members  of  the  KwaZulu-Natal  Provincial
legislature and Local Government Councillors.


2.2.1 A profile of Macekane Primary School


      • Macekane Primary was constructed in 1964.
      • In the past two years, Macekane Primary’s pass rate was 68%.
      • The educators are committed to improving (a)  the  attendance  rate
        and (b) the pass rate.
      • The school employs 15 educators and has 105 learners.
      • Twelve out of the existing 16 classrooms can be utilised (the  rest
        of the classrooms are damaged).
      • The classrooms do not have ceilings, blackboards cannot be used and
        four to five learners have to share two-seater desks.
      • An attempt to lead water from the TICOR  South  Africa  Plants  was
        unsuccessful.
      • Although a feeding scheme is in operation, the storage and  cooking
        areas are totally dysfunctional.


2.2.2 A profile of the Bhekulwazi High School


      • The school has 16 educators and 389 learners, six classrooms and  a
        hall divided into two.
      • Bhekulwazi High can  accommodate  250  learners,  and  at  least  a
        further eight classrooms have to be provided.
      • In the absence of sufficient classroom accommodation, some learners
        have to be taught under trees, and during the  rainy  season  there
        are no classes.
      • Water supply is erratic, although the school does have a  standpipe
        for water.
      • Bhekulwazi paid Uthungulu for labour and 800 meters  of  pipe,  but
        the tap is not yet in working condition.
      • The chemicals for teaching physics are stored in  a  small  office,
        which is (a) a fire hazard and (b) potentially toxic.


2.2.3  Challenges


      • The drop-out rate, which is ascribed to  poor  facilities  and  the
        financial position of parents.
      • No ablution facilities or running water.
      • Lack of sufficient classrooms.
      • High poverty levels which often result in alcohol abuse and teenage
        pregnancies.
      • Insufficient educational equipment.

2.3   Visit to Tholokuhle High School and Sibonokuhle High School

Mr M J Mahlangu, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP,  led  this  delegation,  of
which Mr W Mchunu, Speaker of  the  KwaZulu-Natal  Legislature  also  formed
part, along with other members of the NCOP, MPLs and Councillors.

2.3.1 A profile of Tholokuhle High School

      • Tholokuhle High School has 1 400 learners  and  46  educators.  The
        school has a full management team  consisting  of  the  Headmaster;
        five Heads of Department, and eight Natural Science educators.


      • The  school  offers  three  educational  streams.  It  also  has  a
        Hospitality Centre whose Grade 12  learners  wrote  exams  for  the
        first time this year.

      • Tholokuhle  High  School  has  entered  into  agreements  with  the
        Universities of Zululand and Pretoria, who send subject specialists
        to teach learners from Grade 10 upwards.

      • The school receives  financial  support  from  various  businesses,
        including  Telkom,  Casme,  Mondi,  and  the  Zululand  Chamber  of
        Business.

2.3.2 Challenges

      • The school experiences  a  shortage  of  educators,  especially  in
        relation to Mathematics and Science.

      • There is no transport for learners to and from the school.

      • The school has no hall, tuck shop or conference rooms.

      • There is no funding for Internet services.

2.3.3 A profile of Sibonokuhle High School

      • The school has 682 learners, 24 educators and 18 classrooms, one of
        which is used as a staffroom. The administration building was burnt
        down during the violence in 1989.

      • The water supply to the school is erratic, as  the  standpipe  only
        works in the mornings. However,  a  new  pipe  is  expected  to  be
        installed from Enseleni.

      • The school does not have electricity in  all  classrooms,  and  the
        schools grounds have been fenced in in such a manner that it leaves
        little space for extracurricular activities or sport.

2.3.4 Challenges

      •  The  school  would  like  more  relevant  educators  for  the  new
        curriculum. One educator has been appointed for  Computer  Studies,
        but there are  no  computers  or  any  other  form  of  Information
        Technology.


      • Another educator has been appointed to teach Technical Drawing, but
        there are no facilities.

      • The area has a high unemployment rate, with the result that  up  to
        40% of learners cannot afford the school fees.

      • Grade 9 is being taught Science with no  equipment  or  laboratory,
        and there is no space to set up a laboratory.

      • The pass rate of the school is  declining,  and  few  learners  are
        reaching Grade 12 as they cannot reach the promotion requirements.

2.4 Visit to the Thanduyise High School,  Amangwe  Primary  School  and  the
Dover Combined School

The delegation was headed by Honourable Mr  V  V  Z  Windvoël.  It  included
Members of the KwaZulu-Natal  Provincial  legislature  and  Members  of  the
NCOP.


2.4.1 A profile of Thanduyise High School


    • The school has a learner population of 823 with  24  educators,  which
      translates into a ratio of one educator per 46 learners.

    • Thanduyise is a  fairly-resourced  school  compared  to  some  of  the
      schools that were visited  by  the  delegation.  It  has  a  well-kept
      library, a science laboratory and a  biology  laboratory  including  a
      computer laboratory with 30 computers  that  were  donated  by  Eskom.
      However, the school has inadequate sportsfields for learners.

    • In the 2003 matric results the school achieved a 92% pass rate,  which
      has been the norm at the school for the past years.

2.4.2  Challenges

The school faces the following challenges:

    • A shortage of teachers.
    • A shortage of reading material.
    • Lack of communication between teachers and the district  within  which
      the school falls.
    • The abolition of corporal punishment makes it difficult  for  teachers
      to instil discipline among learners.


2.4.3 A profile of Amangwe Primary School


    • The school starts from Grade 8 to Grade 12.

    • It has a learner population of 254 with 14 educators.

    • The majority of learners come  from  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the
      school, which is a semirural area.

    • The school has no electricity; ceilings and doors are  broken  due  to
      vandalism.



2.4.5 Challenges

The school faces the following challenges:

    • Lack of ablution facilities.
    • Shortage of water facilities.
    • Shortage of qualified teachers, in particular science teachers.

2.4.6 A profile of Dover Combined Farm School


    • The school starts from Grade 1 to Grade 12, with a learner  population
      of 792 and 22 educators.

    • The school is one of the best performing rural schools in the country,
      for the past years it has been achieving a 100% pass  rate.  This  has
      earned the school several awards.

    • The school was originally  owned  by  a  farmer  and  has  since  been
      transferred to the Department of Education. Most of  the  funding  for
      the school is sourced from the private sector.

    • The school has embarked on a programme of twinning with other  schools
      from the United States of America and Europe. During the visit by  the
      delegation one of the learners  had  just  arrived  from  an  exchange
      programme with France.




2.4.7       Outcomes


      • The provincial Department of  Education  is  entering  into  public
        agreements  with  service  providers  in  an  attempt  to   provide
        additional support.


      • Since there is  currently  a  backlog  of  16 500  classrooms,  the
        provincial Department of Education will prioritise the provision of
        classrooms.


      • In the next financial year, an allocation had been made  to  ensure
        that four classrooms, one science laboratory and one  media  centre
        is constructed at Bhekulwazi High School.

      • The provincial  Education  Department  is  committed  to  meet  the
        commitment by the President that by next year no learners  will  be
        learning under trees.

      • Contractors for constructing the  additional  classrooms  would  be
        appointed within the next 14 days.

2.5   Visit to KwaNandi Primary School and Bhekeshowe High School

Mr T  Setona,  Deputy  Chairperson  of  Committees  in  the  NCOP  led  this
delegation  of  Members  of  the  NCOP,  the  Provincial   Legislature   and
Councillors.


2.5.1  Profile of KwaNandi Primary School


      • The school has 383 learners and 11 educators plus one paid  for  by
        an unnamed NGO with a teacher/learner ratio of 1: 40/45. The school
        has 19 classrooms, some of which are used as administration  rooms.
        The grades range from Grade R to Grade 7.

      • The annual school fee is R30,00 but 50% of  school  fees  is  still
        outstanding.

      • The school was established in 1957 but the building is still  in  a
        satisfactory  condition  because  the  district  municipality   has
        renovated it. It is properly fenced with razor wire.

      • There is only one office, which is used by the principal. There  is
        no  administration  block  and  this  causes  classroom  congestion
        because some of  the  classrooms  are  used  as  admin  rooms.  One
        classroom is used as a computer room.

      • There are toilets but they are not  working  because  there  is  no
        water and  because  of  the  soil  type  there  are  problems  with
        drainage. There is also no water and  the  school  depends  on  the
        tanks and a borehole and both these resources dry up more often.

      • The school was provided with electricity in August after ten  years
        of requests.


2.5.2  Challenges


      • There is a high crime rate in the area of the school, and  the  car
        of one of the staff members was hijacked in  front  of  the  school
        gates. There were also incidents of breaking  into  the  classrooms
        before the school was fenced with the razor wire.

      • There is a problem with transport because the school is in a  rural
        area. The learners and  even  the  teachers  have  to  travel  long
        distances. The roads to the school are inaccessible.

      • The school has received 20 computers, which is not enough to  serve
        even one class. There is no computer room and one of the classrooms
        is used as a computer room. The school has no resources for  sport,
        recreation or Grade R facilities


2.5.3  Profile of Bhekeshowe High School


      • The school has a population of 600 learners and 17 educators, which
        translates to a ratio of about 40 learners per educator.

      • The school fees are R90 per annum and the parents are trying  their
        best to pay with a default rate of 20%.

      • There are 21 classrooms with only two  electrified  and  none  have
        ceilings. The roofs on one block were torn off by the storm.  There
        is no proper fencing at the school and this results in  the  school
        being easily vandalised.

      • The matric pass rate is gradually improving at the school. In  2000
        it was 24%; 2001, 43%; 2002, 53%;  and  in  2003,  80%.  There  are
        several strategies aimed at improving results  and  the  Department
        implements them yearly.

      • The learners are educated from time to time on HIV/AIDS. Last month
        Grades 7 and 8 were addressed and on 2 November 2004 somebody  from
        a local NGO will address them on health issues.


2.5.4  Challenges


      • Because of the rural nature of the school, the curriculum does  not
        address the local needs in its subjects. The school therefore wants
        to introduce Agricultural Science and  Computer  Studies.  However,
        the school is struggling to obtain computers because  there  is  no
        security for them.

      • The bad roads in this rural area make the  school  inaccessible  to
        the learners and educators especially during rainy days.

      • The school is struggling to obtain resources, human and  otherwise.
        There is a shortage of educators. There is one laboratory, which is
        poorly equipped. No playgrounds for learners.

      • The school depends on tanks for water. A tap was put  up  early  in
        2004, but it dries up regularly.

      • There is no security at  the  school.  The  school  has  hired  two
        security guards at R400 per month paid for by  the  community.  The
        guards are sometimes attacked,  as  they  have  nothing  to  defend
        themselves with.

      • The school used to have ABET but classes are no longer offered  due
        to problems in handling both ABET and full-time learners.

      • There are no computers; learners have to go to Empangeni and pay R6
        000 for basic computer courses after matric.
      • There is a high pregnancy rate in the school and this year has been
        the worst when compared to others.

2.6   Visit to Ndesheni School and isikhala seNkosi High School

Mrs  M  Oliphant,  Chairperson  of  Committees,  led  the  delegation.   The
delegation comprised  member of the NCOP, MPLs and Councillors.


2.6.1  Profile of Ndesheni School


      • The grades at Ndesheni range from grade 8 to grade 12. There are 21
        educators and 521  learners.  The  ratio  is  one  educator  to  38
        learners – 1:38.

      • The performance of the school in terms of matric  results  is  very
        good. The pass rate has been 73% in the past 3 years.

      • The school falls within the jurisdiction of the Mthunzini district,
        and within the traditional authority of iNkosi Dube.

      • School fees are R120 per annum. The area is a poor  area  resulting
        in most parents being unable to afford  to  pay.  There  is  a  60%
        default rate.

      • Classrooms are not in a good condition, and there is a shortage  of
        classrooms. One block (six classrooms) was burnt  down  completely,
        and has not been renovated. One  classroom  is  being  used  as  an
        administration office. Some of the classrooms  have  ceilings,  but
        most do not. There are lights in one block, but not in the  others.
        The floors are passable in one block, but not in others. There is a
        shortage  of  furniture   for   both   the   classrooms   and   the
        administration office. There is no laboratory and no library. There
        is no assembly hall.

      • There are 12 standpipes, with uninterrupted water supplied  by  the
        Municipality. However, there are no toilets for learners. There are
        two structures put up with no roof, used by both  girls  and  boys.
        These are not in a usable condition. There are two toilets used  by
        teachers, also in a bad condition.

      • There are no sport facilities or equipment. The school used to play
        soccer and netball but cannot manage now.

      • Books and computers were donated by RBCT, but since the fire,  they
        were not replaced by the company as there is no security.

      • There is a high rate of teenage pregnancy (almost  30%),  which  is
        solved by allowing pregnant girls to attend school until  close  to
        delivery, and then giving them home teaching  for  3  months.  This
        year there were 20 pregnant learners. There are also HIV  and  AIDS
        programmes in place to  assist  affected  learners.  One  dedicated
        educator is responsible for the programme.

      • There is no school bus; learners have  to  travel  long  distances.
        They therefore use the public transport.


2.6.3  Challenges


      • The school is situated in a poor area, with  an  estimated  15%  of
        learners showing signs of HIV infection. Most  learners  have  lost
        one or both of their parents.

      • The school is not properly fenced, and has no security guard.

      • The school is in need  of  electricity,  additional  classrooms,  a
        laboratory and library, learning materials and proper toilets.

      • There are no computers. The use of computers will assist to set  up
        proper administration. Currently boxes are used to store  important
        documents of the school.

2.6.4 Profile of Isikhala seNkosi High School

      • The school currently has eight teachers  (excluding  the  principal
        and a Zulu teacher who resigned in September). The position of  the
        principal has been in dispute since 2003, as learners  dissatisfied
        with his management style had chased him away from the school.  The
        principal is now stationed at Dlangezwa High School.

      • The grades range  from  grade  8  to  grade  12.  There  are  eight
        educators and 319  learners.  The  ratio  is  one  educator  to  38
        learners – 1: 38. In terms of matric results, the school  had  been
        performing well from 1999 to 2002. The performance was  as  follows
        in 1999 – 27%; 2000 – 37%; and 2002 – 74%. This was  indicating  an
        increase in the pass rate. In 2003 the  pass  rate  was  42%.   The
        delegation heard that the cause for the decline in  pass  rate  was
        attributed to disturbances  at  the  school  and  lack  of  learner
        commitment to school.

      • There are eight classrooms (prefabricated building donated by RBM);
        two are used as an administration block. Classrooms are in  a  good
        condition (freshly painted) with burglar-barred  doors;  no  broken
        windows  were  visible;  however,  the   school   does   not   have
        electricity. A significant number of desks are broken and  need  to
        be replaced as  a  matter  of  urgency.  The  school  also  has  no
        laboratory.

      • There is one water tap that is operational,  while  there  are  two
        toilets for teachers and five for learners (two for girls and three
        for boys).

      • There is a bus that drops off learners at school and picks them  up
        after school.


2.6.5  Challenges


      • The issue of the school principal needs to be resolved as a  matter
        of urgency.

      • There is a high rate of teen pregnancy. In addition,  there  is  no
        dedicated educator responsible for  HIV/AIDS  programmes.  Instead,
        social workers visit the school on a regular basis.

      • School stationery/material is not received on time.


3.    Opening Ceremony: Session on Co-operative  Governance  and  Issues  of
      Poverty, Rural Development and Health


The meeting on co-operative governance took place on 1  November  2004.  The
week provided an opportunity for the principles of  cooperative  governance,
as enshrined in the Constitution, to be effected  to  the  fullest  possible
extent, to practically  enrich  the  co-operative  interaction  between  the
various spheres of government. The meeting was addressed  by  the  following
speakers: Hon Mr Sibusiso Ndebele, Premier of  Kwazulu-Natal;  His  Majesty,
King Goodwill Zwelithini KaBhekizulu; the Hon Speaker of  the  KwaZulu-Natal
Legislature, Mr W Mchunu; Hon Councillor, BV  Mthetwa;  Executive  Mayor  of
the  uThungulu  District;  followed  by  concluding  remarks  by   the   Hon
Chairperson of the NCOP, JL Kgoali.

The following issues were raised in the session:


3.1   Co-operative governance


      • The interaction between  Members  of  the  Provincial  Legislature,
        Members of the National Council of Provinces and National Ministers
        would boost  the  quality  of  legislation  and  enhance  effective
        parliamentary oversight at all levels of government. The insight of
        National Ministers regarding issues  with  which  the  province  is
        grappling would be further enhanced.



3.2   Poverty and Rural development



        The Premier of Kwazulu Natal provided  statistical  information  on
        the   Province,   which   underlined   the   need   to   counteract
        underdevelopment. Out of a total population  of  9,5  million,  2,1
        million cannot read or write, and 56% of the  population  is  under
        the age of 24 years. Over 4 000 schools do  not  have  electricity,
        while  36%  do  not  have  toilets.  Out  of  51  municipal   local
        governments, 31 are unable to provide services.


      • The importance of supporting a better quality of life in the  rural
        areas was emphasised. Successful  rural  development  will  be  the
        first step of the Government towards the eradication of  slums  and
        informal settlements in the peri-urban centres. It will assist with
        the reduction of unemployment and starvation.

  • It was noted that extreme levels  of  poverty  are  being  exported  to
    informal settlements as people try to escape the unpleasant  conditions
    in the rural areas. Such movement to urban areas creates a new  problem
    of  unplanned  urban  resettlement.  Any  effort  at  correcting  these
    problems  will  only  succeed  when  combined  with  integrated   rural
    sustainable development.

  • The youth need to have access to  amenities  that  will  enhance  their
    social development into healthy adults with a morally upright  attitude
    to life. It is important to create an environment that would  encourage
    the youth to have positive aspirations with regard to their future.  It
    was cautioned that, if not given attention and guidance,  young  people
    will slide into degenerate forms of behaviour,  including  drug  abuse,
    crime, early, unplanned  pregnancies  and  all  associated  social  and
    health complications.

3.3   Health and related issues

      • The Province faces a number  of  health  challenges.  The  lack  of
        accessible, safe potable water led to an outbreak of  cholera  that
        affected thousands of people in KwaZulu-Natal. It was stressed that
        Government  must  ensure  that  the  scourge  of  HIV   and   AIDS,
        Tuberculosis and other diseases is eliminated.

      • With regard to solid waste management, a waste management site  has
        been built in Empangeni at the cost of approximately  R21  million.
        During the first year the performance of this facility  started  to
        show that the Government’s expectations had been met and would even
        be exceeded.

      • A need was expressed for communities to be  economically  empowered
        so that they are able to pay for the provision of services.

      • While administrative centres in the rural areas play a  vital  role
        in providing government services, traditional leaders have  a  role
        to play in the delivery of services  and  in  providing  access  to
        clean water and information.


4.    Meeting with Women


The meeting with women took place on 1 November 2004 at  Empangeni.  It  was
addressed by the Hon Ms JL Kgoali (Chairperson of the  NCOP),  Ms  V  Ngqasa
(Isintu Foods), Dr  E  Kornegay  (the  Presidency),  Ms  N  Ndaba  (National
Association for Women’s Empowerment), Ms N  Legoabe  (GCIS  Chief  Director:
Provincial and Local Liaison) and Ms M Matiwane  (Department  of  Trade  and
Industry).




4.1   Legislation


      • Over the course of the past 10  years,  Parliament  has  introduced
        progressive  legislation  to  improve  the  lives  of  women.   Key
        legislation to impact on women’s  lives  includes  the  Maintenance
        Act, the  Domestic  Violence  Act,  the  Recognition  of  Customary
        Marriages Act and the Welfare Laws Amendment Act. Parliament  wants
        all people to benefit from the legislation that has been passed and
        wants to ensure that people know how to use the legislation. It  is
        important that women, especially women  in  the  rural  areas,  are
        informed about this legislation.


      • Ms J Piliso-Seroke of the Commission for Gender Equality emphasised
        that the Constitution ensures that everyone is equal  and  the  law
        therefore strives to protect women’s rights.

      • The importance of the Criminal Procedure Act  was  emphasised.  The
        Act assists courts in their decisions to refuse bail in rape  cases
        where weapons have been used or where gang rape  has  taken  place.
        The Criminal Law Amendment Act has also benefited women as  illegal
        evictions can now be prevented in terms of the law.


4.2   Government Policies


      • Government intends to mainstream gender into all its  policies.  It
        is the responsibility of the Office  on  the  Status  of  Women  to
        ensure that  gender  issues  are  integrated  into  all  Government
        policies and to monitor whether what the Government has promised to
        deliver has actually reached women in all communities.


      • Various policies have been put in place by  Government,  eg  social
        policies, health policies, etc, to  improve  the  conditions  under
        which women live.



4.3   Budgeting for Women’s Needs


These are areas where the Government has budgeted  specifically  to  benefit
women. Parliament believes that it is important to engage  with  the  people
on the ground about these matters to make  sure  that  the  money  is  being
spent on the people it is intended for.


4.4   Government Programmes


      •  It  is  important  that  women  are  informed  of  the  Government
        programmes that are in place in order to take full advantage of the
        opportunities that are available to them.


      • The programmes of Government are not only aimed at women, but  also
        at men. However, it is essential  that  Government  services  reach
        women.


      • The Government has put in place  several  Entrepreneurial  Business
        Support Programmes and has been the main catalyst for ensuring that
        women receive the necessary support for their businesses.


   The following programmes have been put in place:

A.    Initiatives of the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)


Programme: Technology for Women in Business



      • This programme is aimed at encouraging  women  to  access  and  use
        technology to increase and strengthen their enterprises.


      • The programme awards those who succeed and presents  them  as  role
        models.

      • The  programme  offers  training  opportunities,  eg  the  DTI  has
        established partnerships with information technology  companies  to
        provide training.

      • The Techno-Girl programme targets  girls  and  encourages  them  to
        pursue careers in the field of science and technology.

      Programme: South African Women Entrepreneurs Network (SAWEN)[1]

      • The SAWEN programme was launched  nationally  in  2002.  Provincial
        branches were subsequently launched in 2003 and 2004.

      • The network provides a vehicle for women entrepreneurs to act as  a
        single voice.

      • It provides  support  through  information  sharing,  training  and
        business advice.

      • The structure is an independent  organisation  that  is  driven  by
        women and has a close partnership with DTI.


      Programme: Access to Finance for Women in Business


      • The DTI is working towards the launch of the APEX fund in  December
        2004,  which  will  focus  on  financing  for   micro   women-owned
        enterprises. The APEX fund will be targeted primarily at the second
        economy and will grant microloans from R20 to R 10 000.

      • The DTI has put in place business  incentives  such  as  the  Black
        Business Supplier Development Programme (BBSDP), and the Small  and
        Medium  Enterprise  Development  Programme   (SMEDP),   which   are
        available to women in business. The BBSDP subsidises the  costs  of
        technical support and consultant advice to companies so  that  they
        are able to upgrade their capabilities. The SMEDP gives business  a
        cash rebate on their investments in order to promote the growth  of
        enterprises.

      • The  DTI  caters  for  broad-based  empowerment  initiatives   that
        specifically target rural  communities.  They  have  products  that
        support start-up enterprises through  Kula-Start,  which  primarily
        targets rural women.

      • The DTI has identified problems pertaining  to  access  to  finance
        that face women in business and will look  at  new  initiatives  to
        address these constraints.


B.    Initiatives of the Department of Minerals and Energy


      • The Mining Charter sets a target of 10% women employees within five
        years.

      • Other aspects of the Charter where the  quota  is  applicable  are:
        procurement,  beneficiation,  community  development,  housing  and
        nutrition and employment equity.

      • BP  and  Caltex  currently  have  women  as  shareholders.  Similar
        opportunities with other companies are  in  the  process  of  being
        negotiated.

      • Business structures for women have been  established  such  as  the
        South African Women in Mining (SAWIMA) and Women In  Oil,  Gas  and
        Energy (WOESA).


C.    Initiatives of the Department of Agriculture


      • The Department of Agriculture administers the Women Farmer  of  the
        Year awards, which recognises women who succeed in exporting  their
        products regionally and internationally.

      •  Through  the  Land  Reform  for  Agriculture   Programme   (LRAD),
        development finance has been made available for accessing  land  in
        the price range of R 20 000 to R 100 000, based on the size of  the
        enterprise and ownership status.

      • Support is provided to research seed models required for both local
        and international markets as part of an initiative  to  help  women
        start nurseries.

      • Marketing agencies assist in linking women farmers and clients.

      • Through Agri-Industry Training, women are being assisted to improve
        the quality of their products.

D.    Initiatives of the Department of Science and Technology

      • The focus of the Department is on profiling and promoting women  in
        the sector.

      • Minister’s Awards are held  to  award  the  top  100  companies  in
        engineering, science and technology.

      • Women are encouraged to enter the sector.



E.    Initiatives of the Department of Communications


      • The Department  encourages  women  to  enter  the  Information  and
        Communications and Telecommunications (ICT) sector.

      • The Department provides support to women entering the field through
        mentorship by company directors.

      • The Khulisa Scheme has been established, which provides  mentorship
        and training to women.

      • The Department has established telecentres and  ensures  that  some
        are owned by women to provide easy access to ICT.


F.    Initiatives of the Department of Housing


      • The Department of Housing supports the  entry  of  women  into  the
        housing construction arena.

      • The Department supports a Women for Housing  project  that  assists
        women building contractors through the provision of training, helps
        to place women in construction firms and encourages women to pursue
        housing-related careers.

      • The Department has set targets for women being awarded at least 10%
        of housing construction contracts. This has, however, not been met.




G.    Initiatives of the Department of Public Works



        The Department has set targets for  women’s  participation  in  the
        construction  sector  as  part   of   the   Construction   Industry
        Development Programme.


      • The Department supports  women  enterprises  through  its  Targeted
        Procurement Policy (TPP) and the  Emerging  Contractor  Development
        Programme  (ECDP).  The  TPP  and  ECDP  supports  the   Women   in
        Construction Programme, which ensures that women-owned and  managed
        construction   companies   receive   contracts   and   women    are
        beneficiaries of all support initiatives.

      • Women are supported through  training,  the  provision  of  general
        business skills, tendering and procurement  skills  and  specialist
        training in areas such as electricity and plumbing.

      • The Department manages a database of women in construction.


4.5   Multi-Purpose Community Centres


      • The Multi-Purpose Community  Centre  (MPCC)  Programme  strives  to
        create a people’s contract for more efficient, people-centered  and
        developmental government.



         MPCCs are a vehicle  for  ensuring  that  Government  can  deliver
        services in an accessible manner to poor communities. MPCCs aim  to
        address historical socio-economic issues whereby some citizens were
        deprived of access to government information and services.


      • The MPCC Programme started in 1999, with the aim of establishing  a
        centre in each of the district  municipalities  by  December  2004.
        There are currently 63 MPCCs in the country. Six of  these  are  in
        KwaZulu-Natal, namely, Bamshela, Mbazwana,  Tugela  Ferry,  Dukuza,
        Mbabazane and Dududu. Plans are at an advanced stage to establish a
        centre in Nkandla. Through the MPCCs, communities can  access  more
        than 500 services. By 2014 the Government  plans  to  establish  an
        MPCC in each local municipality.


      • MPCCs are places where a number of services are provided by  local,
        provincial and national government as well  as  parastatals,  NGOs,
        CBOs and the private sector. The services offered at  an  MPCC  are
        those that have been identified by the community.


      • Government is making special efforts to make services accessible to
        every citizen close to where they live. In addition to  the  MPCCs,
        Community Development Workers have been  appointed  and  the  Batho
        Pele  e-Gateway,  which  uses  internet  and  computers  to   bring
        information to communities, has been set up.  Imbizos are  also  an
        important part  of  bringing  government  and  people  together  in
        working for a better life for all.

      • Communities need to work in  partnership  with  the  government  at
        national, provincial and local levels to facilitate the process  of
        community development.


4.6   Challenges


Participants at the meeting identified the following challenges:

      • Notwithstanding the huge strides made  by  the  government  in  the
        advancement of women in all sectors, there  are  still  areas  that
        need to be addressed. These areas include  facilitating  access  to
        some government structures and institutions, the implementation  of
        government  policies,  and  the  relaxation  of  requirements   for
        individuals to qualify for loans or government grants.


      • Before the current dispensation,  women  were  victims  of  extreme
        poverty as a result of a lack of resources and skills. Rural  women
        have been particularly vulnerable.

      • Government should arrange  that  officials  visit  rural  areas  to
        ascertain what is required, as people in rural areas  do  not  know
        about the many structures that exist to assist those in farm areas.



      • Women at grassroots level, particularly rural women, are engaged in
        small business endeavours, but  lack  information  and  support  on
        business and marketing strategies.

      • There is a need for local structures such  as  district  and  local
        municipalities  to  be  more  involved  in  the  affairs  of  small
        businesswomen.

      • Police do not act when cases of domestic violence are  reported  to
        them.

      • There are many problems with regard  to  traditional  marriages  in
        rural areas and there is a need to align traditional practices with
        the rights enshrined in the Constitution.

5.    Visits to farms

5.1   Visit to the Thathunyawo Cane and Citrus Farm  and  the  Phezukomkhono
Women’s Co-operative



The visit took place on 2 November 2004 and included the Hon Ms J L  Kgoali;
the  Hon  Prof  L  Ndabandaba,  KwaZulu-Natal  MEC   for   Agriculture   and
Environmental Affairs; Members of the  Provincial  Legislature  of  KwaZulu-
Natal and Councillors of the Uthungulu District Municipality;  Prof  Mtshali
of the University of Zululand; Mr Biyela,  Chairperson  of  Thathunyawo  Co-
operative; Mr Mtimkulu;  Ms  S  Mkhize,  Chairperson  of  the  Phezukomkhono
Women’s Co-operative


5.1   Background of the Phezukomkhono Women’s Co-operative

      • The co-operative has 46 members; it bought the co-operative farm of
        200 ha of land for R3,7 million.


      • Each member of the co-operative received R35 000 from the  National
        Ministry of Land and Agriculture, while the co-operative received a
        loan of R1,2 million from the Land Bank.

      • Initially, the co-operative had 85 employees, but due to  financial
        difficulty some of the employees  had  to  be  retrenched  and  the
        members of  the  co-operative  received  no  remuneration  for  six
        months.

      •  The  co-operative  approached  the   MEC   for   Agriculture   and
        Environmental Affairs for financial  assistance,  focusing  on  the
        following six areas of assistance:  (i)  insecticides  (ii)  manure
        (iii) a tractor and a car (iv) a monthly instalment of R33 000 (for
        repayment of the Land Bank loan) (v) a  R100 000  electricity  bill
        (vi) R120 000 to be paid to the municipality for the co-operative’s
        water bill.

5.2   The Phezukomkhono women’s co-operative

      • The aforementioned co-operative commenced its activities four years
        ago,  at  a  time  when  52  co-operatives  were  active   in   the
        agricultural field in the Phezukomkhono area.

      • The co-operative started with 11  members  on  a  farm  of  269  ha
        purchased on an auction for R750 000.
      • The Department of Trade and Industry and the provincial  department
        funded the co-operative, and the centre was opened by the  MEC  for
        Land and Environmental Affairs.

      • The provincial department provided 300 000 chickens for farming and
        a chicken mash.

      • The co-operative secured 120 000 tons of orders for next year,  and
        it had no  difficulty  in  accessing  markets,  including  overseas
        markets.

      • The co-operative was planning further developments  in  future  and
        still requires a tractor for paprika production.

5.3   Challenges

The following two challenges were identified:

      • Inadequate training for those who had acquired the land.

      • Assistance by the MEC  with  capacity-building  and  skill-training
        programmes.

5.4   Response by the MEC to the challenges

      • The MEC gave an undertaking that his  department  would  provide  a
        tractor,  made  possible  through  a  departmental  project  called
        “Mechanism Department”.


      • The MEC undertook to revisit the farm on 16 November 2004.

      • The Department has a mentorship programme in place to assist people
        in acquiring the requisite skills and that mentors will be able  to
        facilitate communication by speaking Zulu.

The Chairperson of the NCOP emphasised  the  importance  of  this  women-led
project and donated R1 000 to it.

5.5   Visit to Amangwe Village and Sokhulu Community Garden

The visit took place on 2 November 2004. Mr MJ Mahlangu, Deputy  Chairperson
of the National Council of Provinces led the delegation, which  visited  the
Amangwe Village and the Sokhulu Community Garden.

5.5.1 Background to Amangwe Village

Amangwe village is a partnership-driven initiative,  which  recognizes  that
HIV/Aids is much more than just a health issue. The project aims to  provide
support to adults and children infected and affected by HIV/Aids  through  a
range of interventions. The opportunity to establish  Amangwe  Village  came
about when Monde approached the ZCBF with a veritable dream come  true,  the
offer of Amangwe Village in Kwambonambi - previously used by their  contract
workers to be developed into a holistic HIV/Aids initiative. The offer  came
at a time when ZCBF was looking at options for the expansion of its  already
successful HIV/Aids projects, Ethembeni Care Centre.

Today Ethembeni Care Centre  operates  from  a  purpose  built  facility  at
Amangwe Village, which also boasts, a training  room,  administration  block
and 18 renovated cottages,  which  are  used  for  a  variety  of  services.
Important working relationships have  also  been  established  with  amongst
others, the Africa Centre for Population Studies, the Department of  Health,
Welfare and Education, Lifeline Zululand and KZN Wildlands Trust.  Extensive
continued networking with other important stakeholders  and  government  and
government departments is ongoing.


Orphans And Vulnerable Children Services


The primary objectives of this arm of Amangwe Village  are:  the  protection
of children, their inheritance and property rights; improving  the  capacity
of primary caregivers to meet the basic need of the children in their  care;
ensuring the self reliance of care givers;  and  ensuring  that  traumatised
children are dealt with in a professional and holistic manner.

Outreach, Education And Training

Through outreach, education and training initiatives, Amangwe  Village  aims
to achieve three main objectives:


      • Provides services to communities outside of the confines of Amangwe
        Village through its Homes-Based Care, which comprises  well-trained
        volunteer caregivers who daily visit poverty stricken households to
        assist in caring for critically ill loved ones.

      • Aims to assist affected families  with  income  generation  through
        skills training and supports community-based projects. Initial work
        in this area has centred  primarily  around  the  establishment  of
        rural food gardens to provide produce for a centrally  based  rural
        Health Food Store, which is soon to b opened at Amangwe Village.

      • Generation  of  income  for  Amangwe  Village  itself  through  the
        delivery of workplace HIV/Aids  programmes  to  businesses  in  the
        region




5.5.2  Visit To Sokhulu Community Garden


This is a community project, which practises organic farming. It  serves  to
provide food for orphans and  poverty-stricken  families.  There  are  three
persons involved in the project.

The project is struggling due to lack  of  funds.  There  is  no  sufficient
water supply and they use buckets for  watering.  The  site  is  not  easily
accessible as there are no roads.


      Meeting with Farmers


The meeting with farmers took place on 2 November 2004 and was addressed  by
the Honourable Rev P Moatshe, Chairperson of the Select  Committee  on  Land
and Environmental Affairs; the Honourable Prof L  Ndabandaba,  KwaZulu-Natal
MEC for Agriculture and Environmental Affairs; Mr H Lee (Felix Cane  Growers
Association); Mr P Addison, Chairperson of the SA Can  Growers  Association;
Mr G Green, Treasurer of the SA Cane Growers Association;  Dr  M  Buthelezi,
Chairperson of the Emerging Farmers Association  and  the  National  Farmers
Union; representatives from the National  Agricultural  Co-operative  Sector
of South Africa; and a representative from the emerging farmers.

The Department highlighted the following programmes and successes:

      • Nthingi tea plantation provides 1 000 jobs. Each  hectare  provides
        ten fulltime jobs.

      • Intensive programme of developing the SMME sector:  This  programme
        involves at least 500 emerging contractors.  There  are  new  areas
        coming into production, such as ploughing and haulage, which earned
        R7 million in the year 2003-04. Forty-six tractor units  have  been
        handed out during the 2003-04 financial year, with the minimum area
        ploughed per tractor being 250 ha. The Department is envisioning to
        create 12 000 jobs.

      • Liming and soil fertility programme:  660  ha  have  been  treated,
        which has created 666 new jobs. The restoration of eroded land  and
        the filling  of  dongas  on  2  000  ha  have  provide  2  000  job
        opportunities.

      • Animal handling programme: Through this programme 94 dipping  tanks
        have been rehabilitated in 2004, at a cost of R1, 4  million.  Each
        rehabilitated tank creates 10 jobs, thus 940  new  jobs  have  been
        created.

      • Mentorship programme: This has been established  to  encourage  and
        train black emerging farmers.

      • Agri-economics: It has been discovered that  the  simplest  African
        crop, the amadumbe, has many  uses,  and  thus  the  Department  is
        researching and exploring a variety of uses.  The  Department  will
        also be encouraging farmers to plant amadumbe as a cash crop.

      • Eradication of alien weed programme: The Department has  asked  the
        Premier and Treasury for additional funds for this project. The aim
        is to clear 4 000 ha per annum. This would result in 15 to 20  jobs
        per ha, and because 80 000 person-hours is needed a further  8  000
        jobs can be created.

      • Dam-building project: Three dams  are  being  built  at  Bululwana,
        Makhatini and Pongola. These dams will be used for  irrigation  and
        will provide 500 jobs.

      • Capacity building: Sixty-five applications have been received  from
        farmers to participate in the capacity-building programme. In  each
        case 10 jobs per farm will be created.

      • Women and Youth Project in Agriculture:  There  are  presently  222
        projects, each providing eight jobs, and totalling 1 776 new jobs.

      •  Mushroom  and  Dry  Land  Rice  Production  Project:  the  Chinese
        Government has lent its assistance  to  the  project.  The  project
        produces dry land rice and mushrooms and has 15  field  workers  at
        R70 000 each.  There  are  also  five  field  worker  managers  who
        collectively earn R450 000. This is generating private  employment,
        which will create another 450 jobs for farm workers.


6.1   Challenges


      • Unemployment, which consequently leads to high crime statistics.

      • The requirements of labour legislation, such as minimum  wages  and
        other conditions of employment  requirements,  often  lead  to  job
        losses and other costs, which small-scale growers cannot afford.

      • No training  was  given  to  communities  when  co-operatives  were
        initially  established  resulting  in  poor   management   of   co-
        operatives.

      • A lack of adequate infrastructure, such as roads,  hampered  access
        to and from cane fields.

      • The strengthening of  the  South  African  currency  affected  cane
        farming’s profitability.

      • The usage of inferior seeds resulted in the  usage  of  fertilizers
        and herbicides, which were expensive due to  the  strength  of  the
        rand.


6.2   Recommendations


      • The dedicated buy-in of the Amakhosi and Izinduna with  the  people
        of each  isigodi  to  identify  suitable  land  and  Zulu  farmers,
        preferably from within their  own  area  to  lease  and  farm  such
        identified land.

      • The appointment of extension officers who understand agri-economics
        and will drive that department in a new and decisive manner,  using
        the existing commercial farmers as  mentors  through  a  system  of
        District Agricultural Committees, down  to  Municipal  Agricultural
        Committees. Organised  agriculture  in  KwaZulu-Natal  had  already
        started with a similar process, but could not maintain the idea due
        to a lack of funding. This needs to be brought under the control of
        local  municipalities,  with  funding  from   the   Department   of
        Agriculture in order to achieve effective results.

      • The Department of Transport needs to allocate a  large  portion  of
        its budget to assist in selected (I  D  P)  areas  in  agricultural
        development in the Amakhosi areas through the building of roads and
        causeways to move agricultural crops to mills and/or markets.

7.  Public  Hearing  on  the  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme,  including
    Sustainable Subsistence Farming

The meeting  on  the  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme,  including  issues
related to sustainable subsistence farming, took place on  2  November  2004
at Empangeni.

The meeting was addressed by the following speakers: Hon Deputy Minister  of
Public Works Prof N Kganyago, Hon MEC for Transport and Safety and  Security
Cele, Hon MEC for Public Works Gwala.

The following issues were raised during the session:

7.1  Halving unemployment and poverty by 2014

    • Government has set itself the goal of halving unemployment and poverty
      by 2014.  Joblessness and lack of income represent the glaring face of
      poverty, which manifests through lack of access to basic and essential
      services, lack of free education,  lack  of  infrastructure  including
      houses and roads and lack of skills, qualifications and  education  to
      enable people to take up available job opportunities.

    • Since 1994 government has put  in  place  programmes  to  improve  the
      quality of life of communities. Examples are free public  health  care
      for pregnant women and children up to six years, feeding  schemes  for
      learners  at  deserving  schools,  free  basic   services   for   poor
      households, the child support grant, the roll out of drugs against HIV
      and AIDS and other initiatives to fight poverty.

    • Government also convened the Growth and Development Summit in 2003  to
      discuss with business, labour and civil society, plans and  strategies
      to create jobs, improve the lives of people and eradicate poverty.

    • The Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) is one of the  Government’s
      most  important  strategies  specifically  designed  to  support   the
      objective of job creation  for  poverty  alleviation.  This  programme
      targets the poor,  women,  youth  and  people  with  disabilities  for
      employment opportunities. The target is 60% women, 30%  youth  and  2%
      disabled.

    • The EPWP was officially launched by President Mbeki on 18 May 2004  at
      Giyani in Limpopo. All nine provincial governments have launched their
      EPWP.

7.2  Goals of the EPWP

    • The EPWP is one of government’s initiatives to  create  jobs,  develop
      skills, improve communities and draw the marginalised poor people  out
      of the spiral of poverty.

    • According to President Mbeki, “EPWP is a nation wide  programme  which
      will draw significant numbers of unemployed into productive  work,  so
      that workers gain skills while working, and increase their capacity to
      earn an income”.

    • It therefore seeks to create significant work opportunities that  will
      engage the unemployed in productive activities and, at the same  time,
      equip them with  skills  that  will  allow  them  to  find  continuous
      employment outside the EPWP.  The  programme  is  about  skilling  the
      nation and creating a platform for increased growth and development.

    • The primary objective is  to  use  existing  public  sector  funds  to
      provide as many unemployed locals as possible with an  opportunity  to
      earn an income, gain work experience and acquire job-related  training
      and skills development.

    • Government departments, provinces, municipalities and other government
      institutions  including  state-owned  enterprises,  must  expand   the
      absorption capacity of existing government programmes  to  create  one
      million job opportunities in the next  five  years.  Labour  intensive
      methods will be used to produce and  deliver  services  such  as  road
      construction, maintenance of public buildings, environmental clean-ups
      and caring for the  terminally  ill  and  other  sick  people  in  the
      communities using home-based care givers.

    • Both local and provincial governments, because of their  proximity  to
      the  communities,  are  expected  to   identify   new   and   existing
      opportunities for the creation of jobs.


7.3 The nature of EPWP projects


    •  The  EPWP  differs  from  similar  programmes  before  it.  The  EPWP
      emphasises skills development to address the problem of  unemployment.
      Workers will be given  accreditable  and  recognisable  qualifications
      while employed on these projects as part of the skills  they  can  and
      will use at the  end  of  the  projects  as  they  seek  opportunities
      elsewhere within the realms of the country’s growing economy.

    •  Government-established  Sector  Education  and  Training  Authorities
      (SETAs) have been mobilised to train would-be  employers,  supervisors
      and  employees  in  the  EPWP.   The  idea  is  to   train   them   in
      labour–intensive technologies so that they produce  and  deliver  good
      quality services and products while using labour instead of machines.

    • The National Department of Public Works,  which  is  coordinating  the
      EPWP, is currently communicating with,  and  meeting  with  provinces,
      municipalities and community development organisations to  familiarise
      them with the requirements,  methodologies  and  expectations  of  the
      programme.

7.4  Progress made in implementing the EPWP

    • To date, reports indicate that at least 38 000 work opportunities were
      created in the first quarter, that is, between April and June 2004, at
      a total salary cost of more than R33 million. Work is in  progress  to
      firm up the monitoring and reporting systems under the EPWP. This will
      aid precise data collection and improve projections.

    • As the Provinces and Municipalities  begin  to  fully  comprehend  the
      requirements of the EPWP and its relationship  to  provisional  grants
      such as  the  Provincial  and  Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant,  more
      resources  will  be  allocated  to  projects  and  programmes   within
      communities, which have  the  propensity  to  create  jobs  and  other
      training opportunities. Community members are encouraged  to  talk  to
      their local  representatives  about  EPWP  and  any  other  government
      interventions to  fight  poverty,  diseases,  hunger,  illiteracy  and
      underdevelopment.

    • It was noted that the  EPWP  is  not  a  Department  of  Public  Works
      programme, but that of government as a whole and therefore the  entire
      nation needs to embrace  it.  A  successfully  implemented  EPWP  will
      create jobs, enhance skills and contribute to reducing the gap between
      the rich and the poor.

    • Municipalities and their relevant structures are requested  to  become
      activists for the EPWP ensure  that  as  many  work  opportunities  as
      possible are built to create a better life for all.


7.5 Launch of the EPWP in KwaZulu Natal


On 28 August 2004, the Province of KwaZulu-Natal launched a Provincial  EPWP
programme against the backdrop of the Department  of  Transport’s  following
flagship programmes: Zibambele (Doing it for  Ourselves),  Vukuzakhe  (Arise
and build yourself) and Labour-Based Road Construction.

7.5.1 Zibambele

The project was initiated in 2000 with a budget of  R10  million.  It  is  a
poverty  alleviation  programme  using  labour  intensive  road  maintenance
methods. It targets the poorest of the poor, mostly women-headed  households
especially those headed by  widows;  93%-95%  of  the  contracts  have  been
awarded to women and are  renewed  annually  for  permanent  or  sustainable
income training.  There are 22 208 women on this programme.


7.5.2 Vukuzakhe


This is an emerging contractor development programme.  It  is  a  four-stage
advancement programme. There  are  approximately  1  000  contracts  awarded
annually. The budget for this programme has grown from R49  million  in  the
1998-99 financial year to  R410  million  in  2003-04  financial  year.  The
programme has created more than 100 000 jobs in the past five years.

Vukuzakhe has some contracts maximising labour absorption. These are:

    • Verge maintenance; cleaning of pipes, kerbs and channels.
    • Guardrail installation and repairs.
    • Construction of pipe and concrete culverts.
    • Construction of kerbs and channels.
    • Construction of sidewalks.
    • Construction and gabion repairs.

There  is  capacity  building  with  respect  to  the  following:   business
development, technical training, organisational development  and  there  are
also 100 Construction Education and Training Authority (CETA) learnerships.


7.5.3 Labour Based Road Construction projects


The Department has allocated R25 million for fourteen new projects in  2004-
05. There are 63 kilometres of roads to be constructed and 3 1510  roads  to
be created. The funding targets municipalities with poverty levels  of  60%-
80%, especially women and youth.

Approximately 83 students have been trained to supervise  work,  creating  a
pool of expertise in the construction industry accredited for labour, to  be
sourced  through  CETA.  This  is  to  stimulate  and  encourage  the  local
manufacture of tools and the supply of materials. The emphasis is on  skills
development to eradicate unemployability. This  programme  is  also  divided
into sectors such as social, economic, infrastructure and environmental  and
cultural sectors.

The total for sector budgets is R619,4 million. The sector  budgets  are  as
follows:

Social sector                     R53,7 million
Economic sector                   R0,7 million
Infrastructure sector                   R495,4 million
Environmental and cultural sector       R69,6 million

The profit generated in the Empangeni district alone is R119 million.

The Department of Public Works has other programmes, other  than  the  EPWP,
facilitated by the Department of Transport, which include the following:

    • Hiring and construction of land.
    • Poverty alleviation programmes to assist people in the rural areas, in
      particular. These programmes include (i) Wangenisa for women and  (ii)
      Ushikishi for the youth.
    • People are also encouraged to do craftwork.

7.6 Challenges

The following questions and concerns were  raised  by  the  members  of  the
community:

    • There is a problem with regard to the construction and maintenance  of
      roads in the province, many of which are not properly  tarred.  It  is
      believed that improper tarring contributes to most accidents.

    • Concern was expressed that when National Ministers visit the  Province
      to launch any project in areas such  as  Durban  and  Pietermaritzburg
      they communicate with the mayors, but in rural areas such  as  Tungulu
      and others they go straight to the people.

    • The specific experience of a group who had attempted to start a skills
      training  school  where  beds,  desks,   and   other   furniture   was
      manufactured, was articulated. The  group  claimed  that  because  the
      promised government assistance, through the Department of Labour,  had
      not been received, the school had to be closed and  the  property  has
      since been vandalised.

    • There are concerns about the process of employing people for projects.



    • Tenders are inaccessible, except to many of the larger companies.

    • Concern was raised that tenders  appear  to  be  given  to  government
      officials and even school principals. These officials are also alleged
      to be stumbling blocks to service delivery.

    • There was a concern that people are politising government projects and
      allocating them to people belonging to certain political parties.

    • One resident complained that the funds she had been allocated to start
      a crèche in Ndlangubo were later withdrawn.

    • The  experience  of  a  group  of  employees  from  Richards  Bay  was
      articulated.  In  2001  the  group  organised  themselves   to   build
      cupboards, desks and other school furniture, but were evicted  by  the
      owner of the building because they were unable to pay rent of R3 000 a
      month for four months.

    • Further details were sought on government’s plan to deal with  corrupt
      officials.

    • Details  were  sought  on  the  programme  of  training  of  Community
      Development Workers (CDW), and whether the programme has started yet.

    • The youth expressed concern about their welfare.  They  asked  whether
      government has any programme focusing on youth in Grade 12 who have no
      funding to further their studies.

7.7 Response by the Hon MEC Cele (Transport and  Safety  and  Security  KZN)
    and the Hon MEC Gwala (Public Works KZN) to these concerns:

    • It was noted that, with regard to  the  tarring  of  roads,  when  the
      engineers inspect the roads they prioritise danger  zones,  due  to  a
      lack of funds, and those danger zones are tarred first.

    • It was acknowledged that financing of projects is a problem because of
      the syndrome of politicising the projects. The MEC  warned  that  this
      practice should be stopped as these projects are meant to be allocated
      without regard to political affiliations.

    • The criteria for employing people to work on  the  roads  construction
      and maintenance projects are black women, those who  are  elderly  and
      widows,  in  particular.  People  in  the  communities  are  given  an
      opportunity to employ these people.

    •  The  community  was  requested  to  report  cases  where  they   were
      experiencing problems with the financing of projects, the awarding  of
      tenders, and so forth, to the relevant Department.

    • The community was requested to submit their projects’  business  plans
      to the relevant Department, in particular to  the  MEC’s  office,  for
      assistance.

    • It was noted that the  challenge  of  the  youth  who  need  financial
      assistance to further their  studies  rests  with  the  Department  of
      Education. The Department of Public  Works  assists  those  who  study
      architecture,  civil,  electrical  and  mechanical   engineering   and
      quantity surveying. An amount of R30 million has been  set  aside  for
      this purpose. There is  also  an  assistance  programme  such  as  the
      Tertiary Education Fund of South Africa (TEFSA) to assist students.

    • The community was advised to contact their Member  of  Parliament  and
      Members of the Provincial Legislature when they have problems prior to
      meetings of this nature.

    • The Chairperson of the NCOP’s  Select  Committee  on  Public  Services
      noted the problems raised and the fact that some  are  general  issues
      cutting across all provinces.


8.    Public Hearing on  Poverty  Alleviation  and  Educational  and  Social
      Needs


The meeting took  place  on  3  November  2004  and  was  addressed  by  the
Honourable Ms N Botha (Deputy Minister of Arts and Culture), Dr J  Benjamin,
(Deputy Minister of Social Development), Mr MKN Gigaba (Deputy  Minister  of
Home Affairs) and Dr M Tshabalala-Msimang (Minister of Health).




8.1   Poverty alleviation and social needs in Arts and Culture


The  Deputy  Minister  pointed  out  that  the  Department  was  engaged  in
programmes aimed at restoring the dignity of the culture of all  the  people
in South Africa. These programmes could also  serve  as  tools  for  poverty
alleviation and creating social cohesion.  Rural  development  through  Arts
and Culture has been a key focus in the Department. Community  arts  centres
have been built in  rural  communities  as  an  initiative  towards  poverty
alleviation, with the additional aim of utilising them as  centres  for  the
transfer of skills and information.

8.2   Promoting Arts and Culture through Social Cohesion

The Arts and Culture in Society Unit facilitates strategic support  to  arts
institutions and civil society organisations.  It  involves  developing  the
arts, but also plays an important role in  addressing  issues  of  inclusion
and integration and to removing disparities in the resourcing  of  the  Arts
and Culture Sector. Playhouses, funding bodies and  community  arts  centres
receive grants to run programmes and to develop arts and culture.


8.3   Promoting linguistic diversity


South  Africa’s  linguistic  diversity  is   supported   by   constitutional
commitments to protecting  language  rights  and  promoting  its  indigenous
languages. In 2003 Cabinet approved the National Language Policy  Framework,
comprising a policy statement, implementation plan and a  language  code  of
conduct for South Africa. The Policy Framework promotes  the  equitable  use
of 11 official languages, and targets all government  structures.  Provinces
will formulate their own policies according to regional  circumstances.  The
policy will be phased in progressively.


8.4   International Partnerships


The Department participates in  all  binational  commissions  between  South
Africa  and  its  foreign  partners  with  the  aim  of   securing   foreign
development aid programmes and  international  agreements  or  partnerships.
The Department is  in  the  process  of  registering  as  a  member  of  the
Commonwealth Foundation on  behalf  of  South  Africa,  which  will  further
strengthen international opportunities to leverage skills and resources.


8.5   Transformation of the heritage sector


The establishment of  the  South  African  Heritage  Resource  Agency  as  a
statutory body in 2002 and the National Heritage Council in  2003  has  made
better management of  heritage  resources  and  the  transformation  of  the
sector possible. A lead project in this area is the  proposed  Nkosi  Albert
Luthuli Museum in KwaDukuza. The Cabinet has  approved  a  number  of  other
legacy projects to start correcting distortions  in  the  representation  of
specific aspects of the country’s history,  to  encourage  nation  building,
and to contribute towards tourism development. Disbursements are also  being
paid to assist institutions with transformation processes.


8.6   Archives


The National Archives and Records Service of South Africa  subprogramme  has
made substantial progress in implementing its objectives of good  governance
and transformation, meeting the information needs of society  at  large  and
promoting national reconciliation through  the  transformation  of  heraldic
and  other  symbols.  The  National  Council  for  Library  and  Information
Services (NCLS) was established in November 2003, and its inaugural  meeting
was held in March 2004.


8.7   Supporting cultural industries


      • The Cultural Industries Growth Strategy capitalises on the economic
        potential  of  the  craft,  music,  film,  publishing,  and  design
        industries. Departmental support goes  towards  developing  public-
        private partnerships and initiatives, using culture as a  tool  for
        urban regeneration and efforts to co-ordinate the industries. There
        is an increased focus on the potential of the film industry.

      • A special poverty relief allocation aims  at  providing  access  to
        skills  and  markets  as  a  tool  for  urban  regeneration,  rural
        development,  and  job  creation.  Projects   are   undertaken   in
        partnership with provincial and local government, as well  as  non-
        governmental organisations. The Wild  Coast,  Lebombo,  and  Maputo
        Corridor  spatial  development  initiatives  are  focal  areas   of
        cultural tourism development linked to this allocation.

The following are among the objectives of the subprogramme:

            o Creating opportunities for  musicians,  performers,  crafters
              and artists to contribute to the economy.
            o  Contributing  to  the  sustainability  of  the  projects  by
              providing  the  necessary  training   (product   development,
              entrepreneurial skills).
            o Developing infrastructure  in  order  to  promote  enterprise
              development.
            o Supporting heritage development projects.
            o Creating employment for rural-based women  in  KwaZulu-Natal,
              Eastern Cape, Free State and North West.

      • The Department of Arts and Culture with its mandate  is  addressing
        the following types of poverty:

            o Asset Poverty: by providing capital for raw material  (beads,
              materials, etc) and  in  extreme  cases,  for  infrastructure
              development.
            o  Skills  Poverty:  by  providing  access  to   training   and
              learnerships (human resources development).  To  this  effect
              the MAPSETA has developed nine learnerships ranging from  SQA
              2 to 9.
            o Income Poverty: by  providing  support  to  income-generating
              enterprises and supporting the establishment  of  sustainable
              SMMEs.
            o Markets: an integrated approach to accessing markets  for  SA
              projects  and  services  has  been  adopted.   Public-private
              initiatives including state-owned  entities  and  NGOs  (Cape
              Craft Design Institute).
            o Products from some of the Investing in Culture  Projects  are
              available from  retail  stores  like  Woolworths  and  abroad
              through  a  partnership  with  Conran   Marketing.   Projects
              involved are from the Eastern Cape  (six  villages  in  Mount
              Ayliff and Burgersdorp) and Limpopo  (Twananani,  Mbokota  in
              Louis Trichardt, Makosha in Giyani and Vuhlalu in Acornhoek).

      •  The  Department,  in  conjunction  with  the  municipalities,   is
        establishing Arts and Culture desks in each municipality.




8.8   Poverty alleviation in Social Development


      • The Department  of  Social  Development  is  committed  to  halving
        poverty in our country by the year 2015. One of the ways government
        addresses income poverty is through transfers of R50 billion a year
        in social  assistance  in  the  form  of  social  grants.  This  is
        Government’s most effective antipoverty  programme,  and  currently
        reaches over eight million of the poorest South Africans.

      • The Department is also pursuing its objective of moving away from a
        welfare-type approach to a more developmental approach, because the
        government believes  that  the  focus  should  be  on  creating  an
        enabling environment for people to develop themselves and be  self-
        sustaining.

      • Fighting poverty requires the building of strong partnerships right
        across  the  country.  The  Department  has,  for  example,   built
        partnerships with faith-based organisations in order to  reach  the
        furthest corners of our country, where many of our people  live  in
        conditions of abject poverty. These partnerships have  enabled  the
        Department over the past  few  years  to  increase  the  number  of
        children receiving the  child  support  grant  to  more  than  four
        million.

      •  The  Department  believes  that  a  strong  civil  society  is   a
        prerequisite for  people-centred  development.  The  Department  is
        committed to improving the quality of support provided to  the  NGO
        sector and urges all NGOs to play their part  in  fighting  poverty
        and underdevelopment.

      • In the past few weeks the Deputy Minister of Social Development and
        the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs have travelled to various parts
        of the country visiting various  communities  as  part  of  a  mass
        registration  drive  for  identity  documents   (IDs)   and   birth
        certificates. Through this mass registration  drive,  thousands  of
        previously disadvantaged people have been able to  have  access  to
        Government services for the first time.

      • HIV and Aids present the government with an enormous challenge,  as
        whole families are being affected. The provision of  antiretroviral
        treatment is  just  one  part  of  the  government’s  comprehensive
        response. Support for  home  community-based  care  initiatives  is
        another important component of the Department’s response. The issue
        of  child-headed  households  is  of  particular  concern  to   the
        Department. Research is being conducted to look into this issue and
        programmes are being put in place to address the situation.

      • In KwaZulu-Natal, the  Department  is  working  with  the  National
        Association of Child and Youth Care Workers to alleviate the plight
        of children affected by HIV  and  Aids.  The  Department  has  also
        helped  establish  drop-in  centres  for  orphaned  and  vulnerable
        children.

      • Public hearings have been held  on  the  Children’s  Bill  and  the
        national Department of Social Development is currently costing  the
        Bill. There are unfortunately still a high number  of  children  in
        custody in KwaZulu Natal and the Minister of Social Development has
        instructed that  these  cases  must  be  cleared  and  children  in
        conflict with the law placed in appropriate institutions before the
        end of the year.

      • The Department of Social  Development  is  also  acutely  concerned
        about the problems faced by  youth  in  their  efforts  to  develop
        themselves.  The  biggest  challenges  facing  youth   are   skills
        development, job opportunities and employment.  The  Department  of
        Social  Development  participates  in  the  Expanded  Public  Works
        Programme and  is  involved  in  skills  enhancement  and  enhanced
        service provision through the Early Childhood Development programme
        and the Home Community-Based Care programme. The job  opportunities
        created may be of a temporary nature, but they are a  step  towards
        more sustainable employment.

      • From the 25th November, Government will once more be engaged in  16
        Days of Activism to combat violence  against  women  and  children.
        This campaign signals the fact that South Africans from all sectors
        of  society  are  uncompromising  in  their  fight  against  gender
        violence.

8.9   Department of Home Affairs response to issues of poverty and social
      needs

      • The presentation noted that the Department of Home Affairs played a
        crucial role in ensuring that, with the aid of the correct identity
        documentation, people  are  able  to  access  both  Government  and
        private sector services.

      • The legacy of the  Department’s  role  in  enforcing  apartheid-era
        racial classifications will still be felt for a long time to  come.
        There are still thousands of South Africans who have  never  had  a
        birth certificate or an ID. This makes it impossible for people  to
        access  social  security  grants,  educational   opportunities   or
        employment opportunities.

      •  The  Department  of  Home  Affairs  is  engaged  in  a  number  of
        interventions to meet these challenges:

            o A survey will  be  conducted  to  determine  the  approximate
              number of  people  without  IDs  or  children  without  birth
              certificates to allow for proper planning and  allocation  of
              resources.
            o Another wave  of  the  intensive  drive  for  IDs  and  birth
              certificates will be launched. The Department  has  acted  in
              partnership with other government departments,  such  as  the
              Department of Social Development  and  the  provinces  during
              many of its community outreach campaigns.
            o  The  Department  will  launch  a  campaign  to  rectify  the
              information it has about the citizens, especially  the  dates
              of birth, in order to correct the Population Register.
            o The online birth registration campaign has been  launched  in
              the hospitals and clinics in order to  ensure  that  children
              obtain their birth certificates soon after birth.  This  will
              ensure that their parents can  apply  immediately  for  child
              support grants if they qualify.  This  latter  programme  has
              already been launched in KZN and Limpopo Provinces, and  will
              be launched gradually in 58 hospitals countrywide during this
              financial year and to extend it  to  as  many  hospitals  and
              clinics  as  possible,  depending  on  the  availability   of
              resources over the next few years, and to ensure  that  every
              child born  will  be  registered  and  issued  with  a  birth
              certificate before they leave for home with their parents.

      • In addition, the Department is also attending to the following:

            o The urgent challenge to resolve the capacity problems in  the
              Department, among others,  through  the  recruitment  of  new
              staff and  retraining  of  the  current  staff  to  meet  the
              objectives of Batho Pele.
            o Addressing corruption in the Department  inter  alia  through
              employing the necessary people and establishing  co-operation
              mechanisms with other state agencies to help  eradicate  this
              problem. The Department is calling on the  public  to  assist
              them in this campaign.
            o Funds have been made available for the  construction  of  new
              offices, transforming containers into offices and  purchasing
              67 mobilise units fully fitted with modern  equipment  to  be
              deployed to all the provinces, especially  in  the  far-flung
              areas to assist with the ID drive and the provision of  other
              services.

8.10  Department of Health response to issues of poverty and social needs

      • The Health Department has focused on development  aid  for  primary
        health care in the identified rural nodes  and  has  engaged  other
        partners to assist in strengthening primary care in these areas. To
        this end, dedicated health co-ordinators have been deployed in each
        of the 13 districts, focusing on achieving  functional  integration
        of primary health care services and strengthening of programmes  to
        tackle the diseases of poverty.

      • Departments involved in the Social Cluster have worked together  in
        their efforts to address issues of food security and nutrition. The
        Department of Health contributed to this process  by  strengthening
        the Primary  School  Feeding  Scheme.  The  programme  was  already
        reaching 4,7 million  children  at  15  000  schools  when  it  was
        transferred to the Department of Education.  It  was  estimated  to
        reach 87% of targeted children  and  had  led  to  improved  school
        attendance and attentiveness of learners.

      • The compulsory fortification of basic  foodstuffs  such  as  mielie
        meal, bread and wheat flour with micronutrients, including iron and
        vitamin A, is a major  achievement  in  improving  the  nutritional
        status of South Africans. The Department has  also  allocated  R  7
        million for nutritional supplements to be distributed to  those  in
        need and a campaign to encourage healthy  diets,  regular  exercise
        and other healthy habits in the general population is underway.

      •  The  underlying  factor  in  the  spread  of  infectious  diseases
        including HIV and AIDS, TB and malaria is the poor conditions under
        which most  of  those  who  are  infected  and  affected  live.  In
        responding to these  challenges,  the  Department  highlighted  the
        central role of prevention. Campaigns to encourage  abstinence  and
        ensure that those in  sexual  relationships  are  faithful  to  one
        partner are proceeding well. Distribution  of  newly  branded  male
        condoms has increased from 33 million to  45  million  condoms  per
        month since June 2003. Sites for voluntary counselling and  testing
        have doubled from 1 500 in March 2004 to more than 3000 at the  end
        of September.

      • The utilisation of the AIDS Help-line that provides information  on
        HIV and AIDS and refers people to available services has  increased
        to 5 000 calls per day.

      • Access to AIDS-related  treatment  is  being  extended  across  the
        country with 50 of the 53 districts having  at  least  one  service
        point for management, care and treatment of HIV and AIDS.  A  total
        of 102 health facilities have been accredited to provide  a  number
        of services  aimed  at  mitigating  the  impact  of  HIV  and  AIDS
        including antiretroviral therapy. Efforts are also  being  made  to
        determine the impact of  traditional  medicines  in  improving  the
        health of people with HIV and AIDS.

      • The Department is increasing efforts to combat TB, which remains  a
        major challenge in the country. The interventions  are  focused  on
        better case management  and  providing  support  for  those  on  TB
        treatment because TB is curable even in the presence of HIV.

      • The Department has continued to make progress in  reducing  malaria
        within South Africa and  through  collaborative  efforts  with  its
        neighbouring countries. Since the inception of the malaria  control
        project within the  Lubombo  Spatial  Development  Initaitive  four
        years ago, malaria incidents have been reduced by 96% in  KZN,  91%
        in Swaziland and 86% in the participating areas of Mozambique.

      • The Department is addressing the issue of access to safe water  and
        proper sanitation, as the shortcomings in this regard still  expose
        poor communities to various health risks, including cholera.

      • Noncommunicable diseases, such as  diabetes,  hypertension,  cancer
        and osteoporosis are increasingly being recognised as global health
        problems. Many  developing  countries  face  a  growing  burden  of
        chronic, noncommunicable diseases  - and South  Africa  is  one  of
        them. The Department's priority over the  next  five  years  is  to
        develop meaningful programmes for preventing  these  diseases  that
        are difficult to live with and costly to manage. The strategies for
        prevention are the same for many noncommunicable  diseases  –  they
        centre on  good  diet,  responsible  alcohol  consumption,  regular
        exercise and avoiding  tobacco  use.  Government  is  finalising  a
        policy  framework  that  will  contribute  to  responsible  alcohol
        consumption.

      • As its contribution to tightening the social security net  for  the
        poor, the Department has added free health  care  for  people  with
        disabilities to  the  package  of  free  health  services  targeted
        initially at pregnant women,  children  under  six  and  all  those
        accessing primary health care.

      • The Department is intensifying the implementation of  the  Expanded
        Programme on Immunisation to ensure  that  children  are  protected
        from vaccine-preventable  diseases  like  measles  and  that  South
        Africa can be declared polio-free by the end on 2005.

      • Access to cervical and breast cancer screening  is  being  expanded
        and the main factors contributing to maternal mortality  are  being
        monitored closely to inform further policy interventions  aimed  at
        improving the health of women. The  Department  is  also  extending
        cancer-screening services to cover prostate cancer as well.

      • The other programmes that the Department is involved in include:

            o Improving access to affordable medicine.
            o Increasing access to medical cover and ensuring that  medical
              schemes are financially sustainable.
            o Hospital  Revitalisation  Programme  that  improves  hospital
              infrastructure,  availability  of  equipment  and  management
              capacity.
            o Various efforts to recruit  and  retain  health  workers  and
              improve their capacity to meet the needs of the community  as
              health is a labour-intensive sector.

8.11   Replies and response

      • In response to the concerns that were raised during  the  questions
        from the floor,  the  presenters  and  panellists  highlighted  the
        following issues:

            o The child-support grants are to be used for  the  benefit  of
              the child, not for the parents or  grandparents.  Members  of
              the  public  should  report  those  cases  where  parents  or
              grandparents were using the  money  for  their  own  purposes
              since that amounted to corruption.
            o The issue of teenage pregnancies must be  addressed.  Parents
              should look at why families have lost their values  and  have
              taken on other cultures either voluntarily or by being forced
              to do so.
            o The Department of Education in  KwaZulu-Natal  had  a  policy
              that all schools whether rural or urban had to be given equal
              treatment.  Rural  schools   are   not   deliberately   being
              neglected. The Department was  particularly  concerned  about
              the impact of the drought because it  had  resulted  in  some
              schools simply being without water. The MEC was dealing  with
              the matter together with other role-players.

9.    Meeting with Youth and People with Disabilities

The meeting with  youth  and  people  with  disabilities  took  place  on  3
November 2004. The following speakers addressed meeting:

Mr Jabu Mbalula, (Chairperson of National Youth  Commission),  Mr.  Mbongeni
Mtshali, (Director of  Business  Development  Services  in  Umsobomvu  Youth
Fund, Dr. E. Kornegeay, (Office on the Status  of  Women),  and  Mr.  Philip
Gamede (Provincial Treasurer of the Disabled  People  South  Africa  (DPSA).
All the presenters provided contextual information on the  establishment  of
key organisations aimed at improving the lives of the youth and people  with
disabilities. In this regard,  the  presentations  highlighted  the  various
programmes undertaken, as well as challenges  facing  organisations  in  the
delivery of services to the youth and disabled persons.

9.1   National Youth Commission

The National Youth Commission was established in June 1996, after the  Youth
Summit that was convened by President Thabo Mbeki, aimed at  empowering  the
youth as part of Reconstruction and  Development  Programme  (RDP).  It  was
agreed that the Presidency had  to  ensure  that  government  also  consider
youth issues in their programmes in order to ensure the  creation  of  youth
programmes at provincial and local levels.

The responsibilities and roles  of  the  Commission  are  enshrined  in  the
National Commission Act of 1996. Some of the objectives  of  the  Commission
are to:

    • Co-ordinate and develop an integrated National Youth Commission.


    • Develop an integrated national plan that utilises available  resources
      and expertise for the development of young women and  children.  These
      are integrated within the RDP.

    • Develop principles and guidelines, and  make  recommendations  to  the
      government for the implementation of the National Youth Policy.

    • Promote uniformity of approach to issues affecting youth by all organs
      of State, including provincial governments.

    • Co-ordinate  the  activities  of  the  various  provincial  government
      institutions involved in youth matters.

    • Implement measures to redress the imbalances of the past, in  relation
      to various forms of disadvantages suffered by young  people  generally
      or by specific groups or categories.




The Focal Areas of the Commission include:


    • Economic empowerment of the youth.

    •  The  responsibility  taken  by  young  people  to   ensure   economic
      development in their communities.

    • Education and training.


9.1.1 Challenges


Some of the challenges faced by the Commission in realising  its  objectives
are:

    • A shortage of tertiary infrastructures.


    • Drug abuse.

    • On capacity building and advocacy, the challenge  should  be  ensuring
      that all government programmes are  accessible  and  relevant  to  the
      youth.

    • Assistance given to youth organisations through information  that  can
      help them to access government information.


9.1.2  Interventions


In addressing some of the challenges, a number of  interventions  that  have
been introduced. These include:

    • The government has introduced and adopted the National Youth Services,
      aimed at giving entrepreneurial skills  and  production  of  skill  to
      young people so that they can contribute to  economic  growth  of  the
      country.


    • The Youth Commission has started a pilot programme  to  provide  young
      people in prisons with skills.

    • The Departments of Justice and Home Affairs have  created  programmes,
      aimed at creating opportunities for  graduates  to  become  productive
      citizens of the country.

    • To date, the Youth Commission and Umsobomvu Youth Fund have  recruited
      5 000 youth in the Departments of Social Development and Health.




9.2   Umsobomvu Youth Fund


    • The  Minister  of  Finance  has  founded  the  Umsobomvu  Youth  Fund,
      following the Budget Speech in 1998. The Fund began operating in 2001.



    • In 2001, the government established the Youth Commission to  create  a
      platform for job creation and  skills  development.   Umsobomvu  Youth
      Fund has identified three  major  programmes  areas,  namely,  Contact
      Information and Counselling,  Skills  Development  and  Transfer,  and
      Youth Entrepreneurship.



9.2.1 Programmes



Programmes offered by the Umsobomvu Youth Fund include:

    • Access to information and counselling support, with regard to careers,
      employment and entrepreneurship opportunities, through Youth  Advisory
      Centres, Youth Line and the Internet.


    •  In  KwaZulu-Natal,  the  Umsobomvu  Youth  Fund  supports   a   youth
      development programme called  SEED.  It  has  centres  in  Durban  and
      Potchefstroom.

    • The Fund also provides high-level technical skills and work experience
      for unemployed matric and tertiary graduates, with the aim of securing
      for them meaningful employment in strategic sectors of the economy.

    • The Umsombomvu Youth Fund  and  the  Youth  Commission  together  with
      various government departments have been able to create  opportunities
      for the youth as follows:

            o The National Youth Support  Programme  has  to  date  offered
              opportunities for 5  000  young  people.  Young  people  have
              received training, which has equipped them  with  the  skills
              and experience they need to  achieve  economic  independence,
              while  completing  a  service  project  that  contributes  to
              national or local development objectives.
            o For the year 2004-2005, another 5 000 young  people  will  be
              involved in  youth  service  initiatives  in  health,  social
              development,  infrastructure  development,  agriculture   and
              nature  conservation  sectors.  The  table   below   provides
              information on Lead projects funded by Umsobomvu in  Kwazulu-
              Natal:


|Lead Project         |Beneficiaries        |Committed            |
|Youth Advisory Centre|62 861               |R5 837 630           |
|School to work       |161                  |R5 621 286           |
|FET Support Programme|230                  |R4 000 000           |
|Youth Service        |281                  |R7 320 564           |
|Business Development |4 087                |R6 629 500           |
|Service              |                     |                     |
|Entrepreneurship     |1 052                |R   309 241          |
|Education            |                     |                     |
|Enterprise finance   |15 (deals)           |R10 690 240          |
|(SME)                |                     |                     |
|Micro                |-                    |-                    |
|Coops                |65                   |R    952 091         |
|TOTAL                |65 371               |R41 360 52           |


9.3   Initiatives in the Presidency




      • The Office of the President ensures  that  the  programmes  deliver
        what it has promised. This is done through the Office of the Rights
        of the Children and the  Office  on  the  Status  of  the  Disabled
        People.

      •  It has  to  play  an  oversight  function  in  ensuring  that  all
        government programmes offer equal opportunities for everyone.

      • There is also a policy co-ordination and  advisory  unit.  This  is
        done through the clustering system,  by  ensuring  that  programmes
        interact with those of government. The intent  is  to  ensure  that
        these government programmes deliver to people with disabilities and
        take cognisance of the rights of children.

      • The  Presidency  has  to  provide  oversight  over  all  government
        programmes to ensure that  children’s  rights  are  respected,  and
        people with disabilities have equal opportunities.

      • With regard to children, the intent is to ensure that Section 28 of
        the Constitution is effected. The Presidency  has  a  programme  in
        line with Work for  Children.  The  idea  is  to  ensure  that  the
        Constitution is in line with government action.

      • Concerning disability, there is  an  integrated  national  strategy
        incorporated in all policies. For the next 10 years the  government
        intends to deliver on all these policies. The  core  functions  are
        children and disability.

      • Within the provinces these programmes are represented  in  addition
        to the focal points in all government departments,  except  in  the
        Economic Cluster. The idea is  to  work  with  the  Departments  of
        Education, Public Works and Social Development. Looking at what has
        been done on children development, consideration  is  more  on  the
        psychological and emotional development of children and people with
        disabilities.

      • For the future  the  emphasis  is  on  facilitation  of  mainstream
        programmes  amongst   the   clusters,   and   creation   of   equal
        opportunities in  Expanded  Public  Works  Programmes  for  poverty
        alleviation.

      • The future plans of the  Presidency  are  to  add  more  programmes
        within the Economic and Public Services clusters. The  Presidency’s
        role is to monitor and evaluate these programmes. This is noted  as
        an important initiative over the next 5  years.  The  role  of  the
        Presidency is coordination and facilitation of these programmes.




9.4   The Disabled People South Africa (DPSA)


Prior  to   the   1994   elections,   disabled   persons   suffered   double
discrimination. The Disabled  People  South  Africa  (DPSA)  is  a  national
organisation, which represents disabled persons.  The  DPSA  represents  the
disabled people because organisations that existed to cater for their  needs
did not represent them well.

The vision of the DPSA is to ensure that the problems  of  disabled  persons
are integrated in all programmes. Furthermore, the government  policies  and
rights should provide for all South  Africans.  The  mandate  of  the  DPSA,
therefore, is to ensure that all government departments and  programmes  are
accessible and recognise the needs of the disabled.

Representation of disabled persons is also entrenched in the Office  of  the
Premier in all provinces. The government has also  established  institutions
that recognise the rights of all  persons,  for  example  the  Human  Rights
Commission, Gender Commission and Youth Commission.  In  all  of  these  and
many others, disabled persons are represented.

The Department of  Health  has  been  actively  involved  in  activities  of
disabled persons. The Department is the only department that  gives  funding
to community-based organisations that support disabled persons. The role  of
the DPSA is to facilitate the work  performed  by  such  organisations.  The
international day for disabled persons is another indication  of  commitment
by government.

9.4.1  Challenges

The DPSA faces the following challenges:

      • Although the DPSA has a structure at national and provincial level,
        it does not have at local level.


      • Another challenge is that it is difficult for people in rural areas
        to contact the provinces. As a facility that can be used, the toll-
        free number to report issues or for information,  is  not  helpful.
        People experience problems because phones are  not  accessible  and
        they may not have the money.

      • There is no support for  disabled  persons  from  local  government
        because their needs are not considered.
      • The Employment Equity Act is not properly implemented, as  many  of
        the people with disabilities are unemployed. The  concern  is  that
        there is no commitment from government departments to  ensure  that
        the disabled are employed. The Department of Labour  has  developed
        the Assistance Guide Framework, but it is not well known to  people
        with disabilities.

      • Capacity  building  is  crucial  in  order  to  educate  government
        officials on how to deal with disabled persons,  and  also  on  how
        they can help them access government programmes.

      • Moreover, the concern is the Constitution that does  not  recognise
        sign language. In many government interviews conducted, members  of
        the panel are not acquainted with sign language.

      • The social justice system does not protect women with  disabilities
        who are rape victims.


9.4.2  Recommendations



The following recommendations were made:


      • The Office on  the  Status  of  Disabled  people  (OSDP)  needs  to
        establish disability  desks  within  the  municipalities  that  are
        sensitive to people with disabilities.


      • Government should consider sign language as the 12th language.

      •  In  order  to  create  opportunities  for  disabled  persons,  all
        government departments should employ at least  5%  of  people  with
        disabilities.

      • The government has to ensure that disabled persons are included  in
        government programmes, so that they can benefit from them.

10.   Meeting with Councillors on Local Government Matters

The meeting on local government took place on 4 November 2004. All  speakers
at the session agreed that local government is appropriately at  the  centre
of government’s national development agenda, as its  constitutional  mandate
is development and distribution of services to the people. The  meeting  was
addressed by the following speakers: Hon the Deputy Minister for  Provincial
and Local Government Hangana, Hon the Minister of  Finance  TA  Manuel,  Hon
the MEC: Local Government, Housing and Traditional  Affairs  M  Mabuyakhulu.
Hon Councillor Mlabo, Executive Member SALGA, Hon Councillor B Mthethwa  and
Hon Chairperson of the NCOP JL Kgoali. The session  was  chaired  by  Hon  S
Shiceka, Chairperson of the Local Government Select Committee,  as  well  as
Hon  MA  Khubeka,  Chairperson  of  the  KZN  Standing  Committee  on  Local
Government and Traditional Affairs

10.1   The role of the NCOP in supporting local government

      • The NCOP’s vision of developmental local government  requires  that
        the institutional framework for local government be strengthened so
        that it can carry out  its  role  of  creating  “sustainable  human
        settlements which provide for a decent quality of life and meet the
        social, economic and material needs of communities  in  a  holistic
        way.”

      • Local government is not a third level of government subordinate  to
        provincial and national government. On the other hand,  it  is  not
        completely independent either. It is interrelated  with  provincial
        and national government in a system of co-operative  governance  in
        which the more each sphere co-operates  with  the  other  two,  the
        stronger it becomes.

      • The challenge  facing  the  NCOP  is  to  look  critically  at  the
        institutional framework and identify aspects that must be  enhanced
        so  as  to  assist   municipalities   to   effectively   play   the
        developmental role the Constitution envisages they should play.

      • During the first decade of freedom significant  progress  has  been
        achieved in the areas of housing, basic services, and so forth.  In
        this regard, government’s significant achievements at  local  level
        have been enabled by the detailed legislative  framework  that  has
        been  put  in  place  to  support  all  284   municipalities.   The
        legislative framework for local  government  is  derived  from  the
        Constitution, which  recognises  local  government  as  a  distinct
        sphere of government with both legislative and executive  authority
        powers.

      •  National  legislation  such  as  the  Local  Government  Municipal
        Structures  Act,  Local  Government  Municipal  Systems  Act,   the
        Municipal Finance Management Act and the Municipal  Property  Rates
        Act, set out the basic principles and mechanisms to give effect  to
        the vision of developmental local government.

      • Both the SALGA National Conference and NCOP Provincial  Week  (6-10
        September 2004) provided the NCOP with a window  through  which  it
        can view the challenges confronting municipalities. The events gave
        the Council an opportunity to determine how it  should  respond  in
        helping municipalities deal with the challenges they are facing.


10.2  Challenges facing local government


      • At the SALGA conference President Mbeki  alluded  to  the  critical
        challenges  facing  local  government.  These   include   attending
        expeditiously  to   service   delivery   problems   identified   by
        communities, strengthening community  participation,  co-ordinating
        its activities with other spheres of government, putting  in  place
        effective senior management to ensure the implementation of service
        delivery objectives, making effective  use  of  the  financial  and
        other  resources  available,  resolving  uncertainties  around  the
        functions and powers between local and district municipalities, and
        effectively integrating community development  workers  to  support
        the work of municipal councils.

      • Many of these issues have been raised in the NCOP’s Provincial Week
        Report,  which  presents  a  broad  picture  of  the  capacity   of
        municipalities.  The  report  seeks  to  provide  a  framework  for
        interaction between the NCOP, provincial and  national  departments
        around these and other key issues.

      • The general picture that emerged from  the  municipalities  visited
        during the Provincial Week is that they are functioning  well,  are
        delivering  services  of  a  high  quality   and   making   genuine
        contributions  towards  improving  the  quality  of  lives  of  the
        communities they serve. However, there are some municipalities that
        continue to face severe constraints in  delivering  even  the  most
        basic services to the communities they serve.  Many  municipalities
        have no capacity to raise their own revenue and the challenge is to
        empower these municipalities to be able to raise their own revenue.

      • The NCOP has concluded that the most  significant  way  in  it  can
        respond  to  the  challenges  faced  by  local  government  is   by
        strengthening its oversight work. Through its  oversight  work  the
        NCOP plays a critical role in ensuring that provincial and national
        government continues to provide the institutional support to  local
        government  that  it  needs   to   discharge   the   constitutional
        obligations it is entrusted with. This includes  making  sure  that
        municipalities have the capacity to implement social  and  economic
        development programmes such as the Expanded Public Works  Programme
        to help government achieve its objective  of  halving  unemployment
        and poverty by 2014.

      • Municipalities also have an obligation to ensure they add value  to
        the efforts being put in by national and provincial  government  to
        capacitate  them,  by  enhancing  their  delivery  of  services  to
        communities.

      • Capacity building  within  municipalities  will  not  automatically
        result in enhanced service delivery. It will have to be accompanied
        by a conscious effort, total commitment and dedication on the  part
        of councillors to act as  real  agents  of  transformation,  to  be
        servants to communities and not to act in pursuit of self-interest.

      • The province itself has drawn up a capacity building  programme  to
        assist Councillors and managers in municipalities.

10.3  Response by the Deputy Minister of Provincial and Local Government  to
      challenges facing local government


10.3.1 Overview of Project Consolidate


In response to all these challenges the Department of Provincial  and  Local
Government  (DPLG)  has  created  a   legislative   framework   that   would
proactively stem the tide and push back the frontiers of poverty.  Yet  none
of the role players in this  sector  can  adequately  deal  with  all  these
challenges on their own. In  recognition  of  this,  DPLG  has  embarked  on
Project Consolidate, a targeted hands-on engagement programme to  deal  with
problems facing local government. Through  this  initiative,  municipalities
that require the greatest support have been profiled.  The intention  is  to
mobilise national and provincial  government,  state-owned  enterprises  and
the private sector to support the local government.


10.3.2 The focus of Project Consolidate


The profiling exercise indicates that municipalities face  legal,  financial
and administrative challenges in the following areas:

    • Public empowerment, participation and community development.

    • Capacity building, systems, human resource  development  and  improved
      organisational culture.
    • The provision of free basic  services  that  target  poor  households,
      appropriate billing systems and reducing municipal debt.

            o Local economic development,  job  creation,  Expanded  Public
              Works Programme and municipal infrastructure.
            o Anticorruption initiatives.
            o Rural and urban development nodes.
            o Performance monitoring, evaluation and communication.

    • Other  challenges  include  the  low  rate  of  payment  of  services.
      Communities need to be educated on why they should pay for services.

    • In terms of the management of municipalities, many municipal  managers
      and senior  managers  are  not  adhering  to  Batho  Pele  principles.
      Councillors also face certain capacity challenges. Since the Municipal
      Finance  Management  Act  provides  for  the  shift   of   power   and
      responsibilities to  councillors,  they  require  training  on  budget
      management, planning (drawing up  of  Integrated  Development  Plans),
      financial management and general management issues. Councillors should
      be able to communicate council  resolutions  to  the  community.  They
      should be able to identify  challenges  and  draw  up  an  appropriate
      programme of action to deal with those challenges.

    • It was noted that the direction taken by the DPLG to deal  with  these
      challenges will have a direct impact on the success of the forthcoming
      local government elections in 2005-06.

11. Conclusion

The NCOP visit to KwaZulu-Natal proved to be  very  successful  and  yielded
many critical insights. Many valuable lessons  were  learnt  as  to  how  to
improve upon initiatives to “Take Parliament to the People”.  These  lessons
will be incorporated into future initiatives of this nature.

Report to be considered.

                          THURSDAY, 27 JANUARY 2005


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail Commuter
     Corporation Limited (SARCC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 105-
     2004].

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Government Notice No 1135 published in Government Gazette No
         26848 dated 8 October 2004: Establishment of the Ventersdorp-
         Dolomite Water User Association, Magisterial district of Coligny,
         Koster, Lichtenburg and Ventersdorp, in the North West Province,
         Water Management Area number 9 in terms of the National Water Act,
         1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (b)    Government Notice No 1136 published in Government Gazette No
         26848 dated 8 October 2004: Transformation of the Elands Valley
         Irrigation Board, Magisterial districts of Belfast, Waterval Boven
         and Nelspruit, Mpumalanga Province, into the Elands River
         Catchment Area number 5, Mpumalanga Province in terms of the
         National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (c)    Government Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette No
         26848 dated 8 October 2004: Restrictions on the taking of water
         from the Tosca Molopo Dolomite Aquifer in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (d)    Government Notice No 1316 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Proposal for the Establishment of
         the Crocodile (West)- Marico Catchment Management Agency in terms
         of section 78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
         1998).

     (e)    Government Notice No 2478 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
         in the open air: Districts of Clanwilliam, Piketberg, Ceres,
         Tulbagh, Worcester, Caledon, Paarl, Stellenbosch, Strand and
         Somerset West in terms of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No
         84 of 1998).

     (f)    Government Notice No 2479 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
         in the open air: Districts of Swellendam and Montagu in terms of
         the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (g)    Government Notice No 2480 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
         in the open air: Western Cape in terms of the National Forests
         Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


     (a)    Notice received from the MEC for Local Government and Housing
         and Traditional Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal regarding the
         investigation in the Impendle Municipality in terms of section
         106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act
         No 32 of 2000).

     (b)    Notice received from the MEC for Local Government and Housing
         and Traditional Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal regarding an
         investigation against the mayor of the Ehlanzeni District
         Municipality, in terms of section 106 of the Local Government:
         Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

     (c)    Notice of investigation in Utheka, Umzinyathi and Amajuba
         Districts and the Newcastle Municipality, in terms of section 106
         of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of
         2000).

     (d)    Notice of investigation in Umvoti Municipality in terms of
         section 106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act,
         2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

     (e)    Notice of investigation in Umgungundlovu District Municipality
         in terms of section 106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal
         Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

     (f)    Notice of investigation in Nongoma Municipality in terms of
         section 106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act,
         2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

     (g)    Notice of investigation in Umtshezi in terms of section 106(3)
         of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of
         2000).

         Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration for consideration and report.

         Copies of these notices are available from the office of the Clerk
         of Papers.


     (h)    The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following
         letter dated 10 January 2005 to the Acting Chairperson of the
         National Council of Provinces informing Members of the Council of
         the employment of the South African National Defence Force in
         Sudan:

         EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN SUDAN IN
         FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF
         SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE AFRICAN UNION

         This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
         authorised the employment of the South African National Defence
         Force (SANDF) personnel to Sudan for service in fulfilment of the
         international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
         the African Union, as part of the enhanced African Mission in the
         Sudan.

         This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
         of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the
         Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

         A total of 329 members of the SANDF will be deployed for the
         mission as from mid-January 2005 to March 2006.

         The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the
         deployment of personnel to the mission until 31 March 2006 will be
         R76 570 247.

         I will communicate this report to the Members of the National
         Assembly and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
         Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
         the notice of the National Council of Provinces.

         Regards


         SIGNED

         J Z ZUMA
         ACTING PRESIDENT

                          TUESDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2004] - Act No 32 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 18 January 2005);


     (2)    Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2004] - Act No 34 of
         2004 (assented to and signed by President on 18 January 2005); and


     (3)    Securities Services Bill [B 19B - 2004] - Act No 36 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 18 January 2005).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (i)     Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2005] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              27001 of 18 November 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 1 February 2005.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of the Council


     (1)    The vacancy in the representation of the province of KwaZulu-
         Natal, which occurred owing to the passing away of Mr N M Raju on
         27 October 2004, has been filled with effect from 26 November 2004
         by the appointment of Ms A N T Mchunu.


     (2)    The vacancy in the representation of the province of Gauteng,
         which occurred owing to the passing away of Ms J L Kgoali on 21
         November 2004, has been filled with effect from 2 December 2004 by
         the appointment of Ms N F Mazibuko.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report on the removal from office of Magistrate P W Phiri on
         account of his incapacity to carry out his duties of office
         efficiently.

     (b)    Proclamation No R.58 published in Government Gazette No 28990
         dated 19 November 2004: Amendment of Proclamation in terms of the
         Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act
         No 74 of 1996).

     (c)    Proclamation No R.59 published in Government Gazette No 28990
         dated 19 November 2004: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

                          THURSDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Activity Report of the Auditor-General for 2003-2004 [RP
              211-2004].

         (b)     Special Report of the Auditor-General on the delays in the
              tabling of Annual Reports and Consolidated Financial
              Statements of National Government for 2003-2004 [RP 208-2004].

         (c)     General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcome
              for 2003-2004 [RP 210-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
              Board on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2003.

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Government
              Employees Pension Fund for 2002-2003, including the Report of
              the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2002-
              2003 [RP 1-2004].

         (f)     Government Notice No R1289 published in Government Gazette
              No 26938 dated 5 November 2004: Determination of amounts in
              terms of sections 1 and 5 of the Military Pensions Act, 1976
              (Act No 84 of 1976).

         (g)     Government Notice No R1334 published in Government Gazette
              No 26981 dated 19 November 2004: Exemption of Telkom SA
              Limited and its subsidiaries and any entities under its
              ownership control in terms of section 92 of the Public Finance
              Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

         (h)     Government Notice No R1353 published in Government Gazette
              No 27011 dated 19 November 2004: Amendments to the exemptions
              made in Government Gazette No 24176 dated 20 December 2003, in
              terms of section 74 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act,
              2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).

         (i)     Government Notice No R1354 published in Government Gazette
              No 27011 dated 19 November 2004: Second Reporting Exemption in
              terms of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No
              38 of 2001).

         (j)     Government Notice No R1354 published in Government Gazette
              No 27012 dated 19 November 2004: Amendment of prescribed fees,
              made in terms of section 36 of the Pension Funds Act, 1956
              (Act No 24 of 1956).


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

         The following person has been appointed by Cabinet as a member and
         chairperson of the South African National Parks Board, in terms of
         section 8 of the National Parks Act, 1976 (Act No 57 of 1976):

     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water Board
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Sedibeng Water
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Ikangala Water
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Lepelle Water Board
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Magalies Water
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Rand Water Board
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bushbuckridge Water
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the Umgeni Water Board
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the Overberg Water
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (j)     Report and Financial Statements of the Botshelo Water
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (k)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bloem Water Board
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (l)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pelladrift Water
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (m)     Report and Financial Statements of the Namaqua Water Board
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (n)     Report and Financial Statements of the Amatola Water Board
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (o)     Report and Financial Statements of the Albany Coast Water
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
              Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (p)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Weather Service for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP
              221-2003].

         (q)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Weather Service for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              176-2004].

         (r)     Government Notice No 2483 published in Government Gazette
              No 26969 dated 5 November 2004: Invitation to apply for
              experimental longline fishing permits for the catching of
              Patagonian tooth fish (Dissostichus SPP), tabled in terms of
              the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

         (s)     Government Notice No 1135 published in Government Gazette
              No 26848 dated 8 October 2004: Establishment of the
              Ventersdorp-Dolomite Water User Association, Magisterial
              district of Coligny, Koster, Lichtenburg and Ventersdorp, in
              the North West Province, Water Management Area number 9 in
              terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (t)     Government Notice No 1136 published in Government Gazette
              No 26848 dated 8 October 2004: Transformation of the Elands
              Valley Irrigation Board, Magisterial districts of Belfast,
              Waterval Boven and Nelspruit, Mpumalanga Province, into the
              Elands River Catchment Area number 5, Mpumalanga Province in
              terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (u)     Government Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette
              No 26848 dated 8 October 2004: Restrictions on the taking of
              water from the Tosca Molopo Dolomite Aquifer in terms of the
              National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (v)     Government Notice No 1316 published in Government Gazette
              No 26962 dated 12 November 2004: Proposal for the
              Establishment of the Crocodile (West)- Marico Catchment
              Management Agency in terms of section 78(3) of the National
              Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (w)     Government Notice No 2478 published in Government Gazette
              No 26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of
              fires in the open air: Districts of Clanwilliam, Piketberg,
              Ceres, Tulbagh, Worcester, Caledon, Paarl, Stellenbosch,
              Strand and Somerset West in terms of the National Forests Act,
              1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

         (x)     Government Notice No 2479 published in Government Gazette
              No 26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of
              fires in the open air: Districts of Swellendam and Montagu in
              terms of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

         (y)     Government Notice No 2480 published in Government Gazette
              No 26962 dated 12 November 2004: Prohibition on the making of
              fires in the open air: Western Cape in terms of the National
              Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:

         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
         Company Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent-Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Standing
         Committee on Defence:


         (a)     The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 26
              November 2004 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
              Provinces informing Members of the National Council of
              Provinces of the employment of a member of the South African
              National Defence Force in Mozambique.

         (b)     The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 3
              December 2004 to the Speaker of the Chairperson of the
              National Council of Provinces informing Members of the
              National Council of Provinces of the employment of members of
              the South African National Defence Force in Mozambique.

         (c)     The Acting President of the Republic submitted a letter
              dated 10 January 2005 to the Chairperson of the National
              Council of Provinces informing Members of the National Council
              of Provinces of the employment of the South African National
              Defence Force in Sudan.


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services:

         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail Commuter
         Corporation Limited (SARCC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         105-2004].


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

         Report on the removal from office of Magistrate P W Phiri on
         account of his incapacity to carry out his duties of office
         efficiently.


     (8)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional:


         (a)     Proclamation No R.58 published in Government Gazette No
              28990 dated 19 November 2004: Amendment of Proclamation in
              terms of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals
              Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

         (b)     Proclamation No R.59 published in Government Gazette No
              28990 dated 19 November 2004: Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of
              the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate R
         Ameer.

     (b)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate M
         S Makamu.

     (c)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Senior
         Magistrate M J S Nhleko.

     (d)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate M
         K Chauke.

     (e)    Report on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate L
         D Monageng.

                           MONDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


         (i)     Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill [B 3 - 2005]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 27031 of 26 November 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial
         and Local Government of the National Assembly, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 7 February 2005.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              Magistrate R Ameer.

         (b)     Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              Magistrate M S Makamu.

         (c)     Report on the provisional suspension from office of Senior
              Magistrate M J S Nhleko.

         (d)     Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              Magistrate M K Chauke.

         (e)     Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              Magistrate L D Monageng.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Citrus Board for 2001-2002 [RP 204-2004].

     (b)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Meat Board for the year ended 31 December 2001 [RP 196-2004].

     (c)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         President's Fund for 2002-2003 [RP 84-2004].

     (d)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Special Pensions Board for 2003-2004 [RP 193-2004].

2.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Government Notice No 1474 published in Government Gazette No
         27124 dated 23 December 2004: Adjusted allocations in terms of the
         Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act No 5 of 2004).

     (b)    Proclamation No R.62 published in Government Gazette No 27139
         dated 22 December 2004: Fixing of date on which sections 121(1)
         and 148(1)(e) of the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2001 (Act
         No 60 of 2001), and section 164(1)(c), (i) and (j), sections
         169(1)(e) and section 170(1)(b) of the Revenue Laws Amendment Act,
         2003 (Act No 45 of 2003), shall come into operation in terms of
         the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2001 (Act No 60 of 2001)
         and Revenue laws Amendment act, 2003 (Act No 45 of 2003).

     (c)    Government Notice No 1429 published in Government Gazette No
         27070 dated 10 December 2004: Notice fixing amount of tax in
         dispute for purposes of appeal to Tax Board in terms of section
         83A of the Income Tax Act, 1962 and section 33A of the Value-Added
         Tax Act, 1991 in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
         1962).

     (d)    Government Notice No 1432 published in Government Gazette No
         27077 dated 10 December 2004: Notice setting out particulars of
         areas demarcated by Municipalities of Ethekwini, Tshwane,
         Emfuleni, Sol Plaatje, Manguang, Buffalo City and Mbombela in
         terms of section 13quat of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
         1962), which shall constitute urban development zones.

     (e)    Government Notice No 1404 published in Government Gazette No
         27044 dated 1 December 2004: Exemptions from supply chain
         management provisions in terms of the Local Government: Municipal
         Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     (f)    Government Notice No 1405 published in Government Gazette No
         27044 dated 1 December 2004: Amendment of Government Notice No 773
         dated 1 July 2004 in terms of the Local Government: Municipal
         Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     (g)    Government Notice No 1433 published in Government Gazette No
         27084 dated 8 December 2004: Approval of allocations in terms of
         the Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act No 5 of 2004).

      h) Discussion Paper on Retirement Fund Reform.


                          TUESDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following changes have been effected to the Joint
         Committees, viz:

         Budget:

         Appointed: Burgess, Mr C V

         Defence:

         Appointed: Burgess, Mr C V
         Discharged: Jankielsohn, Mr R; Sinclair, Mr K

         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
         Disabled Persons:

         Appointed: Gore, Mr V C

         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women:

         Appointed: Batyi, Ms F; Camerer, Ms S M (Alt); Mdlalose, Ms M M
         (Alt)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Supplementary Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
     Division of Revenue Bill for 2005-2006 and the Medium Term Expenditure
     Framework (MTEF) for 2005-2008, tabled in terms of section 9(1) of the
     Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


     (a)    Progress report on the intervention in Elundini Municipality in
         terms of section 139 of the Constitution, from the MEC for
         Housing, Local Government and Traditional Affairs in the Eastern
         Cape.

         To be referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration for consideration.


     (b)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
         dated 27 January 2005 to the Chairperson of the National Council
         of Provinces of the employment of the South African National
         Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of Congo:

         EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
         DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE
         INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS
         THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

         This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
         authorised the employment of the South African National Defence
         Force (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo, for
         service in fulfillment of the international obligations of the
         Republic of South Africa towards the Democratic Republic of Congo
         in the provision of support in the integration and training of the
         new restructured forces.

         This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
         of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the
         Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

         A total of 40 members are employed as from mid-January 2005 for a
         period of 12 months.

         The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the
         deployment of personnel is R 25 600 036.

         I will communicate this report to the Members of the National
         Assembly and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
         Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
         the notice of the National Council of Provinces.

         Regards

         SIGNED

         T M MBEKI
         PRESIDENT

                         THURSDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2004] - Act No 30 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 7 February 2005);


     (2)    National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment
         Bill [B 2B - 2004] - Act No 31 of 2004 (assented to and signed by
         President on 7 February 2005);


     (3)    Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and
         Related Activities Bill [B 12F - 2003] - Act No 33 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 4 February 2005).


     (4)    Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 66B - 2003] - Act No 35
         of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 7 February 2005);


     (5)    Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill [B 20B - 2004] - Act No 37
         of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 4 February 2005);
         and


     (6)    Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 72D - 2003]
         - Act No 38 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 4
         February 2005).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency

     Strategic Plan of Government Communication and Information System
     (GCIS) for 2005-2008.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Bilateral Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic
         of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Croatia,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum of the Bilateral Trade Agreement between
         the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
         of the Republic of Croatia.

                          TUESDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         (i)     Co-operatives Bill [B 4 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec
              75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 27257 of 4
              February 2005.]

              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160, on 14 February 2005.

              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.


         (ii)    Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 6 - 2005] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              27281 of 11 February 2005.]

              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160, on 16 February 2005.

              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (i)     Citation of Constitutional Laws Bill [B 5 - 2005]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 27278 of 10 February 2005.]

              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
              Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 15
              February 2005.

              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    South African Abattoir Corporation Act Repeal Bill, 2005,
         submitted by the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs on 4
         February 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture
         and Land Affairs and the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs

     The Employment Equity Report of the Independent Electoral Commission
     for 2003, tabled in terms of section 22 of the Employment Equity Act,
     1998 (Act No 55 of 1998).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     Notice received from the MEC for Local Government and Housing in the
     Mpumalanga Province regarding the intervention in the Thaba Chweu Local
     Municipality in terms of section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution of the
     Republic of South Africa (Act No 108 of 1996).

     Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
     for consideration and report.

                         WEDNESDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2005


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Municipal Investment Regulations and Municipal Public-Private
     Partnership Regulations, in terms of section 168 of the Municipal
     Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).



-----------------------
[1] The SAWEN contact person is Ms Lindiwe Ncobo at 086 110 1968 or 083 303
1697


