---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 April 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-04-12
---

TUESDAY, 12 APRIL 2005
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I shall move on behalf of the MF that
we are devastated by the number of street children forced to beg on our
streets. Many children are found selling goods at our robots and elsewhere
to earn a living for their families, even though child labour is prohibited
in our country.

Childline has shockingly reported that parents are loaning their kids to
beggars for nominal fees. A 10-year-old Phoenix boy says his parents drop
him off at the Blue Lagoon, where he sells and begs, on Friday afternoons
and fetch him on Sunday evenings. We have numerous laws in place to
prohibit this. The police and the child units are trying to contain the
situation, but are facing much difficulty.

Many of these families receive child grants of R180 per month, but, as that
is not enough to survive on, these children return to the streets where
many earn as much as R300 per day. Many people are urging motorists to
assist in the situation by not giving these begging children anything, but
how do you turn away an innocent child fighting to survive?

We hope the House will devise ways to remove these children from the
streets to stop the exploitation and abuse of children. But with poverty on
the rampage, how do we dissuade these households from getting an income
that puts food on the table? We need to address this situation with all
earnestness. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member. That was actually a statement,
not a notice of motion.

   EXTENSION OF PERIOD OF OPERATION OF SECTIONS 51 AND 52 OF CRIMINAL LAW
                                AMENDMENT ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of
the Chief Whip I move the draft resolution printed in his name on the Order
Paper, as follows:

   That the House gives its consent that the President, by proclamation in
   the Gazette, extends the period of operation of sections 51 and 52 of the
   Criminal Law Amendment Act, Act 105 of 1977, in terms of section 53(2) of
   the said Act, a further period of two years, with effect from 1 May 2005.


Agreed to.

            SADC SALUTED ON THE OCCASION OF ITS 25th ANNIVERSARY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M M MAUNYE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC salutes the Southern
African Development Community on the occasion of its 25th anniversary.
Twenty-five years ago, on 5 April 1980, the SADC – then known as the
Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference – was formed. This
regional body in Southern Africa was founded by a group of states in the
frontline against apartheid. At that time the principal focus was to add
momentum to the anticolonial struggle and launch the final assault against
the citadel of minority racist rule.

On this day we remember the sterling leadership of outstanding African
leaders, such as Julius Mwalimu Nyerere, Kenneth Kaunda, Samora Machel,
Agostino Neto and Ketumile Masire, who spearheaded the formation of the
SADC. The formation of the SADC helped in the finish push against the
apartheid regime.

As we observe the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter, we congratulate
the SADC on its endeavours to achieve economic independence. The regional
co-operation by the 14 member states organised in the SADC contribute to
Nepad and the African Renaissance. The SADC makes a critical contribution
in ensuring stability and peace in the Great Lakes region and the DRC.

The attainment of political stability and peace is critical in the overall
programme of Nepad. Aluta! [Applause.]

                           DISSOLUTION OF THE NNP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK (DA): Die DA wil graag die agb Marthinus van Schalkwyk
gelukwens met sy besluit om die NNP, wat onder sy leiding feitlik al sy
ondersteuners verloor het, die genadeskoot te gee en te ontbind en so van
sy leierskap te verlos.

Die ontbinding van die NNP bevestig die troubreuk tussen die NNP-leierskap
en sy ondersteuners, wat tot samewerking verbind was en die versekering van
die NNP-leier geglo het dat eenwording met die ANC nie op die tafel is nie.
Tweehonderd en vyftigduisend ondersteuners het in 2004 onder valse
voorwendsels vir die NNP gestem. Hulle is nou sonder ’n politieke tuiste.
Hulle is welkom by die DA, wat sy erewoord gestand doen en nie as
opposisieparty voor die ANC sal gaan lê of buig nie. Naas boedeloorgee en
die slaafse versterking van die ANC-meerderheidsregering om die doelwit van
’n eenpartystaat in Suid-Afrika te verkry, het die NNP die demokrasie
versaak en die opposisie se belangrike rol in die Parlement verswak. Ek
dank u. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Dr A I VAN NIEKERK (DA): The DA would like to congratulate the hon
Marthinus van Schalkwyk on his decision to give the NNP, which under his
leadership lost practically all its supporters, the coup de grâce and to
dissolve it, thereby rescuing it from his leadership.

The dissolution of the NNP confirms the breach of trust between the NNP
leadership and its supporters, who were committed to co-operation and
believed the assurance of the NNP leader that a union with the ANC was not
on the table. In 2004 250 000 supporters voted for the NNP under false
pretences. They now have no political home. They are welcome in the DA,
which is true to its word and will not, as the opposition party, go bowing
and scraping in front of the ANC. Apart from its bankruptcy and the slavish
strengthening of the ANC’s majority rule to achieve the aim of a one-party
state in South Africa, the NNP has abandoned democracy and weakened the
opposition’s important role in Parliament. I thank you. [Interjections.]]

                          DANGERS OF DRUNK DRIVING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T E VEZI (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, many people lose their lives and
many more are injured on our roads each year as a result of people who do
not take the law seriously by driving under the influence of alcohol. In
spite of the efforts and campaigns warning people of the dangers of
drinking and driving, there are still those who continue to do so as they
think that they will probably just get a fine.

It is with this in mind that the IFP welcomes the decision by a magistrate
in George in the Western Cape who sentenced a serial drunk driver to an
effective six years in prison. The convicted man has a history of drunken
driving, and has already had eight previous convictions for drunken
driving.

We hope that this sentence serves as a wake-up call to all those who
continue to drive while under the influence of alcohol despite all the
potential dangers that this poses to the driver and other innocent road
users. I thank you.

                     CORRUPTION REGARDING WELFARE GRANTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu L D MADUMA (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, umbutho wesizwe, i-ANC,uyamxhasa
urhulumente kwiinzame zakhe zokulwa kwanokuncothula neengcambu zawo
urhwaphilizo. Singamalungu alo mbutho siyakholelwa ekubeni urhwaphilizo
aluphelelanga kwizinto ezinxulumene norhulumente kuphela koko luchaphazela
namashishini abucala.

Umbutho wesizwe, i-ANC, uyasamkela isibhengezo esenziwe nguMphathiswa
wezoPhuhliso loluNtu kuzwelonke, uGqr Zola Skweyiya, sokuphan da abasebenzi
bakwarhulumente, oogqirha kwakunye namalungu athile esipolisa seli lizwe,
kubandakanywa namalungu athile oluntu nabakwigumgedle lokuhlisa ngomlenze
iimali zikarhulumente ezijongene nokulwa indlala nentlupheko.

Apha naphaya kungakho uphazamiseko kwinkqubo yokunikezela ngemali yendodla
kubantu abambalwa kuba kusenziwa olu phando. Ngoko ke sibongoza abantu
bakuthi ukuba babe nomonde. Singamalungu alo mbutho ukhankanywe apha
ngentla sibongoza kwaye sidomboza amasebe ethu kunye nabahlali ngokubanz i
ukuba abimbasane noMphathiswa kweli phulo lokuvumbulula le migewu. Enkosi.
(Translation of Xhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mr L D MADUMA (ANC): Deputy Chairperson, the majority party, the ANC,
supports the government in its endeavour to fight and eradicate corruption.
As members of this organisation, we believe that corruption does not only
involve government officials but the private sector as well.

The ANC welcomes the Minister of Social Development, Dr Zola Skweyiya’s
notice of intention to investigate public officials, doctors, some members
of the Police Service, and those members of the community who are involved
in corrupt activities that may derail the fight against hunger and poverty.

Here and there we may find interruptions in the pension payout system
during these investigations. We would like to plead with our people to be
patient. As members of the organisation mentioned above we call on all the
departments and communities to work with the Minister of Social Development
in his campaign aimed at rooting out these corrupt individuals. I thank
you.]

                  DEVASTATING FIRES IN INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Madam Deputy Speaker, every single year around this
time we experience events that are predictable and horrifying in their
regularity. I am referring to the onset of winter that painfully exposes
the extent of the housing crisis in our country. Every single year we
witness devastating fires sweeping through informal settlements and these
are often combined with massive flooding in certain areas during the same
period.

  In the process, tens of thousands of people are displaced and lose their
    belongings. Many lives are lost. Those with employment have their job
      security threatened by their inability to attend work, and school
 attendance plummets. It is predominantly poor and working-class people who
   end up being plummeted into deeper poverty and suffering as a result of
                              these disasters.

 Given the severity and regularity of these occurrences, the UDM appeals to
    the relevant national, provincial and local government departments to
    explain why they have not done more to avert these tragedies. We also
  appeal to them to at least demonstrate that they have made the necessary
 advance preparations to deal with the thousands of displaced people. After
     all, these are not unexpected events. If they have not made proper
  preparations, they are guilty of gross negligence in dealing with a known
                  problem. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

                       FRAUDULENT SOCIAL GRANT PAYOUTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv A H GAUM (NNP): Deputy Speaker, good governance in terms of fighting
corruption is one of the important challenges facing government. Therefore
the NNP commends the swift action by the Minister of Social Development
with regard to fraudulent social grant payouts. More than 37 000 public
servants could be involved in social assistance fraud and corruption. The
department has stated that it will take various measures to reduce and
finally eliminate fraud and corruption within the grant administration
system.

Currently, government loses about R1,5 billion per annum to fraud and
corruption. It is expected that the antifraud and corruption campaign will
drastically reduce this amount. Those in government departments who are
aware of corrupt practices and refrain from reporting them should also be
held accountable.

We commend Minister Skweyiya for his commitment to do everything in his
power to ensure that everyone guilty of defrauding the system is dealt with
accordingly.

               ROLE OF TAIWAN IN SOUTH ASIAN TSUNAMI DISASTER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, ek wil vir die agb
Kraai van Niekerk net sê: Jong, daardie 250 000 Natte waarna hy verwys het,
was al by die DA. Hulle is nou op pad na die VF toe. [Gelag.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want to say to the
hon Kraai van Niekerk: Those 250 000 Nats to whom he referred, have already
been to the DA. They are now on their way to the FF. [Laughter.]]

The FF Plus believes that it is a mistake for countries and international
organisations to use international health issues to obtain specific
political goals. Disasters and diseases recognise no national boundaries.

The World Health Organisation has played a very important role in the
recent South Asian tsunami disaster. The World Health Organisation co-
ordinated and distributed massive amounts of contributions from all its
members.

The Republic of China (Taiwan), as one of the largest trading countries of
the world, has shown its willingness to join these relief efforts led by
the World Health Organisation. However, Taiwan is hampered by the fact that
it is not a member of this organisation and has been refused participation
in any event of the World Health Organisation. During the tsunami disaster
Taiwan delivered more than 172 metric tons of relief provisions.
Furthermore, Taiwan collected a total of US$70 million in donations from
the people and the government of Taiwan for emergency relief funds for the
affected countries.

The World Health Organisation is to hold its annual meeting in Geneva from
16 May to 25 May of this year. Taiwan has been campaigning to be readmitted
as a member of the World Health Organisation. The Congress of the United
States of America and the European Parliament support Taiwan’s efforts. It
is sincerely hoped that the South African government and delegation will
also support Taiwan’s endeavours before another deadly epidemic spreads
through the world while the WHO argues politics. Mixing international
politics and health issues is shortsighted and irresponsible. I thank you.


     ELEPHANT AND RHINO SECURITY AGENCIES CO-ORDINATE ACTIVITIES AGAINST
                                  POACHERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P N MNANDI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC applauds the initiative
taken by the elephant and rhino security agencies from seven African
countries to plan and co-ordinate their approaches against the cruel
activities of poachers. The meeting was convened by the South African
elephant and rhino security agencies at the Doubledrift Nature Reserve in
Port Elizabeth. The meeting was attended by conservation law-enforcement
agencies from seven African countries, members of the police, the Green
Scorpions and the environment desk of Interpol.

The ANC urges all stakeholders in the fight against poaching to involve
local community members so as to make our people aware of the importance of
preserving our biodiversity and to make sure that we leave something for
our children. I thank you.


                   GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR TEXTILE INDUSTRY





                            (Member’s Statement)


Mnr R K HENDERSON (DA): Agb Adjunkspeaker, die Britse regering het gister
’n lening van R75 miljoen aan MG Rover, ’n Britse motorvervaardiger, gegee
om te help met die aanpassing teen internasionale kompetisie.

Hulle het dit gedoen omdat hulle besef het die sluiting van die organisasie
sal 6 000 poste verlore laat gaan by die fabriek en 15 000 poste sal
verlore wees vir afhanklike nywerhede in die motorbedryf. Vergelyk dit met
ons regering wat staan en toekyk dat 35 500 poste verloor gegaan het in ons
tekstiel-, klere- en skoensektore verlede jaar. Dieselfde regering doen
niks om sukkelende maatskappye, byvoorbeeld Rex Trueform, van sluiting te
red nie.

Verlede jaar het die Chinese regering aan Suid-Afrika ’n bedrag van R3,7
miljoen gegee om ons tekstiel- en klerebedryf te help om aan te pas by
Chinese invoere, maar dit is tragies dat ons regering net sê die geld is
tot dusver nog nie gebruik nie. Dit is nie goed genoeg nie. Die DA doen ’n
beroep dat die geld onmiddelik gebruik moet word om te help keer dat
werkgeleenthede in die tekstielbedryf verlore gaan. Die tyd het aangebreek
dat die regering bewys dat hulle ernstig is om Suid-Afrikaanse maatskappye
en werkers te help om hulle werke te behou. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr R K HENDERSON (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, yesterday the British
government granted a loan of R75 million to MG Rover, a British car
manufacturer, to assist with the adjustment to international competition.

They did this because they realised that the closure of the organisation
would lead to the loss of 6 000 jobs at the factory, and that 15 000 jobs
would be lost in independent industries in the automotive industry. Compare
this to our government, which looked on as 35 500 positions were being lost
in our textile, clothing and shoe manufacturing sectors last year. The same
government does nothing to save struggling companies, such as Rex Trueform,
from closing down.

Last year the Chinese government gave South Africa an amount of R3,7
million to help our textile and clothing industry adjust to Chinese
imports, but it is tragic that our government simply says that the money
has not been used yet. This is not good enough. The DA calls for the money
to be used immediately to help prevent jobs in the textile industry being
lost. The time has come for the government to prove that they are serious
about helping South African companies and workers keep their jobs. I thank
you. [Applause.]]


                    COMPLIANCE WITH EMPLOYMENT EQUITY ACT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N T GODI (PAC): The PAC of Azania notes and applauds the Employment
Equity Act as a tool for the transformation of the workplace. However, it
notes that the Act is unfortunately so lenient that reportedly an estimated
80% of employers are not legally bound to implement affirmative action.

The PAC is perplexed by the fact that a report by the Commission for
Employment Equity has shown that about 99% of companies have no plans for
equity; and that even the approximately 1% that has complied has done so
only on procedural matters and not on substantive aspects.

The PAC is concerned that in the past employers did not need inspectors to
implement legislation, but some of them now have the audacity to object to
notices from the Department of Labour that they not complying with the law.
The PAC therefore calls on the House to join it in its call on employers in
particular and white South Africa and its political leadership in general
to demonstrate in much more meaningful ways their commitment to this new
dispensation and their sense of appreciation that in this new dispensation
they got away with too much. Finally, the PAC calls on the Department of
Labour to vigorously pursue the full implementation of legislation. Thank
you.


                      PROMOTION OF A HEALTHY LIFESTYLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M MALUMISE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC believes that the
promotion of healthy lifestyles is an integral part of the campaign to
reduce communicable and noncommunicable diseases, as well as high levels of
injuries and violence. The campaign includes the promotion of good
nutrition, regular physical exercise, safe sexual behaviour, and extensive
interventions aimed at decreasing smoking, alcohol and substance abuse.

As our campaign for a healthy lifestyle gains momentum, six leading United
Nations agencies are holding an international consultative meeting in
Durban. The meeting started on Sunday 10 April and it will continue to
Wednesday 13 April. The hosting of this meeting is an important development
for South Africa. It is important because the world community affirms the
approach of the ANC-led government; namely that issues of food security in
general and good nutrition in particular must become an integral part of
our response to diseases, including HIV and Aids. The international
consultative meeting provides a platform for us to share our experiences
with the international community. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Applause.]


                         CHANGING OF PRETORIA’S NAME


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mev D VAN DER WALT (DA): Agb Adjunkspeaker, ten einde te betoog teen die
ANC se ondeurdagte voorstel om die hoofstad Pretoria se naam na Tshwane te
verander, dien ek later vandag hierdie petisie met handtekeninge van sowat
32 000 beswaarmakers by die Parlement in.

Daar het niks gekom van die voorgeskrewe konsultasieproses met die
plaaslike gemeenskap en ander rolspelers nie. Inteendeel, die voorsitter
van die SA Pleknaamraad het self voorgestel dat ’n konsultasieproses nie
nodig is nie.

Die ANC beweer dat die geraamde koste van R1,5 miljard deur die sakesektor
gedra sal word. Hierdie koste sal inderdaad op die skouers van reeds
oorbelaste belastingbetalers val. Dit is duidelik dat die ANC-beheerde
stadsraad met dié ondeurdagte aksie desperaat is om die aandag weg te lei
van hul swak en onvoldoende dienslewering aan die armes van Pretoria.

Die DA maak ten sterkste beswaar teen die voorgestelde verandering.
Pretoria is Pretoria! Dankie. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Ms D VAN DER WALT (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, in order to protest against
the ill-considered proposal to change the capital Pretoria’s name to
Tshwane, I will hand this petition, with the signatures of 32 000
protesters, in to Parliament later today.

Nothing came of the prescribed consultation process with the local
community and other role-players. On the contrary, the chairperson of the
South African Geographical Names Council suggested that a consultation
process is not needed.

The ANC alleges that the estimated cost of R1, 5 billion will be shouldered
by the business sector. These costs will indeed fall on the shoulders of
the already overburdened taxpayer. It is clear that the ANC-controlled city
council is desperate to divert the attention away from their poor and
inadequate service delivery to the poor in Pretoria with this ill-
considered action.

The DA objects vehemently against this proposed change. Pretoria is
Pretoria! Thank you. [Interjections.][Applause.]]


            BUDGET FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH AND INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, following a presentation to
the health committee by the Medical Research Council, the IFP commends the
council for its major contribution to health care in South Africa, in
particular with regard to HIV vaccine research, the impact of lifestyle on
disease, such as smoking and obesity, monitoring the effectiveness of
educational programmes and policies, and most particularly its pioneering
work on indigenous knowledge and medicinal herbs.

In this regard, all departments attempting to develop South Africa’s vast
storehouse of traditional knowledge are hamstrung; firstly, by inadequate
legislation for intellectual property on discoveries as compared to
inventions; and secondly, by weak legislation on benefit sharing, which
would assist the people of South Africa to share in the wealth that would
come from developing our biological gold mines.

Therefore, we call on government to increase the budget dedicated to
medical research above its current 9% of the Health budget and on the
Ministers of Trade and Industry, Health and Science and Technology to
develop an in-depth programme to draft laws that would result in our
country’s indigenous knowledge playing an important role in the modern
trend of healing, using knowledge from the ancient past. Thank you.

                    TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT FOR INMATES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M S MOATSHE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC-led government believes that
imprisonment should be aimed at re-education and not vengeance. In an
outstanding display of great courage and proof that our rehabilitation
efforts within the Department of Correctional Services are working, Mr
Jessie Dlamini, a former inmate, passed his matric and he is currently a
college student about to embark on a successful career in human resource
management.

This story is a testimony to the strength and conviction of the human
spirit to triumph over obstacles, and should serve as a source of
inspiration to other inmates that imprisonment does not mean an end to
one’s growth.

The ANC wishes to congratulate Mr Dlamini on his outstanding efforts and
his positivity. We saw him achieve excellent results in his studies.

We also wish to commend the Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality, which
awarded him R10 000 to further his education. The encouragement and support
that they are providing to Mr Dlamini will, no doubt, ensure that he
becomes a truly productive member of our society. I thank you, Minister and
Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]



                 THE PRETORIA NAME CHANGE AND REHABILITATION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, there is really not
much to respond to regarding the statements. I will definitely respond to
the last one on Correctional Services, but with regard to the others,
particularly the one about Tshwane and the Pretoria name change, my only
response is: Jirre! [Laughter.]

On the issue of rehabilitation, the issue that hon Moatshe is raising is a
very good one. It is at the centre of what we do as Correctional Services -
rehabilitation and correcting offending behaviour. And, when we see some of
our former inmates going into business like Mr Dlamini, and being able to
say that they are one of those who have been rehabilitated by Correctional
Services, we can only give thanks for the work that my officials are doing
within the department. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Minister. Hon Minister, I live in
Sinoville; I don’t know whether you want me to add “Jirre” as part of my
address. If I remove “Pretoria” or “Tshwane”, should I add “Jirre”? But I
think I can take that up with you after the sitting.

The House adjourned at 14:28.


