---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 June 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-06-21
---

TUESDAY, 21 JUNE 2005
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                APPOINTMENT OF LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS


                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that she had been informed by the President that
Minister Charles Nqakula had been appointed as Leader of Government
Business in the NA in terms of section 91(4) of the Constitution, with
effect from 15 June 2005.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION



Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of this House:
    That the Chief Executive Officer of the SA Airways be called before
    Parliament’s Public Enterprises portfolio committee to explain why a
    leasing agreement with Jet Airways was signed while another similar
    agreement with Sahara Airways was turned down, an agreement that would
    have earned the South African national carrier R100 million more in
    revenue.

               BELATED BIRTHDAY WISHES TO PRESIDENT OF THE RSA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House -

  (1) notes that last Saturday, 18 June 2005, was the birthday of the
       President of the Republic;


  (2) congratulates the President on his birthday and hopes that he will see
       many more; and


  (3) wishes the President a belated happy birthday.

Agreed to.

                     INTERNATIONAL STROKE AWARENESS WEEK


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A VAN WYK (ANC): Madam Speaker, health workers across the globe observed
last week as International Stroke Awareness Week. The condition is rapidly
becoming the second most common cause of death after heart disease.

In the past the condition was associated with old age. Today this is no
longer the case. It strikes everyone, regardless of age, gender or race.
The prevalence of the condition is strongly associated with health
transition. This means a change in eating habits and other factors of
lifestyle.

There is clearly an increasing burden of non-infectious diseases such as
hypertension, diabetes and cancer. This fact confirms the ANC-led
government’s policy that in achieving a healthier society, we need to have
healthy people.

The provision of affordable health care is fundamental to the wellbeing of
our society. The ANC will continue to mobilise communities around the
issues of healthy living and eating habits.


                       RULING PARTY SILENT ON OILGATE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J ELLIS (DA): Madam Speaker, Oilgate threatens to be the next biggest
corruption scandal to engulf the government. Yet, the ruling party remains
deafeningly silent about the nature of its business transactions with
Imvume Management despite allegations that Imvume financed its election
campaign with taxpayers’ money to the tune of R11 million.

Imvume is no ordinary private company and this was no ordinary private
donation. Imvume’s CEO, Sandi Majali, styles himself as the economic
adviser to the ANC’s secretary-general. He has served on the party’s
committees involved in fundraising and economic policy-making. It would be
far better if you listened instead of trying to make cheap jokes.

PetroSA, the state-owned enterprise that awarded a supply contract to
Imvume is chaired by Popo Molefe, who is a member of the ANC National
Executive Committee and chairperson of the party’s sub-committee on
government and legislatures. Dr Molefe should stand down from his
chairmanship of PetroSA while Oilgate is investigated.

The ANC needs to address Oilgate’s unanswered questions before the public
is left with the impression that this was yet another BEE deal that filled
the back pockets of the ruling party and its cronies. Thank you.
[Applause.]

        WORLD BANK LOANS TO AFRICA TO BE REPLACED WITH AID AND GRANTS





                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Madam Speaker, the African Union and South Africa in
particular should welcome the prospect of the World Bank replacing loans to
Africa with aid and grants, as indicated by the new president of the World
Bank, Paul Wolfowitz, during his recent visit to Africa.

At the same time it is of vital importance that the African countries
insist that, in pursuit of this goal, the World Bank abandons the
conditional structural adjustment programmes, which are notorious for
worsening the state of underdevelopment, poverty, unemployment and poor
debt repayment in Africa.

Not only the World Bank, but also the international donors to Africa and,
more importantly, the G8 countries, should as a matter of great urgency,
persuade the recipient African countries to embrace the principle of aided
self-help development schemes.

This should presuppose an imperative willingness on the part of African
leaders to initiate and sustain a radical shift away from the post-war
colonial economic development planning, currently characterised by
widespread urban-rural disequilibrium and dependency, and adopt co-
operative and self-reliant economic development programmes. I thank you.


                      SA YOUTH SEES BRIGHT FUTURE IN SA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T G ANTHONY (ANC): Madam Speaker, the International Marketing Council
contracted the FutureFact research company to do research on the attitudes
of young people towards the future of our country. Those interviewed were
between the ages of 20 - 24 across gender and colour lines. The
overwhelming majority of our young people see a brighter future in the
country of their birth.

As many as 91% are overwhelmingly excited to live in these times of change
and 85% believe that people are endowed with the same capabilities
irrespective of race, religion or gender. About 88% believe that the South
African youth are determined to succeed in the future. Jos Kuper, of Kuper
Research said, and I quote:


   The survey was one of the most comprehensive ever undertaken in South
   Africa. It provides us with a unique insight into the rich texture and
   fabric of South African society.

The findings confirm the correctness of the work the ANC is doing among
young people. I thank you all. [Applause.]

                            MURDER OF BABY JORDAN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MDAKA (UDM): Madam Speaker, the UDM is horrified at the murder of
six-month-old Jordan Leigh Norton a week ago. We extend our heartfelt
condolences to her family. We congratulate the police for their swift
action and the subsequent arrest of a suspect. We hope that the four other
wanted criminals who perpetrated this horrible crime will soon be brought
to book.

On previous occasions, in this House, we have raised our growing concern
regarding the murder and abuse of children in our country. The regularity
with which children are victimised and murdered in this country is pointing
to a major unravelling of the social fabric. The moral health of our nation
is in dire straits.

It is difficult to comprehend what level of callousness and inhumanity can
give rise to the calculated stabbing to death of a six-month-old baby. If
our rights-based democracy cannot protect the most innocent and weakest
amongst us, then it cannot claim to be a true democracy. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, my attention has just been drawn to the
fact that we have a technical problem; we are not being recorded for
Hansard purposes. We therefore suggest that we suspend proceedings for a
few minutes, just to check whether there’s a major problem. We don’t
suggest that members should leave the House, but, of course, for minor,
natural purposes, you have the right to do that. [Laughter.]

BUSINESS SUSPENDED AT 14:14 AND RESUMED AT 14:23.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, let’s settle down. Let us proceed with
members’ statements.


                     INVESTIGATION BY NPA INTO ARMS DEAL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Speaker, the ID calls for further investigation
regarding the information contained in the De Lille dossier. The National
Prosecuting Authority should pursue the enemies of the state within the
context of the arms deal. Part of this document is now a record of the
courts and the people named therein should be investigated and charged.

The names on the most wanted list in South Africa include Ron Haywood,
Chippy Shaik, Richard Carter, Ntsiki Mashimbye, Vivian Reddy and Jayendra
Naidoo.

Furthermore, we call on the NPA to investigate the British Aerospace Hawk
deal and determine why we paid R70 million more than the market price; the
German frigates from Ferrostaal, an additional R750 million for each
frigate. Why was payment of a success fee of R1,2 million made by Thyssen
to Futuristic Business Solutions? Furthermore, the 19 people who received
considerable discounts from Daimler Chrysler for cars purchased.

I have been subpoenaed three times by the NPA and provided information,
which has led to two successful prosecutions. Why is it that the other
information provided hasn’t been used to date?

The ID will be relentless in the battle to rid South Africa of this plague.
We send out the message to all, that we will protect our country. We don’t
need another judicial commission of inquiry to waste taxpayers’ money. What
we need is for the NPA to investigate and charge those alleged to be
involved in the arms deal. I thank you. [Applause.]

                APPEAL TO DECLARE STILFONTEIN A DISASTER AREA

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF Plus): Agb Speaker, die VF Plus het reeds op 19
April 2005 die President versoek om die proses aan die gang te sit om
Stilfonteingebied tot rampgebied te verklaar. Tot op hede is nog niks
gedoen nie, en is daar geen staatshulp aan mense wat honger ly nie.

Die ANC-burgemeester van Klerksdorp, wat moet begin met die proses van die
verklaring van ‘n rampgebied, sloer nou al drie-en-‘n-half maande daarmee.
Dit getuig òf van onbevoegdheid òf ‘n onwilligheid om Stilfontein tot
rampgebied te verklaar.

Die ANC-beheerde provinsiale regering is net so laks met die hele proses.
Die boodskap aan die mense is duidelik: Die ANC gee nie ‘n flenter om vir
die gemeenskap van Stilfontein nie.

Tans moet kospakkies steeds aan minstens 1 200 inwoners uitgedeel word,
maar die fondse droog op. Daar kan nou met reg gevra word: Gee die ANC-
regering werklik om vir mense wat honger ly?

Die VF Plus doen weer eens ‘n beroep op die Kantoor van die President om
daadwerklik in te gryp, en die gebied tot rampgebied te verklaar én
sodoende geld beskikbaar te stel om mense te voed. Dankie.
[Tussenwerpsels.](Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Hon Speaker, already on 19 April 2005  the  FF
Plus requested the President to set the process in  motion  to  declare  the
Stilfontein area a disaster area. To date nothing has been done,  and  there
is no state aid to people who are starving.

The ANC mayor of Klerksdorp, who has to start the  process  of  declaring  a
disaster area, has been dragging his heels for  three  and  a  half  months.
This is evidence of either  incompetence  or  an  unwillingness  to  declare
Stilfontein a disaster area.

The ANC-controlled provincial government is just  as  lax  with  the  entire
process. The message to the people is clear. The ANC does not care  one  bit
for the community of Stilfontein.

Currently food parcels are being distributed to at least 1 200  inhabitants,
but the  funds  are  drying  up.  This  begs  the  question:  Does  the  ANC
government really care about people who are starving?

Once again the FF Plus calls on the Office of the President to intervene
forthwith and to declare the area a disaster area and thereby make money
available so that these people can be fed. Thank you. [Interjections.]]

                         PEACE MNISI WINS FILM AWARD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D M GUMEDE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC salutes Peace Mnisi, a ten-year-
old boy from Mpumalanga, who wrote and stars in the film Mibiya and his
cow. At the Ciak Junior Competition in Italy, which took place in May this
year, the film won the grand jury prize for the best film; best film voted
by the children; best film voted by television broadcasters; best African
film; and the local mayor’s award for excellence.

Peace, for whom this was a first appearance on film, was also nominated for
the best actor award. Mnisi’s great achievement emphasises the need for
government, at all levels, the private sector and the arts community at
large to continue to concentrate on the issue of creating opportunities and
making expertise available to all our people and, in particular, the
formerly disadvantaged communities.

The ANC congratulates Peace on becoming a source of national inspiration
and pride. His success, which is ours too, demonstrates, among many things,
that indeed the doors of learning and culture are progressively being
opened to all the people of our country, black and white, united in our
diversity. I thank you. [Applause.]

                            CRIME IN JOHANNESBURG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Speaker, if perceptions about crime in our
country are valid then it’s very difficult to marry them up with the
alleged statistical reality that crime is stabilising, and in the case of
certain crimes, such as murder and rape, actually decreasing.

I represent a large section of the northern suburbs of Johannesburg and I’m
constantly contacted by my constituents who believe crime is out of control
again. Recently, there was a spate of horrific murders in the Blairgowrie
area. Several women in the Craighall and Bryanston areas have recently been
hijacked in their cars and beaten up, or have been victims of robbery and
assault in their homes.

The Johannesburg newspapers and radio stations are awash with such stories
from all over the city. Indeed, statistics show that perceptions about
crime in Johannesburg are increasingly negative. According to a recent ISS
survey, over 60% of residents believe that crime has increased over the
past three years, nearly 80% of people feel unsafe walking alone in their
areas after dark, and statistically they are quite right.

The DA demands answers from the responsible Minister on what can and will
be done about the worsening crime situation in Johannesburg. Thank you,
Madam Speaker.

                    THE FREEDOM CHARTER FAILED THE PEOPLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Madam Speaker, with the vociferous noises that have
been made about the Freedom Charter, millions of people would have expected
Kliptown to be a model of excellence in development terms that enjoys the
benefits of all the declarations made in the freedom cheater. But, the
residents of Kliptown themselves bear witness that this charter has failed
the African people and the poor of this country just as the PAC warned 50
years ago, that the Freedom Charter was a betrayal of the land question.

The conundrum today, of course, is that the proponents of the Kliptown
charter themselves no longer believe in its tenets except in rhetoric. They
have shifted away into enclaves of capitalism and neo-liberal policies. The
commemoration of 50 years of the demise of this charter would be more
appropriate. [Interjections.]

The foundation for the charter’s anticlimax is the austere and conservative
policy of Gear. There is a deafening realisation, which resonates in the
experiences of the African people and the poor, that South Africa is yet to
belong to all who live in it. [Interjections.]

Let us not delude ourselves. This country belongs more to the minority than
the land-dispossessed and wealth-deprived Africans. This is a political
reality. [Interjections.] The Freedom Charter remains the freedom cheater
it was 50 years ago. [Laughter.] It serves the interests of plutocracy. I
thank you. [Time expired.]

                 AGREEMENT BETWEEN EKHURLENI METRO AND ESKOM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms L L MABE (ANC): We appreciate the recent historic agreement serviced by
Ekhurleni Metropolitan Council and Eskom, the service provider for the
provision of free electricity in areas that are directly provided by Eskom.

In those areas our people were not receiving their fair share of free basic
services as promised by the ANC-led government. This will not only benefit
the poor and the indigent, but even those who are capable of paying. The
provision of these basic services to all our people regardless of race,
gender or age stands at the heart of the ANC’s efforts to create a new
people-centred society, a society that affirms the dignity of humanity.

We call upon other municipalities to emulate the example of Ekhurleni in
providing services to their citizens. The ANC salutes Comrade Duma Nkosi,
the mayor of Ekhurleni, and his team for the sterling work they continue to
do to help realise the dream of a better life for all our people. I thank
you. [Applause.]

                   MUGABE’S REGIME OPERATION MURAMBATSVINA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W J SEREMANE (DA): Thank you. Government’s failure to speak out against
the Mugabe regime’s Operation Murambatsvina, which means clearing away
trash, is shameful.

The UN human rights organisations, as well as a number of church groups,
have expressed revulsion at such inhuman treatment of a people by a
government that is supposed to protect them.

Hundreds of thousands of Zimbabweans now find themselves homeless in the
midst of a bitterly cold winter. Today we hear people are being prevented
from feeding themselves with small-scale urban agriculture, which is
increasing the threat of starvation.

The sovereignty of Zimbabwe cannot override the fundamental human rights of
citizens. This is what the South African government should clearly say to
President Mugabe, instead of saying, Comrade Mugabe, you are free to do as
you please, no matter the degree of human suffering it may cost.
It is high time that President Mbeki expresses South Africa’s outrage at
the shocking human rights violations next door to us. People are not trash.
When you call them trash, you sow the seeds of genocide. Mark my words.
Thank you. [Applause.]

                 GAUTENG GOVERNMENT’S HIV AND AIDS PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C KONDLO (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC is committed to the continued
improvement of the health of the nation as part of an effort to realise the
goals of a better life for all.

In this context, we commend the Gauteng provincial government on increasing
its HIV and Aids allocation by 30%, which is also aimed at prioritising the
health of women and children. This shows that the ANC cares.

We further commend the ANC-Gauteng provincial government on exceeding last
year’s targets in implementing the comprehensive HIV and Aids prevention
treatment and care programme. Despite the challenges we continue to face in
the transformation of the health sector, the victory scored by the Gauteng
health department shows that the ANC policies are the correct response to
deal with the damage done by years of white minority rule.

Let us work together with our government to improve the health of the
nation, including strengthening our efforts aimed at the implementation of
the comprehensive HIV and Aids prevention, treatment and care programme.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, by virtue of the IFP not taking their slot, we
have a list that indicates who comes next. The ANC has another slot.

                        TWO ADDITIONAL SABC LICENCES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms K R MAGAU (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ANC applauds and
celebrates the decision taken by Icasa to grant the SABC two additional
licences to establish two additional TV channels. We are happy that the
public broadcaster will use these two channels to broadcast in indigenous
languages. We are not surprised at the stance taken by the DA since the
announcement was made by the SABC to establish SABC 4 and 5 as regional
stations to cater for the previously disadvantaged languages.

The DA has been consistent over time in opposing any attempt by the ANC-led
government to transform our society. Affirmative action is conveniently
viewed by the DA as reverse racism.

When government facilitates interaction with communities through their
languages, suddenly the issue of rands and cents becomes an issue. If not
that, then the government is trying to establish its propaganda machinery.
This is nothing else but an attempt by the DA to keep our people ignorant
of their constitutional rights and services that this government is
rendering to our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

                         INVESTIGATION OF ARMS DEAL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to two of
the statements.

First, very briefly, in response to the statement by the hon Pheko:
Unfortunately, the hon member is lost, and has been lost for a very long
time. This is the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa. He believes
he is in “Azania”. He is in the wrong place, and that is why he doesn’t
understand the present history, and has no clue of the future.

There is no point in wasting our breath on him, but we should call on him
to desist from distorting history by distorting the name of the Freedom
Charter. We will not stand for that! He is a leader of the people, and if
he believes he is a leader then he must show respect for our history.
[Applause.]

I would like to respond to the hon De Lille more particularly. You see, her
claims that the Terry Crawford-Browne document is now the De Lille document
is quite disingenuous. [Laughter.] She should desist from naming people in
the way that she does, because if she does so, then she must be prepared to
name those names outside.

You see, what’s very important about the issues that she raises here is
that these have been matters of thorough, ongoing investigation. The two
Chapter 9 institutions and the NPA sat in this House and reported on their
findings. That she doesn’t accept those findings suggests that she doesn’t
accept the supremacy of the Chapter 9 institutions, and therefore she
disregards the Constitution. That’s the fundamental problem.

In respect of the choice of weaponry that we bought, we didn’t go to a
bargain basement sale to find the cheapest aeroplane on the market. We
wanted to equip the Air Force with the best. Similarly, in the purchase of
the corvettes, we wanted to equip the Navy with the best. So, that it
wasn’t the cheapest is neither here nor there. [Interjections.][Applause.]

All that that does is to show two things. The first is that the hon De
Lille has no idea of what she is talking about. And the second is that she
is a useful idiot in the hands of those who failed in their bid to secure
the contracts. [Interjections.]

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL
                                     AND
                     TAXATION LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, let me just assure Mrs De Lille that after
that little bit of excitement there is some real excitement coming up now –
the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill. [Laughter.]

A few weeks ago in this House, we approved the Appropriation Bill
authorising the expenditure proposals put forward in the 2005-06 Main
Budget. Today we have before us two Bills that will complete the
legislation required to authorise the 2005-06 Main Budget.

The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill basically gives effect to the tax
proposals put forward in the Budget Speech. There are also some urgent anti-
avoidance measures provided for. Since the Joint Tagging Mechanism ruled
that a number of these are beyond the scope of a money Bill as defined in
the Constitution, as amended, these are provided for in a separate section
75 Bill which is known as the Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill, which is
also tabled before the House today.

I should just remind the House that the Main Budget proposed an adjustment
to the personal income tax tables that offers tax relief to individuals
totalling R6,8 billion. The biggest proportional relief is provided for
lower-income taxpayers who receive as much as a 35% reduction in their tax
liability.

There are also additional allowances for taxpayers over the age of 65;
corporate taxes decreased from 30% to 29% for larger companies; and there
is additional tax relief, as well as simplified tax procedures, for small
businesses. On the other hand, taxes on some goods and services – alcohol,
tobacco, air passenger departure fees and fuel levies - are all increased.

The money Bill before us today gives effect to all these proposals and the
section 75 Bill provides mainly for clarification of the definitions of
ownership with respect to depreciation allowances and a few other anti-
avoidance provisions. A more comprehensive discussion document on general
anti-avoidance measures is in preparation and will hopefully inform
legislation on anti-avoidance measures that will be placed before the House
in the future.

Since Parliament and the portfolio committee cannot yet amend money Bills,
the practice has developed of a draft tax law Bill being published for
comment and then presented to the portfolio committee, after whose
deliberations the final Bill is then tabled. The portfolio committee
organises public hearings on this draft Bill.

In these public hearings the only really controversial issue placed before
us was in respect of the proposal to cap tax benefits for car allowances at
the value of a vehicle of R360 000. This means that if you drive a vehicle
whose value exceeds R360 000, you will not be able to claim any additional
tax relief beyond that which is available to someone driving a vehicle
valued at R360 000.

The aim of this provision is clearly to curb the practice that was
observable in the recent past of the fiscus effectively subsidising the
provision of high-priced luxury vehicles to highly paid corporate
executives. Most of the submissions which we received, which were critical
of this proposal, argued that it would have unintended negative
consequences on the motor industry, as well as increasing the incidence of
taxation on wealthier individuals.

The latter point, I must say, did not command much sympathy among many
committee members and the majority of the committee were satisfied that the
National Treasury and Sars had based this proposal on thorough, careful
consideration of all the issues, including the impact on the industry,
based on thorough research and a modelling exercise. The modelling exercise
concluded that any negative impact on the motor industry in South Africa
would be negligible.

Although this provision, together with the adjustments of the allowances at
lower vehicle values are fundamentally aimed at reducing the scale of this
concession and increasing the takes of the fiscus, committee members also
identified a number of other potential benefits of this capping proposal.

The most expensive luxury vehicles tend to be heavy on petrol, and so there
is a potential saving on the fuel import bill, as well as a potentially
positive environmental impact. Most South African manufactured cars also
retail for under R360 000, with higher priced vehicles being largely
imported models. So, there will hopefully also be some incentives to buying
South African manufactured goods. In short, the majority of the committee .
. .
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Could hon members please lower their voices?

Dr R H DAVIES: Yes, it is the excitement of this Taxation Laws Amendment
Bill, Madam Speaker.

In conclusion, the majority of the committee members were satisfied with
this provision, as well as other provisions in this Bill. I therefore have
pleasure in commending this legislation to the House. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before I call on the next speaker, hon
Davidson, may I also say that I have been informed that this debate will
deal with both the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill and the Taxation Laws
Second Amendment Bill. So, it is one debate dealing with two different
Bills.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Speaker, these Bills give effect to the Budget
proposals of the Minister, passed by this House and, in line with our own
position during the Budget process, we will be supporting the Bills.

Now it is not my intention to pass comment on what are in essence technical
Bills, but rather to address the need for government to expand on the
details of its tax policy going forward. The technicalities of SA’s tax
system are often debated; the philosophy behind it is seldom, if ever,
spelt out.

Clearly, we welcome amongst others the reduction in corporate tax, the
raising of the minimum income tax threshold and the raising of interest
income exemption. All of these measures will help create a more competitive
direct tax regime capable of supporting investment and economic growth. And
clearly that has to be our objective. Not a race to the bottom, but to
design a tax system, which addresses the many needs of our country, but at
the same time attracts international capital.

In a globalised economy where capital is highly mobile we are competing
with other countries. Therefore the creation of a competitive regime must
be our principle aim.

In this connection it is interesting to see the link, noted in the latest
World Competitive Yearbook compiled by the IMD School of Management in
Lausanne, Switzerland, between the top ten competitive countries and
corporate tax rates.

What has become clear is that we need to start thinking creatively about
our tax competitiveness. Corporate tax rates are constantly falling around
the world. The corporate tax in OECD countries fell by 6,5% on average
between 1996 and 2003, and they will continue to do so as we move further
into the global age. Gerhard Schröder, the German Chancellor, has just
proposed a cut in corporate tax from 25% to 19%.

More significantly, KPMG, and I said this before in this House, in a survey
last year showed that the average effective corporate tax rates for
emerging markets was only 24%. A more direct comparison of countries
against which SA competes for capital and investment, namely Malaysia,
Morocco and Indonesia, have effective tax rates of 28%, 33% and 30%
respectively. Egypt has just announced that their maximum tax rate for both
personal and corporate is now 20%.

Certain countries in Eastern Europe, such as Russia, Romania, Georgia,
Ukraine and Lithuania have introduced flat tax rates. Slovakia and Russia
have actually seen tax revenues rise.

Now the point of all this is that clearly competition is becoming more
intense. In SA, despite the lowering of our corporate tax rate from 30% to
29%, our effective tax rate remains around 37%, mainly because of the
secondary tax on company profits.

In the last fiscal year, corporate tax contributed an estimated 19% of tax
revenue to the fiscus, up from 11,9% ten years ago, and if you add the
secondary tax to that it comes to 21% as opposed to 13% ten years ago – and
that is with the secondary tax rate halving during the same period. In
contrast, corporate tax revenue as a percentage of total tax revenue
averages round 9% in OECD countries and therefore we are way ahead of our
competitors.

Clearly as a total share of the tax pie the SA corporate tax burden is by
international standards one of the highest in the world. For a country that
is trying to attract more foreign and local investment this must be a
negative. The imperatives of the global economy are making it harder for
countries to levy taxes, as they would like. Freer trade makes it easier
for companies to move to low tax destinations and faster communications
make it easier to locate new services abroad.

Tax policy, more particularly the philosophy behind policy, needs therefore
to be reviewed and communicated. Instead of ad hoc annual adjustments
government needs to provide both certainty and incentives by setting out
what it plans, over what timeframe and under what conditions. A target
corporate rate of say 25% and a time period over which it will be
implemented will, I believe, have a powerful and immediate effect on
investments and growth. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Madam Speaker, the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill and Second
Amendment Bill are procedural pieces of legislation that give effect to the
announcement made by the Minister of Finance in his presentation of the
annual Budget.

The IFP welcomes the various taxation measures that are designed to lower
the compliance costs of business. The IFP expresses its appreciation that
the transfer duty threshold has been raised, particularly in respect of
lower priced properties. However, we feel that the proportionate increase
in the upper limits of the five per cent category is relatively low, taking
into account properties in excess of R330 000.
Current property prices indicate that these values no longer represent the
high range of residential property prices. We believe that a culture of
home ownership should be encouraged, particularly where residential
property normally represents wealth accumulation, often for retirement.

The increase in both primary and secondary rebates by material amounts is
welcomed, as the tax burden on low-income earners will be reduced.

In conclusion, most of these items were adequately dealt with by the hon
Minister of Finance in the Budget Speech. It is therefore pointless
preaching to the converted.

The IFP supports the Bills. I thank you.

Mr K D S DURR: Speaker, the process and the progress of these taxation
Bills have been exemplary, if I may say so.

The enthusiasm of Sars and the Treasury to inform us over days and weeks in
the portfolio committee cannot be faulted and we thank them for that.

The tax laws are complex and last year in this debate the Minister
announced his commitment to a tax rewrite, even though one is aware that
our tax rates and effectiveness are highly rated worldwide.
This year and each year we refine and improve our system, and we have done
so again, but I believe the time has come for a simplification of the whole
process and to begin to think fundamentally de novo about the whole system
of how we tax. Essentially we are reinforcing and improving all the time on
an old tax system.

As Messrs Owen and Harrison write in the Economist, they “... worry that
tax codifiers and tax dodgers are locked in a mutually destructive arms
race”. The best way to fight tax avoidance, Minister, and to promote
compliance is simplicity and low rates. Has the time not come for us to
break out of this mould and think afresh?


Inter alia, I believe that we should be investigating various forms of flat-
rate taxation. The Americans are talking about it. In Russia, Georgia,
Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia, one way or another, they are doing it. Let
us also look at it; let us simplify our tax.


Countries are implementing flat taxes for reasons of cost, compliance,
fairness, simplicity, etc. Even the social democracies of Western Europe,
like Spain and Germany, are looking at flat-rate taxes. It has been found
that repealing progressively high tax rates will not erode the tax base and
the poor are helped on the expenditure side, such as in New Zealand. People
have started working harder as flat-tax rates sharpen the incentive to
work.


The ACDP supports a form of flat-rate tax called TEAL, Total Economic
Activity Levy, that could be levied at a low, low rate, perhaps 0,01% as a
tax on both sides of all financial transactions excluding bonds and guilds,
but there may be other ways of skinning the cat.


The financial institutions and banks would automatically and electronically
collect the tax whenever one of the myriad transactions takes place each
day. Let us modernise and look at the new opportunities the electronic age
has opened also for tax reform. Let us simplify and modernise our tax
system.


I thank you, Minister. I do not know whether I will be addressing this
House again. It is my intention to leave Parliament at the end of next
month. So, I bid all my colleagues and friends in this Parliament adieu. It
has been a great pleasure and an honour for me to serve here. I have been
particularly proud, Madam Speaker, when our President spoke last week to
put SA on the side of the angels. I am proud to have been part of that
whole process and I wish you all well. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam speaker, the MF acknowledges and accepts the Bills
that this Bill serves to amend in regard to section 77. The new rate
structure regarding the acquisition of property is found to be fair and
approved.

Further, the changes regarding personal and company taxes are also found to
be suitably drafted and accepted. In regard to rebates, we find that the
rebates for normal citizens are fair. However, we feel that the rebates for
persons over 65 years of age should be reviewed and reduced to a smaller,
more suitable amount.

Further, stipulations regarding travel allowances and car allowances are
both adequate. Provisions made towards small enterprises are found to be
well devised and shall benefit our economy in the long run.

Our provisions regarding passenger taxes are found to be fair; however, it
is felt that passenger taxes should be bulky in comparison to travel.

Bank charges are happily seeing a decrease. In view of section 75, the MF
has no objection to the provisions made in this Bill, and the Bills these
amendments serve to address and correct.

The MF supports the provisions made regarding deposits towards the supply
of goods or services. Further allocations and restrictions made towards
public entities are found reasonable and a necessity to ensure proper
management and delivery.
Exchange control and tax amnesty have also received much attention and the
MF finds that the application of such provisions would be of great benefit.

Further, no provisions and applications are made regarding the mineral and
petroleum taxes that are respected and found to be necessary. All
amendments have been found to be well devised and in each provision it is
evident that the best interests of the community and our economy is being
catered for.

The MF supports the legislation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B A MNGUNI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and colleagues, this Bill seeks
to effect the tax proposals and other incentives announced by the Minister
in his Budget Speech earlier this year. Otherwise the rest are
consequential technical amendments.

There is, in essence, nothing controversial about this Bill as the
ideological thrust of the tax policy and the economy in general took place
during the Budget debate and to some extent during the budget debates of
different departments.

I would like to highlight just a few clauses from the two Bills that seek
to address economic growth and job creation. Clause 1 is the amendment of
section 2 of the Transfer Duty Act of 1949. This clause increases the
threshold of value of fixed property that is exempted from transfer duty
from R150 000 to R190 000 and above this threshold, that is R190 000 up to
R330 000, one would expect to pay transfer duty of five per cent, and on
more than R330 000, a transfer duty of eight per cent.

The objective of this amendment is to enable people to have houses,
especially first-time owners, and to encourage property investment. We are
all aware of the booming property market and the price of houses, which
makes an own home unaffordable for an average income earner.

The purchase of residential property has a knock-on effect on many other
issues that impact positively on our economy and the socioeconomic issues
in general.

Clause 3 of the Bill deals with the increase of primary and secondary
rebates as the hon Vezi has said, which in effect increases the primary
rebate from R5 800 to R6 300, and increases the secondary rebate for
persons who are 65 years old and over from R3 200 to R4 500.

The tax assured is effectively increased to R35 000 for persons who are
under 65 years of age and R60 000 for persons who are 65 years old and
older.

This will increase the propensity of consumers to save, which in return, to
put it in textbook economics terms, will improve the resilience of the
economy to external shocks and promote economic growth and job creation and
all other minimal effects which at the end of the day bring about a better
life for all.

The amendment of section 12(e) of the Income Tax Act of 1962 gives effect
to the proposal by the Minister to expand categories of companies that
should qualify for small business relief incentives. These companies
include the services sector, which is one of the prominent growing sectors
as far as small business is concerned.

Small businesses, which are providing personal services, will be eligible
for the relief if the company or the close corporation maintains at least
four full-time employees for the operations of the business. On the other
hand, this enhances compliance of the professions engaged in personal
services, as they will no longer be able to create shell companies in order
to avoid PAYE.

Small businesses are further promoted by the introduction of accelerated
depreciation over a three-year period. This is in addition to an immediate
100% write off of an incentive that is in place in respect of manufacturing
assets. The turnover limit for small businesses is also further increased
from R5 to R6 million.

To further promote economic growth and job creation clause 24 seeks to
increase the skills development levy threshold from R250 000 to R500 000
and does away with qualifying requirements, which state that the business
should not have employees liable for PAYE in order to qualify. This is
another relief for small business corporations and reduces compliance
costs.

Everybody is increasingly becoming aware that small businesses are the key
drivers of economic growth in most developed countries and they provide
valuable job opportunities. I would further wish to remark that David
Newton, Joseph Stiglitz and other tax experts refer to tax structure and
the development of the economy that you need to review your tax system, but
that is dependent actually on your tax structure and the development of the
economy, because developing economies cannot put in tax systems that would,
at the end of the day, see them lose revenue because they need that revenue
for economic growth and to address other social ills in order for them to
be on par with developed countries.

On behalf of the committee I would further like to wish hon Kent Durr well,
after his life in Parliament. I hope he has found more challenging jobs and
that his life will improve. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, may I express our
appreciation to the various speakers from the parties in the House for
supporting the broad thrust of the Bill.

Of course, the debate is not about the Bill. The debate is about tax
policy, about which hon Davidson is very topical again, certainly in the
light of the impasse which has arisen in the context of the European Union.

What do you allocate, who do you take from and how do you exercise those
choices? So, Tony Blair arguing for the maintenance of the rebate that the
UK has against the common agricultural policy, which has kept French
farmers happy, comes back to exactly the same issue. If you want to
exercise those choices and spending you must be able to exercise the
choices on how you tax.

And then in dealing with the issues again we must be clear about the
available sources of taxation. Now the flat taxes appear very topical, but
they stand apart from other issues. What none of the proponents of flat
taxes argue is that roughly a third of European Union taxes are social
security taxes, which we don’t have in this country. So if you want to
compare then it’s important that you compare the totality of our
contribution with the totality of contributions in other countries. So if
we add in the social security taxes in Europe then the position looks very,
very different.

Also, hon Davidson, we’d covered the effective tax rate and again in the
context of Europe, as against the KPMG arguments in South Africa, in almost
all of the countries where they look at the situation there is tax and
dividends in place.

We are saying take out the secondary tax on companies, which is actually
not a tax on companies. It’s a tax on dividends at source. If you do that
then clearly the picture looks very different.

But what we need to understand about tax policy in the context of fiscal
policy is what South Africa is. What South Africa is, is a country very
deeply divided between rich and poor and if we believe that we can adopt
exactly the same tax policies as you can in a country that has a strong
across-the-board endowment in education, strong across-the-board endowment
in skill, strong across-the-board wealth quite evenly spread in the
country, then you will make a fundamental mistake in this country.

So that balance between how we tax and how we spend is a fine line that you
have to walk. But in walking that line we have to be able to come back to
this House and debate these issues. But we can have a debate on fiscal
policy outside of the debate of this.

I think that Parliament should, in fact, take the opportunities of quiet
afternoons like this and not look at the technicalities of a piece of
legislation like this, but try and understand where the decisions that we
take in this House will take the country this year, next year, over the
five years and over the ten years, and how we find ourselves in South
Africa.

Those are the kinds of issues that I believe belong on the Order Paper of
this House. But, again, let me express my sincere appreciation to everybody
and allow me to single out the hon Kent Durr. Bonne chance! [Good luck!] We
wish you everything of the best as you have your medical treatment and for
your life ahead. Thanks so much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.


                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second ti.e.


                     TAXATION LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.
Bill read a second time.

           CONSIDERATION OF RECOMMENDATION OF MR MTHOBELI M ZOKWE
                   AS COUNCILLOR TO FILL VACANCY ON ICASA

Question put: That Mr Mthobeli M Zokwe be recommended for appointment as
councillor to fill a vacancy on the Council of the Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa.


Declarations of vote:


Ms S C VOS (IFP): Chairperson, it is common knowledge that the Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa lacks the capacity both in human
and economic resources to function properly in terms of its legislated
mandate. Icasa is known to be a weak and underfunded regulator. This is one
of the reasons why South Africa battled to attract international investment
in the second national operator and competition in the telecommunications
industry has been critically delayed while Telkom tariffs and profits have
soared.

Cabinet is tomorrow discussing, again, a Bill to amend the ICASA Act,
precisely in an attempt to rectify this problem. The ICT industry is
recognised as a fundamental economic driver. It is therefore astounding and
extremely disappointing that the ANC majority in the Portfolio Committee on
Communications in the NA decided, in the opinion of the IFP, to ignore the
ICASA Act and proposed to Parliament and the President that a person wholly
unqualified for the position be appointed as a councillor of ICASA.

The ANC has chosen, yet again, to flex its majority muscle and totally
ignore opposition pleas for skills to take precedence over the ANC’s
repeated quest to provide jobs for pals. In terms of the law, the ICASA
Council must, when viewed collectively, be comprised of persons who possess
a various range of skills. Mr Zokwe does not possess those skills. A former
ANC and COSAW organiser, he is not in a position to do the job that we want
him to do.

The IFP regrets to so publicly discuss Mr Zokwe, but believes Parliament
and the Portfolio Committee on Communications cannot continue to pack the
ICASA Council and the SABC Board, for that matter, with, for the most part,
party-political favourites while rejecting the kind of critical skills
available and required by law. A crippled ICASA is going to be disastrous
for South Africa’s economy. The Minister here knows it full well, as do
consumers in general.

Experience has shown us that many excellent and highly skilled candidates
are short-listed for the sake of form but are continually thrust aside and
never seriously considered due to their lack of political legitimacy or in
many cases simply because they are white and not black. This cannot go on!
Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, one of the things wrong with
South Africa is the fact that the ANC feels that it has to control every
single section of our South African life. [Interjections.] Everything in
this country has to be controlled by the ANC. [Interjections.] Whether it’s
the Defence Force, whether it’s the opposition political parties, whether
it’s the representation to the Pan-African Parliament, whether it’s the
judiciary, whether it’s - you name it – the ANC feels that it has to be in
control of it. That is a very bad aspect of a democratic country.
[Interjections.] What we have today is a manifestation of exactly the same
thing.

The person being proposed here for appointment today is, no doubt, a very
nice person. I am sure there is nothing wrong with him as a person. But the
fact is he is by far not the best person who could be put on this board,
and the members who served on the selection committee will know that.

I hope they feel quietly ashamed of themselves, because what is happening
in this country is that instead of appointing the best on or going out and
looking for the best, what we do is we appoint the people who are going to
be politically reliable. And I think you should be ashamed of yourselves.
We are not going to help you in this. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mnu M S KHUMALO (ACDP): Sihlalo, siyabonga. I-ACDP ayimeseki uMnu M Zokwe.
Isimo esikhona manje seziteshi zemisakazo yomphakathi asisihle uma ubona
iziteshi zemisakazo yomphakathi yezenkolo eziba senkingeni ngayo. Ngaleyo
ndlela i-ACDP ibingathanda ukuthi umuntu onjengalo ofakwa lapha kube umuntu
ozoba nozwela kulezo zimo ezinjengalezo. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Zulu
declaration of vote follows.)

[Mr M S KHUMALO (ACDP): Chairperson, we thank you. The ACDP does not
support Mr M Zokwe. The present conditions at the religious community radio
stations are causing problems. The ACDP wishes that this position be filled
by a person who would have sympathy for and address these conditions. Thank
you.]

Mr M K LEKGORO (ANC): Chairperson, the hon member from the ACDP, who has
just spoken before me, doesn’t even know what we are talking about. He just
played it by ear. [Laughter.]

In the process of appointing a councillor, people who are short-listed and
interviewed go there at our invitation. To stoop so low as to vilify them
in the media because the selection didn’t go your way, I think, is
undermining this process.

The actual point that the hon Suzanne Vos made in her press statement was
that we continue to thrust aside candidates because they lack political
legitimacy and simply because they are white not black. That is the actual
contestation. [Interjections.] You see, the candidate we selected is black
and has an ANC background.

Now, according to this kind of thinking, if you have an ANC background
these things are too sophisticated for you and you don’t know them, and all
you know is how to conduct a revolution. That is the thinking they want to
thrust upon us. [Interjections.] And we refuse to be led into that kind of
thinking.

We considered all candidates and we are not prepared to vilify the other
candidates that were not selected for any reason. We are just saying that
we had a selection and preferred this candidate who has the actual
qualifications for the job, who has been in this industry. And as a result,
Chairperson, we ask you to request the House to accept our selection. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order! Are there any
objections to the House recommending the appointment of Mr Mthobeli M
Zokwe? I hear there are objections. [Interjections.] Order! Give the Chair
an opportunity. [Interjections.] I think the ayes have it.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 172: Abram, S; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M
   N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Benjamin, J; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F;
   Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B ; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W;
   Carrim, Y I; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J
   P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W;
   Dlali, D M; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza,
   N E ; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M
   M; Hendricks, L B; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L ; Jeffery, J H;
   Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kalako, M U; Khoarai, L P;
   Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W;
   Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lishivha, T E; Maake, J J; Mabe, L
   L; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E
   ; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Malahlela,
   M J; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Manuel, T A; Martins, B A D; Maserumule,
   F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M;
   Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
   Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Meruti, M V; Mfundisi, IS;
   Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S;
   Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M
   R; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E;
   Montsitsi, S D; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Moss, M I; Mpaka, H M;
   Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Ndou, R S; Nel, A
   C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N
   J; Nhleko, N P ; Nhlengethwa, D G; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Ntombela, S H;
   Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M
   D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pandor,
   G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B
   A; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
   Ramphele, T D H; Reid, L R R; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D;
   Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M; September , C C; Siboza, S ; Sikakane, M R;
   Smith , V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
   Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J;
   Tshivhase, T J; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van
   Wyk, Annelizé; Wang, Y; Yengeni, L L; Zulu, B Z.
   NOES - 54: Bekker, H J; Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, C-S;
   Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Dhlamini, B W;
   Ditshetelo, P H K; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Farrow, S B;
   Gibson, D H M; Green, L M; Haasbroek, S F; Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K;
   Kalyan, S V; Khumalo, M S; Labuschagne, L B; Masango, S J; Mdlalose, M M;
   Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J; Mnyandu, B J; Morgan, G R; Mpontshane, A M;
   Ndlovu, V B; Nel, A H; Ngema, M V; Ntuli, R S; Rabie, P J; Roopnarain, U;
   Sayedali-Shah, M R; Seaton, S A; Selfe, J; Seremane, W J; Sibuyana, M W;
   Skosana, M B; Smuts, M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Van
   der Merwe, J H; van der Walt, D; van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Vezi, T
   E; Vos, S C; Woods, G G; Zikalala, C N Z.


   ABSTAIN-7: Bici, J; Godi, N T; Likotsi, M T; Nkabinde, N C; Pheko, S E M;
   Sigcau, Sylvia N; Stephens, M.

Question agreed to.

Mr Mthobeli M Zokwe accordingly recommended for appointment as councillor
to fill a vacancy on the Council of the Independent Communications
Authority of South Africa.

 MEASURES TO RELIEVE OVERCROWDING OF PRISONS THAT WILL NEITHER UNDERMINE THE
  CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM, SHORT-CHANGE THE VICTIMS OF CRIME NOR TRIVIALISE
                    THE DETERRENT EFFECT OF IMPRISONMENT

                          (Subject for Discussion)
Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, Parliament has on several occasions this year
debated the unacceptably overcrowded conditions in our prisons. Despite
this it is worth repeating the reality of what it means to be imprisoned in
South Africa.

If any hon member here were to be sentenced to imprisonment you would, in
all likelihood, be confined for between 15 and 20 hours of every day to a
cell housing at least three times the number of inmates it was designed
for. There would not be enough staff to supervise you properly, which means
that for most of the day, you would be at the mercy of the gangs that
infest our correctional centres.

There is an 80% chance that you would be assaulted and sexually abused by
gang members and forced to participate in their activities. Again, because
of the shortage of staff, rehabilitation programmes would be limited and
could not cater for the large numbers of inmates.

The result of this, Chairperson, is that many inmates emerge from prison
more criminalised than when they were admitted, and that far from prisons
correcting and rehabilitating their offenders, as they are supposed to do,
it very often becomes a university of crime. To overcome these challenges
it is plain that the levels of prison overcrowding must be relieved.

Now during his Freedom Day imbizo in George, the Minister announced
measures that in his words “would impact positively on corrections”. He
said that he would be announcing details of remission of sentence for
“certain carefully identified categories of offenders” while assuring the
audience of this government’s zero-tolerance approach to crime.

On 31 May the Minister elaborated and told the NA that “anyone who presents
a danger to society will not be released under the terms of the envisaged
remission of sentence”. However, on the very next day at Pollsmoor prison,
bright and early in the morning, the Minister said that, “a maximum of six
months special remission of sentence will be granted to all sentenced
offenders, probationers, parolees and day parolees irrespective of the
crime category”. A further 14 months of remission was granted to certain
other offenders.

Now I don’t doubt the Minister’s sincerity in dealing with prison
overcrowding in this way, but to give a blanket across-the-board remission
of sentence to all sentenced offenders irrespective of their crime
category, as he did, sends out entirely the wrong message. It undermines
the deterrent effect of imprisonment, it interferes with judicial
independence and it short-changes the victims of crime. It stands to reason
then that another more creative solution must be sought to solve this
problem.

Many individuals and institutions, including the Cabinet cluster, the
Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons, the National Council for Correctional
Services, eminent judges, our portfolio committee and NGOs, give this
problem their continuous attention and yet the prison overcrowding
persists. It is caused by the operation of minimum sentences, by the
depressingly high rate of repeat offending and by the predilection of
magistrates and judges to impose prison sentences for far too many
offences.

It is caused by bail being imposed on awaiting-trial detainees at levels
magistrates know they can’t afford. It is caused by delays in the judicial
processes that lead to detainees languishing in prisons for months and even
years. It is even caused by the imprisonment of people who should be
accommodated elsewhere, children in conflict with the law and the mentally
disabled, to name but two examples.

There are in our view a number of interrelated measures that could/should
be applied to relieve prison overcrowding responsibly. The first challenge
is the awaiting-trial detainees, some 51 000 of them, costing us R5,8
million per day to accommodate.

While the Criminal Procedure Act has been amended in various ways to allow
the review of bail conditions and the conversion of bail to correctional
supervision, the courts have tended not to be interested in this option.
There were 3 793 applications brought to court, of which only 793 were
granted.

I believe that Parliament needs to re-examine the relevant provisions of
the Criminal Procedure Act dealing with bail, something that the
correctional services and justice committees must do together. But the
courts will be unlikely to release ATDs on correctional supervision unless
they are satisfied that the accused will not abscond. That requires a
community supervision capability the department currently does not possess.

At the moment a mere six per cent of the budget of the department is
allocated to community corrections. One effect of that is that many
community corrections officers shoulder impossibly high case loads and that
inevitably means that some people on correctional supervision abscond and
that that unfortunately undermines confidence in the system. Add to this
the fact that tracking devices which inmates released on correctional
supervision are obliged to wear are in short supply and one can understand
the cynicism with which the judiciary view this.

Dealing with the problems of awaiting-trial detainees, however, is only
part of the solution to prison overcrowding. We must naturally also deal
with those convicted by the courts. The answer to this is, in appropriate
circumstances, to divert people and particularly first offenders away from
prison except as a last resort.

Nicro in particular has championed diversion but it is an NGO whose
resources are limited. Moreover diversion is limited to young offenders and
the result is that relatively few offenders are diverted. Secondly, we
should release people on parole as soon as they are effectively
rehabilitated. Again, both these strategies rely on the Department of
Correctional Services putting resources behind the system of community
corrections.

Critically, both these options depend on a partnership between the DCS and
the judiciary. And the Minister announced only this morning that he was
involved in discussions with the judiciary and it would be interesting to
hear from him what the results of those discussions are.

Unless the department is prepared to take community corrections seriously
and to put the necessary resources behind it, community corrections
programmes will not be seen by the judiciary and by the     public at large
as a punishment with enough deterrent effect to serve as an alternative to
imprisonment. To be an effective deterrent sentences of community
corrections must have three elements: they must bring home to the offender
the wrongfulness of the crime, they must involve those sentenced in major
inconvenience, and those sentenced must as part of their sentence
contribute directly back to society.

The Minister is aware that we have proposed a system whereby offenders
work. We have proposed an extension to the system designed both to serve as
a deterrent and to keep appropriate people in conflict with the law out of
prison. In essence, this system could involve performing community service
as part of an appropriate overall sentence, as part of which he or she is
obliged to work cleaning streets, weeding graveyards, clearing alien
vegetation, removing pollution from our beaches and rivers every weekend
for years on end until the sentence is served. These steps are designed to
relieve prison overcrowding.

This is essential if those who are appropriately sentenced to imprisonment
by courts, because of the seriousness of their crimes or because of their
previous convictions, are to be effectively rehabilitated, because you
cannot rehabilitate people in the context of a severely overcrowded prison.

They are also designed to ensure that those who deserve a second chance can
be given it without undermining the criminal justice system or short-
changing the victims of crime. We hope the government will take this into
account. [Applause.]

Mnu N B FIHLA: Mhlalingaphambili, okokuqala masilungise le ndawo yokuba
kusithiwa uMphathiswa wathi uxolelo luza kunikwa onke amabanjwa. Ndicinga
ukuba ilungu eli libekekileyo kufuneka likhe liye kuxilongwa iindlebe ezi
ukwenzela ukuba lize kukwazi ukumamela kakuhle.

UMphathiswa zange ayithethe loo nto, koko wathi la mabanjwa abanjelwe
ulwaphulo-mthetho oluxhomis’amehlo bona baza kubekelwa ecaleni. Kuza
kushukuxwa imeko yabantu ababandakanyeka kulwaphulo-mthetho olungaxhomisi
mehlo. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr N B FIHLA: Chairperson, let me put straight the point made that the
Minister has given parole to all prisoners. I think the hon member must
open his ears in order to listen carefully.

The Minister never uttered that statement, but said that those criminals
with serious crimes will be placed separately. Discussions will be around
the issue of criminals who have committed minor crimes.]

So, what I can tell hon Selfe is that I believe him, but most others will
not.

When the previous Pope talked about overcrowding, he stressed that inhuman
conditions do not succeed in addressing the problem of crime, but rather
deepen it. Where such conditions exist, there is an urgent necessity to
reform the system. According to the Human Rights Watch World Report,
overcrowding is prevalent in almost every country and it is the root of
many of the worst abuses.

In South Africa, overcrowding is frequently cited as the most serious
problem facing the prison system. In many instances, overcrowding has led
to a lack of basic facilities, such as beds, showers and toilets. There are
about 74 000 more inmates in the system than the prisons are designed to
handle. The main problem of overcrowding is that there are too many
awaiting-trial detainees in the Correctional Services system, and many of
them are there because they cannot afford bail.

The implications of these are not confined to the costs to the fiscus of
housing and feeding all prisoners. Family life is disrupted and there is a
litany of human rights that are being infringed. Problems resulting from
overcrowding are not only related to a physical lack of space, there are
also profound psychological and social problems.

According to the Department of Correctional Services, one of the effects of
overcrowding is that it causes tension, hostility and aggression in both
officials and fellow inmates. In some instances, especially where juveniles
are concerned, such conditions contribute to their criminalisation and
brutalisation.
The situation is further complicated by the fact that the adult population
is not always separated from juvenile offenders. Juveniles are exposed to
serious criminals and, because of their age and vulnerability, can leave
prison being more of a threat to society than when they first went in. It
is not just that, as a society, we are failing to protect those children
who are often the most vulnerable and marginalised in our society, it is
also a problem from the perspective that the situation is perpetuating the
cycle of crime and, indeed, in many cases making it worse.

Mhlalingaphambili, iSebe leeNkonzo zoLuleko liye lenza into entsha
engazange khe yenziwe ngaphambili ngabakhe balawula, yokutsolisa ukuba
ingxaki yokuxinana kwamabanjwa entolongweni ayinakho ukuba ingasonjululwa
leli sebe lilodwa. Ngoko kufanele ukuba iSebe lezoBulungisa libe nenxaxheba
eliyithathayo. Eli sebe lithe ke lenza ukuba kudityanwe liSebe
lezoBulungisa, elezoKhuselo noKhuseleko kunye neleeNkonzo zoLuleko ukuze
kusonjululwe le ngxaki ngokuthi la masebe aseke inkqubo yezobulungisa
ehlangeneyo.

Le ntlanganisela yoxolo nozinzo [peace and stability cluster] iluthathela
kuyo uxanduva lokuqinisekisa ukuba xa umntu ebanjwa, kubakho umtshutshisi
kunye negosa lezoluleko bahlole loo mntu ukuba ukufanele na ukuba agwetywe
ahlale entolongweni, okanye abe phantsi kweliso lezoluleko engekho
ntolongweni, okanye abuyiselwe eluntwini kusini na.

This is what is being done presently by this system. [Le yinto eyenziwayo
njengokuba sithetha nje yile nkqubo]. Inkqubo eyilwayo endakhe ndayibona
phaya kwiinkundla zamatyala ezaziwa njenge-New Law Courts eBhayi iyanceda
kakhulu, kwaye iyasetyenziswa nakwezinye iintolongo ngoku, yokuba la masebe
adibane ancedisane ngokubhekisele kulo mbandela woxinano.

Nangona lo mba woxinano ingumba onzima nakumazwe aseNtshona, kodwa akhona
amazwe aphumelelayo ukuwusombulula, njengelase-New Zealand nawase-
Scandinavia. Wona awusombulula ngokuthi athi umntu othe wenza ityalana
elingena buzaza akukho mfuneko yakumsa entolongweni. Umntu othi asiwe
entolongweni ngowenze ityala elinobuzaza. Yiloo nto eqhubekayo kula mazwe
ndiwakhankanye ngentla apha, nto leyo eyenza ukuba angabi nayo le ngxaki
yokuxinana kwababanjwa.

Kanti kwamanye amazwe, ngenxa yokuba inkqubo yobulungisa abayisebenzisayo
iyile injongo yayo ikukohlwaya okanye ukuphindezela, abakwazi ukuba
bangaliluleka ibanjwa balenze liguquke kwisimo salo xa lisentolongweni. Loo
nto yenza ukuba umntu aluthiye uluntu ngokubanzi, aphinde enze elinye
ityala ukuphuma kwakhe entolongweni. Le nto yenzeka kumazwe amaninzi,
kuqukwa noMzantsi Afrika.

Kodwa sizama ukusuka koloohlobo lunjalo lobulungisa, bempindezelo.
Sisebenzela ukuba alungiswe isimilo xa esentolongweni umntu, ukwenzela
ukuba azisole ngento ayenzileyo abuye abe ngumntu.
Sikwazama nokuba sibe namaphulo esiwaqhubayo ukwenzela ukuba uluntu luphela
luyiqonde into yokuba abantu abasentolongweni bayaphinda babuye baze
kuhlala phakathi kwethu, kwaye ukuba asibenzi bazive bemkelekile phakathi
kwethu baye basizonde siluluntu. Ngoko uluntu lunobutyala ngokungabamkeli
nangokungabaniki elinye ithuba abantu abavela entolongweni.

Kufuneka sazi ukuba umntu xa enze isono uluntu lunakho ukuba lumbonise
ukungalungi kwesenzo sakhe, adityaniswe nexhoba, kuxoxwe kuboniswane.
Kwenzeka loo nto koo-New Zealand. Kubakho inkomfa kuxoxwe malunga nesenzo
eso solwaphulo-mthetho, kudityaniswe umoni nexhoba elo, ukwenzela ukuba
akhululwe umoni angabisaya entolongweni. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Chairperson, the Department of Correctional Services has done something
that has never been done before and that is to state that this department
alone cannot solve the overcrowding in prisons. The cooperation between
this department, the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
and the Department of Safety and Security has made it possible to solve
this problem by formulating an integrated justice system.

The peace and stability cluster has taken the responsibility of ensuring
that when someone is charged there must be a prosecutor and a correctional
services official present to investigate the sentence. Where possible the
accused can be put in prison or under correctional supervision outside
prison or be brought back to society.

This is what is presently being done by this system.  A system has been
initiated at the New Law Courts in Port Elizabeth that brings relief and
has been adopted by other prisons; the departments must work together to
fight overcrowding.

Although this is a problem in the western countries, there are countries
like New Zealand and Scandinavia that succeeded in solving this problem.
They solved these problems by saying there is no need to detain someone who
has committed a minor crime. A person who is put in prison is the one who
has committed a serious crime. This is the situation in the aforementioned
countries that are trying to solve prison overcrowding.

Nevertheless, in other countries, because of the integrated justice system
their punishment and revenge system cannot rehabilitate prisoners. This
approach makes the prisoners detest society and they commit crimes again.
This happens in many countries, including South Africa.

But we are trying to move away from that system of justice, that of
revenge. We work towards rehabilitating measures for prisoners, in order
for them to feel guilty and to become human beings again.

We are putting projects in place so that people can become aware of the
fact that those in prison do come back and join society and if they are not
accepted they will dislike the community. Therefore, society will be guilty
of not accepting them and not giving them a second chance.

We must understand that when a person has sinned against society, making
him face the victim can show him how unacceptable his offence is, and
discussions can start from there. That is what is happening in countries
like New Zealand. A meeting is held for discussion about the crime
committed, and the accused will meet the victim so that the accused can be
released without being imprisoned.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, hon members, I agree with what both members
have said. There are major problems; we’ve got to look at change. I am not
going to be able to repeat everything that has been said, because I only
have a very short period of time. The fact of the matter is that we all
understand that South African prisons are grossly overcrowded; we know the
problems are in the main owing to the fact that the justice delivery system
has collapsed. We’ve said it before, we are going to say it again, and that
is the area that’s got to be looked at.

I agree that we need to meet together, but not only the Departments of
Safety and Security, Justice and Correctional Services, but also Social
Development, because Social Development also plays a role here with the
child facilities. I would go so far as to say that even from an educational
point of view we need to look at it, because education comes into it as
well.

We agree that there needs to be alternative sentencing. Community
corrections and restorative justice are the answers. There are no two ways
about that, but we’ve got to start doing it, not just talk about it. There
have to be shorter sentences for minor crimes. In fact, we’ve even talked
about the decriminalisation of such things as dagga possession over the
years. It is time we genuinely started looking at those sorts of
alternatives or proposals, rather than just looking at what we can do.

We also believe - the IFP has always maintained this, and I support Mr
Selfe in this - that prisoners should work. I believe that there is a far
better morale in the prisons where prisoners are kept busy. We need to make
sure that they are kept busy in such a way that they learn life skills.

I have always maintained, and I have advocated this for years, that we
should be changing our prisons into those sorts of institutions that are
manufacturing goods, that are industrialised, or that engage in farming;
then those people can become rehabilitated a great deal quicker. They will
learn the skills that will help them to be released earlier, that will
enable them to be put back on the streets, into society, where they can
again become effective members of society.

We also really need to see to it that there is a change in the public
perception of people that have been rehabilitated and taken back. We keep
on talking about what needs to be done, but we’ve got to do something about
getting the communities to accept the people that have now been released
and brought back into the communities. Until we do that we are actually
going to achieve nothing.

We, ourselves, have got a job to do, and I don’t believe that it is
something that only one person, one organisation or one group can do. It is
something that we collectively have to do to ensure that when our people
are released they go back into society rehabilitated. The only way we are
going to do that is by changing the structures of our prison systems in
this country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Chair, hon Minister, hon members, it is trite that
punishment must fit both the crime and the criminal. While expressing the
community’s abhorrence of the deed, punishment must never be vengeful, lest
the distinction between the actions of the state and those of the criminals
become a mere legal technicality.

The deterrent effect of imprisonment is more apparent than real. If it were
not so, the number of repeat offenders in our jails would be minimal and
not the severe problem that it actually is. The Department of Correctional
Services’ paradigm shift to rehabilitation must thus be applauded.

Alternatives to incarceration urgently require further attention. Such
programmes are part of the mix of factors that have allowed New York City
to reduce crime and prison populations, while helping individuals and
communities throughout that city.

Offenders are sentenced to programmes where they receive, under strict
supervision, treatment, education and employment training in the community.
In addition, restorative justice, in which offenders take responsibility
for their crime and for making amends to the victim, has proved very
successful in Europe. An element of community payback normally forms part
of all sentences for non-violent crimes. Victim participation is maximised,
thus meeting their needs in a constructive way.

It follows that there must be greater public, community, and business
sector involvement in criminal justice generally. Local authorities and
communities must become involved in identifying how offenders can pay them
back and make amends.

Decisions about young offenders should be made in a forum such as the youth
courts in Germany and Italy that prioritise problem solving over
punishment. Community-based and residential incarceration alternatives
under strict supervision better serve the needs of often highly damaged
young people.

Furthermore, gender-specific community programmes, which meet women’s needs
by creating local support and rehabilitation centres, should be developed.
Prisons must be used as a genuine last resort, but at the moment they are
virtually our only resort. Crime’s true deterrent is a functional, caring
society not a retributive penal system with forced labour. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr Y WANG: Chairperson, Minister, hon members, the Minister has indicated
and assured us that this ongoing release of prisoners is a selected and
responsible release. We in the ID support policies that are directed at
reforming and rehabilitating prisoners. This is progressive and humane, and
what is expected from a country that subscribes to the promotion of a firm
human rights culture. This cannot be viewed as undermining the criminal
justice system or the rights of the victims concerned.

In any event, the cost of keeping prisoners locked up in prison amounts to
roughly R42 000 per person per year. That should be seen as a bonus that we
are saving, but not as the main reason why we are releasing them.
Personally, I think there should be more training facilities involving the
prisoners, not that this is the job of Correctional Services, and the fact
that especially for ... [Time expired.]

Mr M J ELLIS: I rise on a point of order. According to the speakers’ list
on my screen, the hon Chikunga has no speaking time whatsoever, so
therefore I must ask that you rule that her speaking time has expired.
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Yes, the IT has let Mr Ellis down
again this afternoon, but the hard copy gives you 10 minutes. Please
proceed, hon member.

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Chairperson, hon Minister, members of Parliament,
comrades, ladies and gentlemen, our Portfolio Committee on Correctional
Services, whose members include the DA, adopted a report on recommendations
towards addressing the problem of overcrowding in our prisons in May this
year. That report was subsequently tabled before Parliament.

Less than a month down the line, the hon Mr Selfe of the DA, has moved a
motion that we must debate the issue of overcrowding because he now has
better recommendations, which he did not have then.
Listen very carefully: He does not add any new recommendation, which is not
covered in the report. This happened even before we, as the portfolio
committee, we got an opportunity to monitor whether the department is
implementing the recommendations that were tabled before Parliament.

This is undermining the House, as well as the people of South Africa who
honestly believe that we take our work seriously. What he does best is
distort the whole issue of remission of sentences. The issue of remission
of sentences should be understood in its correct context, not the
hysterically confusing context perpetuated by the DA. [Applause.]

Our Constitution, in section 84(2)(j), outlines the granting of special
remissions of sentence to sentenced offenders by entrusting the President
with powers to pardon or reprieve offenders, and remit any fines, penalties
and forfeitures.

Granting remissions of sentence for offenders is not a new occurrence in
our penal history. In South Africa, in the period between 30 March 1990 and
30 June 1994, 94 128 prisoners were granted special remissions. Goodwill
and “bursting” remissions of sentence were also granted in December 1990,
April 1991 and January 1993.

According to Judge Fagan, and I quote: “Granting amnesty is not new,
previous governments have frequently authorised it.” He further states that
there have been 19 amnesties between April 1984 and October 2000. According
to the DA it was correct for the apartheid government to grant remissions.
It becomes wrong when the legitimate people’s government does it within the
most conducive, correct, fair and democratic environment. [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

As we can see, the granting of remissions is not a new approach  in  dealing
with corrections  in  this  country.  In  fact,  it  is  in  line  with  our
rehabilitation approach. Any attempt  to  think  of  special  remissions  of
sentence as the government being soft on  crime,  would  be  misleading  and
extremely incorrect.

Any attempt to regard special remission as an easy solution to reducing
overcrowding in our prisons, would equally be incorrect and misleading. The
Constitution does not suggest that remissions be granted in order to reduce
overcrowding. But the Constitution grants the President powers,
irrespective of overcrowding or undercrowding in prisons.

The truth is that granting remissions of sentence to certain categories of
offenders is in line with the policy of the Department of Correctional
Services, which is to correct offending behaviour and development. The aim
is to employ a humane approach when dealing with corrections in this
country. It is an attempt to recognise that people can change, and that a
second chance is sometimes the catalyst that people require to become
functionally productive and responsible citizens. [Applause.]

The planning and the detailed process which led to the granting of special
remissions, as was announced by hon Minister Balfour, took into
consideration, among other things, the following factors: the powers and
functions as outlined in our Constitution with regard to pardoning or
reprieving offenders; the granting of remissions of sentence to offenders,
which is an international practice exercised in most democracies, DA; the
adoption of the White Paper on Corrections in South Africa, and entering
our second decade of democracy with the objectives of building on and
strengthening the achievements of our first ten years of democracy; a
continued zero tolerance towards aggressive, firearm-related, sexual and
drug-related crimes - hence these were excluded from remissions of
sentence; public interest and concern, and integrity of the public system;
the safety and security of the public; the interests of victims of crime;
repeat offending by those who gain from the remissions of sentence. All
these factors were taken into serious consideration.

The DA and its allies may perceive this as another instance of miscarriage
of justice, as it says. Yet, how does one measure the success of
rehabilitating individuals, if not by ensuring that they are given another
chance to prove their worth to society? History is littered with people who
were considered as society’s rejects or terrorists. And when given the
opportunity to prove themselves, they did so outstandingly.

We are not for one minute suggesting that all offenders are necessarily
good citizens, and that all can be rehabilitated. There will always be
those in society who are inherently evil, who will seek to cause
destruction wherever they go. Obviously, in these cases there will be no
second chances. We know this and can never overlook it, as we responsibly
execute our duties as the ANC-led government.

Those who have been chosen as the recipients of special remissions were
those in whom rehabilitative qualities where found, those who could turn
their lives around, and those who have expressed remorse for the crimes
they have committed.

No offender who committed aggressive crimes has been considered for special
remission of sentence. We call on all families and communities of the
offenders to help us ensure that those who have been released are assisted
and helped in their reintegration. This is the message we expect from all
responsible public representatives ... [Applause.] ... not a message that
says, isolate and push them to re-offend. This is a regrettable and
irresponsible message, to say the least.

Those released will also be monitored closely by the criminal justice
system, and if there is any deviance in behaviour, we will definitely
ensure that the law and the Department of Correctional Services reverse
their decisions.

Mass release of dangerous offenders into our communities is definitely not
the approach of the department or government. Communities need to
understand this in all seriousness. People who alarm communities with talk
that the government cares neither for victims of crime nor their families
are simply causing hysteria and being untruthful.

The communities should always be assured that the correctional services in
this country is there to ensure their safety. We will ensure their safety
but, also, we will not adopt a policy of locking up offenders and throwing
away the key. We are one of the most respected democracies in the global
arena, and the way we treat our offenders says more about the kind of
people we are. We are a government that will care for all in our society.

Our overcrowded prisons are indeed an inhumane situation in the making, yet
we will persevere in ensuring that our rehabilitation programmes are
adhered to, that the communities and the victims acknowledge that our
correctional system offers the offenders a chance to take responsibility
for their actions, and that when necessary we will ensure complete
incarceration of those in our society, who do not demonstrate an ounce of
humanness.

In conclusion, the DA is opposed to granting remissions of sentence,
because the overwhelming majority that benefit from it, are our black
people in general and women and children in particular, whose future is
still in the making. [Interjections.]
The DA racist approach is always naked and clear. If it hopes to use
remission for election campaigns . . .

... ishaye phansi kwashunqa uthuli [... that will never happen].

In fact, it must be joking. People know it is an opportunistic approach
that has no policy direction. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, I am sure there are many members
who, following the Minister’s statement in this House on May 31, believed
that serious offenders would receive no remission of sentence. This,
however, does not appear to be the case.

In the media release on 1 June 2005, and in response to my parliamentary
question, hon Minister, you indicated by implication that six months’
remission would be given across the board to all crime categories. It is
only the further 14 months’ remission that will not apply to certain
serious crime categories. This the ACDP clearly cannot support.


The ACDP shares the view that the solution to prison overcrowding lies
firstly in building more facilities; secondly, in addressing the large
numbers of awaiting-trial prisoners; and thirdly, in applying restorative
justice principles, including the payment of restitution to the victims of
crime.

Finally, the ACDP has consistently supported the concept of productive
prison labour, including the usage of such labour to assist needy
communities. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, al die partye kom, en die lede kom, én
hulle sê dat daar weggedoen moet word met die verhoorafwagtendes – die 51
000 wat in ons tronke is – en dat dit een van die redes en maniere is om
die probleem op te los.

Die VF Plus stem saam daarmee, maar die vraag is: Hoe word dít gedoen? En
ek wil vandag vir u sê dit is die ANC se skuld dat daar so baie
verhoorafwagtendes is, en die rede waarom die VF Plus dít sê, is as gevolg
van regstellende aksie en die omvormingsbeleid van die ANC. Want, dít
veroorsaak dat daar nie behoorlike kundiges in die polisiediens is nie, dat
daar nie genoeg kundiges in justisie is nie, want ‘n ondersoekbeampte neem
nou té lank om ‘n ondersoek af te handel en dit vertraag die hele proses,
in terme van die verhoor.

Daarom sê ons, een van die maniere om die oorbevolking van tronke teë te
werk, is om te verseker dat daar behoorlike opleiding is – u moet nie die
kundiges wegjaag nie, kyk na meriete en bevorder dié mense, en dan sal die
probleem opgelos word. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, all the parties and their members come
here and say that the number of awaiting-trial detainees should be reduced
– the 51 000 who are in our prisons – and that that is one of the reasons
for and ways to solve the problem.

The FF Plus agrees, but the question is: How will this be done? And I want
to tell you today that it is the fault of the ANC that there are so many
awaiting-trial detainees, and the reason the FF Plus advances for this, is
affirmative action and the transformation policy of the ANC. This has
resulted in there being no proper experts in the police service, in there
being insufficient experts in justice, because an investigator takes too
long to finalise an investigation and this delays the whole process in
terms of the trial.

That is why we say, one of the ways in which we can prevent overcrowding of
prisons, is to ensure that there is proper training - do not chase away the
experts, take merit into consideration and promote these people, and then
the problem will be solved. [Time expired.]]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairman, it looks like I am going to say nothing here.
[Laughter.]

Prevention is better than cure. This problem of imprisonment and
overcrowding must be looked at holistically. The most disturbing thing that
one experiences when visiting the prisons of our country is to find so many
young people in prison.

Certain measures must be introduced to prevent these young people finding
themselves in prison. About 72% of the young people are unemployed. They
live in poverty, and they are also without education and skills. There must
be free education in our country. It is a prudent national investment.
Unskilled people are a national liability.

Our education must now be tailored to the needs of the nation. It is tragic
for our students to reach matric without any skills. We must provide the
type of education that imparts technical skills for self-employment. As
long as young people are not given proper and free education, and are
therefore unemployable, relieving overcrowding in prisons will not solve
the problem of overcrowding.

The PAC of course observes with pain the stony silence on the young people
who fought for the liberation of this country, and who are today
languishing in jails. They should qualify as a category to relieve those
that are in jail, particularly because we are here because of them.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Pheko!

Dr S E M PHEKO: We also have the Minister of Justice here ...
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order!

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, everyone would like to live in a safer South
Africa, and the overcrowding of our prisons certainly does not serve as an
encouragement to attain that. The MF is determined to overcome crime and to
create a safer environment for all South Africans, but we seriously need to
take into account the seriousness of crime in South Africa, and the
material conditions of criminals in our prisons.

Basically, what brings these people to commit crime? In all honesty, the MF
feels that poverty plays a serious factor in persons resorting to crime.
Poverty alleviation and the intensive deterrence of the committing of crime
will greatly serve to make South Africa a safer place to reside in.

Our juvenile delinquents are especially a concern for the MF, and the
rehabilitation and deterrence of this youth for further developing into
criminal personas needs to be addressed with all earnestness.

The value of life and livelihood needs to be established and respected, and
we as government have a pivotal role to play by relaying the message to our
people that crime is not the way to go, and that prison is not a path to
life. Thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order, sir. I see that Mr Bloem
also has no time whatsoever allocated to him. Taking into account that the
last time an ANC speaker had no time allocated she then stood up and spoke
rubbish for ten minutes, surely you are not going to allow Mr Bloem to
speak on this occasion. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I have to disappoint you, Mr
Ellis, the hard copy speaks the truth. Somehow the IT has let you down once
more.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, the hard copy might speak the truth, but I am
not sure if Mr Bloem is going to speak the truth. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): We’ll be guided by the hard copy.
Hon D V Bloem, you have six minutes.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Voorsitter, ek gaan ook nie die ses minute gebruik nie, ek
dink agb Sindi Chikunga het alles gesê.

Twee weke gelede het ons ’n verslag aanvaar in dié Huis, met oplossings wat
kan bydrae tot hierdie gesprek. Sindi Chikunga sê ons mors
belastingbetalers se geld om hier te kom staan en praat, oor én oor, oor
dieselfde ding.
Mnr Selfe was deel van die aanvaarding en het voorstelle gemaak uit dié
dokument, uit hierdie verslag. Maar, ek weet dis nie oor dié verslag nie,
dit is oor die afslag wat die Minister twee weke gelede gegee het. En sien,
dis reg, dit is ’n rassistiese houding wat hierdie mense inneem dat daar
nie baie witmense in die tronke is nie, dit is swartmense, en húlle word
vrygelaat.

Daarom, laat ek ’n boodskap oordra aan die Minister en die President, twee
weke gelede was ek saam met u in Pollsmoor. ’n Moeder het my gesê: “Mnr
Bloem, sê asseblief vir die President baie dankie. Na ses jaar gaan ek my
kinders sien. Minister, baie dankie. Mnr Bloem, sê vir Minister Balfour
baie dankie, ek waardeer dit. Ek het ses jaar gelede my kinders gesien,
klein kinders.”

In Kroonstad, Maandag, sê ’n moeder in trane dieselfde woorde.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Moenie huil nie.

Mnr D V BLOEM: Ja, jy kan sê hulle moenie huil nie, want jy weet nie wat
gaan daarbinne aan nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Jy het mense toegesluit in die ou
apartheid dae. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ons het genade! [Tussenwerpsels.]

Minister, dié boodskap moet na die President toe gaan. Moeders wat baie
dankie sê, hulle waardeer wat u en die President gedoen het. Hierdie mense
verstaan dit heeltemal verkeerd. Verhoorafwagtendes - awaiting-trials - dit
is die ANC, hierdie ANC-studiegroep, wat na die tronke toe gaan en praat
oor dié verhoorafwagtendes - awaiting-trials - wat vir sewe jaar sit; wat
vir vyf jaar sit; wat vir ses jaar sit, dít is ons. Dit het niks te doene
met dié mense nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ntate Pheko, jy kom hierheen vir die tweede maal en sê dat daar Apla-mense
in die tronk is. Ek het twee weke gelede hier gesê, bring ons die name
sodat ons kan gaan kyk, maar jy het nie die name nie, want daar is nie Apla-
mense in die tronk nie. As jy net daardie lys vir ons bring, sal ek tronk
toe gaan, saam met jou, Ntate, maar daar is nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr Groenewald, regstellende aksie is daar om te bly. Jy kan nooit die
horlosie terugdraai nie. Ons gaan dié land verander soos ons dit wil hê.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Tronke gaan nie meer tronke bly nie. Dit gaan inrigtings
wees waar ons mense rehabiliteer, nie mense slegter maak soos julle mense
slegter gemaak het oor al die jare nie. Mense moes klippe kap in die tronk.
[Applous.] Ons het dit verander. Dít is regstellende aksie.

Daar is nie ’n manier hoe ons dit gaan verander nie. Jy kan hier kom staan
en jou blou praat, jy gaan dit nooit kan verander nie. Ons gaan voortgaan
met hierdie wa van regstellende aksie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr Selfe, laat ek hierdie een minuut gebruik om jou te sê dat as ons in
die komitee is, kom met voorstelle. Moet nie agter jou party skuil nie. Jy
sien, jou party se mense dink jy is baie militant wanneer jy hier kom
staan. [Gelag.] In die party is jy beter, want jy kan voorstelle maak, jy
kan baie mooi idees gee. Maar nou, hierso, wil jy vir mnr Mike en vir . . .
Wat is jou naam nou weer? [Gelag.] Seremane. Ja, Seremane.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Nou wil jy hulle kom tevrede stel, mnr Selfe. Jy het my
vandag regtig teleurgestel, Mnr Selfe, ek moet jou sê. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I will also not need the full six minutes, I
believe the hon Sindi Chikunga has said all there is to say.

Two weeks ago we adopted a report in this House, with solutions that can
contribute to this debate. Sindi Chikunga says we are wasting taxpayers’
money by coming here to talk, over and over again, about the same thing.

Mr Selfe was part of that adoption process and made proposals from this
document, from this report. But I know it’s not about this report, it’s
about the remission the Minister granted two weeks ago. And you see, that’s
right, these people are taking a racist position, because there are few
white people in the prisons, those are black people, and it’s they who are
being released.

Therefore allow me to convey a message to the Minister and the President,
two weeks ago I accompanied you to Pollsmoor. A mother said to me: “Mr
Bloem, please say ‘many thanks’ to the President for me. After six years I
am going to see my children. Minister, thank you very much. Mr Bloem,
please say ‘thank you very much’ to Minister Balfour, I appreciate it. I
last saw my children six years ago, small children.”

In Kroonstad, on Monday, a tearful mother said the same words to me.
[Interjections.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Don’t cry.

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes, you can say they shouldn’t cry, because you don’t know
what’s going on in there. [Interjections.] You locked people up in the old
apartheid days. [Interjections.] We have mercy! [Interjections.]

Minister, this message must be conveyed to the President. Mothers who say
“thank you very much”, they appreciate what you and the President have
done. These people here get it all wrong. As regards awaiting-trial
prisoners – it’s the ANC, this ANC study group, who go to the prisons to
talk about these awaiting-trial prisoners, who have been behind bars for
seven years; or for five years; or for six years, we are the ones who take
up this matter. It does not concern these people here at all.
[Interjections.]

Ntate Pheko, you come here and claim for the second time that there are
Apla members in prison. Two weeks ago I said here, give us the names so
that we can go and have a look, but you do not have any names, because
there are no Apla members in prison. If only you would bring us such a
list, then I would gladly go to prison with you, Ntate, but there are none.
[Interjections.]

Mr Groenewald, affirmative action is there to stay. You can never turn back
the clock. We will change this country to what we want it to be.
[Interjections.] Prisons will no longer be prisons. They will be
institutions where we will rehabilitate people, rather than to make them
even worse, the way you made people worse over all those years. People had
to do hard labour in prison. [Applause.] We changed that. Now that is
affirmative action.

There is no way that we are going to change that. You can come here and
talk until you are blue in the face, you will never change that. We will
continue to keep this wagon of affirmative action on track.
[Interjections.]

Mr Selfe, let me make use of this last minute by saying to you that when we
meet as a committee, do come to us with proposals. Don’t hide behind your
party. You see, your party colleagues think you are very militant when you
come and stand here. [Laughter.] Within the party you are better, because
you can make proposals, you can present beautiful ideas. But now, in this
place, you want to satisfy Mr Mike and . . . What is your name again?
[Laughter.] Seremane. Yes, Seremane. [Interjections.] Now you want to
satisfy them, Mr Selfe. Today you really disappointed me, Mr Selfe, I must
tell you.]

Mr M J ELLIS: What’s your name?

Mnr D V BLOEM: Mev Seaton, u weet, dié hele proses van afslag wat die
President nou toegepas het, is in werking gestel deur die vorige minister,
Minister Skosana. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hierdie storie kom ’n lang pad aan. Dit
is nie ’n storie wat eergister begin het nie. Minister Skosana het dié ding
opgestel, want hy weet ten minste wat aangaan daarbinne. Nie soos Mnr
Seremane wat nie weet wat dit is nie, en skree en praat. [Tussenwerpsels.]

U sien Mnr Skosana sit doodstil, want hy weet wat aangaan. Dit is nie om te
sê . . . Ntate Pheko, laat ek vir Ntate Pheko vra, vir die laaste maal. En
as jy weer hier kom praat, Ntate Pheko, van die Apla-mense en daar is nie,
gaan ek jou stil maak en sê daar is nie Apla-mense nie. Baie dankie.
[Tussenwerpsels.][Gelag.][Tyd verstreke.][Applous.](Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Mrs Seaton, you know, this whole process of remission, which
the President has now implemented, was put in place by the previous
minister, Minister Skosana. [Interjections.] This story has come a long
way. It is not a story that started only the day before yesterday. Minister
Skosana set up this thing, because he at least knows what goes on in there.
Unlike Mr Seremane, who does not know what it is all about, and who shouts
and talks. [Interjections.]

You see that Mr Skosana is sitting quietly, because he knows what’s going
on. That’s not to say . . . Ntate Pheko, let me ask Ntate Pheko, for the
last time. And if you come here again Ntate Pheko, to speak about Apla
members in prison and there are none, I will shut you up and say there are
no Apla members. Thank you. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, I would like to thank all hon members who
participated in this debate, even the hon member Chikunga, because she made
the point that blanket amnesties and presidential pardons were given in the
past. She is correct. It was wrong then, it’s wrong now.

Nor am I distorting what the Minister said – I am simply quoting what he
said. That hon member did what every other ANC member does when they are in
a corner. She played the race card. It has nothing to do with race.
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Hear! Hear!

Mr J SELFE: Many of us in this House disagree on many issues, but all
parties in this House are in agreement that prison overcrowding is a real
problem that cries out for real solutions, and the hon member Bloem said,
yes, we had a report. Well, the fact of the matter is that that report was
not debated in the NA, and, as far as I know, it hasn’t been applied.

Now, I really do believe that the department and the Minister have done a
great deal to relieve overcrowding, including building a series of new
prisons and there are still others in the pipeline. The real problem lies
in the fact that prisons must accept whomever the court sends them. It
follows therefore that the other departments that form part of the cluster
must apply their minds to solutions.

I think there isn’t a dispute in the committee, but the dispute lies
between our committee and other committees. I hope the chairperson of the
justice and constitutional affairs committee is listening, because during
the Budget Vote, the Minister of Correctional Services said that he was
giving “serious consideration to refusing to accept any more inmates in
grossly overcrowded facilities”. He said that he would be taking up the
matter with the Minister of Justice. I would be interested to know what the
upshot of that particular conversation was, because I think it is a very
real prospect that that sort of thing has to happen.

But there is another aspect that needs our attention. At the moment, the
number of sentences available to a judge or magistrate is relatively
limited. Essentially, one can be sentenced to imprisonment, correctional
supervision, or a fine, and these sentences can be suspended.

One needs to consider more imaginative sentences, such as a caution with
conditions, good behaviour orders, supervision and guidance orders,
reporting orders and prohibition orders. Such sentences would also allow
people to correct their offending behaviour without the stigma of a
sentence of imprisonment.

This really is a matter that is of critical importance. I cannot for the
life of me understand why members from the ANC seek to trivialise this,
seek to put into my mouth words I never said, seek to attribute motives to
me that I don’t have.

We have to deal with this problem in a sensible way, in a coherent way, and
in a way that is going to be in the interests of all South Africans, black
and white. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Malibongwe! [Praise be to the name
of women.][Applause.]
Chairperson, there is nothing as wonderful as seeing a mature person, a
rational person, delivering education to people who need to be educated.
[Interjections.]

Comrade Sindi Chikunga, when you were talking, they didn’t haggle.
[Interjections.] They didn’t say a word. They were all quiet, because you
were saying the right things. [Interjections.] [Applause.] There wasn’t
even a whimper from them. I sat there. You know, if I had a camera, I would
have taken some pictures, because they were being educated.
[Interjections.][Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: They would have all been rubbish.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: SMSs and all, they were being
educated.

Number two, when you were talking about the types of people that we have in
our prisons, I was very disappointed in the hon Seremane. You cannot deny
that the bulk of young people that are in our prisons are black. You cannot
deny that. I am very disappointed. [Interjections.]

Hon Seremane, could I make a request? Could we go together - come with me -
to two or three prisons just around the Western Cape? I am disappointed.
[Interjections.]

With regard to the ACDP, it’s a pity that the Rev Green has left. They are
a Christian organisation. It’s amazing that a Christian organisation like
the ACDP can come onto the stage and say things that belie the fact that
they call themselves Christian. Amazing! Some things are beginning to make
sense to me. [Interjections.]

The FF Plus, Mr Groenewald, if this was not Parliament, I would have . . .
An HON MEMBER: Hit you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: No, I wouldn’t. I wouldn’t beat you.
I am not that violent. I would have said:

Wat jy vandag hier gesê het, is twak! [Gelag.][What you said here today is
rubbish! [Laughter.]]

If this was not Parliament ... Please grow up. You need to grow up, Mr
Groenewald. [Interjections.] Regstellende aksie [affirmative action] is
here to stay, and overcrowding has got nothing to do with regstellende
aksie. Absolutely. [Interjections.] I don’t understand your thinking.
Somebody needs to perform a head operation on you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The remission of sentences that is implemented by this government has the
endorsement and support of a wide cross section of respected and
influential organisations and individuals throughout the country. These
organisations and individuals place a high premium on the safety and
security of the public. They will never compromise on crime. They reach out
to victims of crime and they respect the Constitution of our country, and
not only sections of the Constitution that might suit their own needs.

Amongst these organisations: the SACC, the SA Council of Churches, has come
out to support this; the Salvation Army; Nicro; Sanca, Khulisa; labour
organisations; and the Archbishop of Cape Town, Njongonkulu Ndungane, have
come out in support, as has a wide range of members of the judiciary,
including Justice Hannes Fagan, Justice Siraj Desai and others in the
justice system.

These respected organisations and individuals are grounded in communities.
They don’t speak from where you are speaking, Mr Groenewald. They would
never compromise one section of society to the advantage of others. It is
from their ranks that support for this remission of sentences has come.
That is why I am surprised at the ACDP. Very, very surprised.

Correctional Services is on a very clear course of action. We are guided by
our country’s Constitution, by the Correctional Services Act of 1998 and
related legislation, and by the White Paper on Corrections in South Africa.
Those are the guiding documents of this department. If there are people who
want to add value to those documents, come forward. I will listen to them.

I have listened to James Selfe. It’s not the first time he is raising all
these issues. I am happy he is raising them, because they are always in the
public domain. This doesn’t necessarily mean that I agree with him on
everything, but I do certainly accept some of the recommendations he has
made, particularly when he talks about diversion of sentences and
everything else.

Through this phased implementation of remission of sentences, 33 000
probationers and parolees were already outside by 17 June. They have
benefited, and now are in the mainstream of South African life. They can
now pursue a positive, responsible life in society. By 20 June, that is
yesterday, 9 599 offenders had been released either unconditionally or on
parole.

We have given them a second  chance.  This  includes  41  mothers  who  were
incarcerated with their babies, the  youngest  of  those  babies  being  two
weeks old. This also includes young children, the youth, the aged and  those
with disabilities. With these concessions, it is hoped that  those  released
will change their lives for the better.

I want to warn offenders who go out and re-offend, and I’ve said this
before: you will be doing a grave injustice to other people in this country
by re-offending. I am not concerned about whether the crime they commit is
a small crime or a big crime. However, the safety and security people, the
police, are on the lookout for all those who will re-offend. They will go
back and will not go through parole again, because they will be making a
mockery of what we are trying to do - actually agreeing with some people on
my left who don’t know anything about what’s going on in our prisons.
[Interjections.]

Sybil, you are an old campaigner in Correctional Services. You are an old
campaigner. You have been with the Portfolio Committee on Correctional
Services for a long time. Your hon colleague, Ben Skosana, was the Minister
in this department. So you know it all. What you have said about the public
perception that must change is quite correct. I am appealing to the public
out there. I am appealing that we change perceptions, and accept that these
are human beings. They have erred, they have made mistakes, but they are
still human. They are South Africans.

In the Minister’s office we have always had – something started by Ben
Skosana - an offender working for us who comes from prison, who stays with
us until he or she is finished with his or her parole and then gets a
better job. John Palm has gone out from our office. He has a good job with
an organisation that is working in Pollsmoor.

From the ones that were released on the 13th, we now have a young lady
called Sindi. She is in my office right now. She was released. She served
her sentence from 2000, and was released on remission in 2005. She is
working in our office on a contract. She will be doing all the things that
John Palm was doing. This is the kind of confidence that we want the public
to treat offenders with, to understand they have offended. They have been
through hell in prison - they know what it is. They have acknowledged their
crimes. They are now being given a second chance in society.

So Sindi is in my office and will be working there for us for the next
year, until we sort out what she does next. We will take on another
offender in the office. That is the kind of view that I would like the
public out there to have in dealing with the offenders.

Regarding those who offend - I repeat this, and we have said this from the
beginning - that we do not believe that everybody will not re-offend. We
are not that naive. People are not ujeqe [steamed bread]. They are not
ujeqe [steamed bread].

Ujeqe sisonka esiphekwe ngamanzi. [Ujeqe is steamed bread.] You feel it
with a big kitchen knife. Umama wakho uyakufundisa ukuba wenza njani. [Your
mother teaches you that]. My mom taught me that. You feel if it is well
cooked. You take out a big kitchen knife and thrust it into the bread to
feel if it is sticky or not. If it is not sticky, the bread is well cooked.
Human beings are not bread. You can’t test them like that.

We are not naive as the department – not to know that there will be those
who will re-offend. To those who re-offend, they will be arrested. They
will be brought to court. I am also pleading with the judges and the
magistrates to really use diversion. I am busy dealing with that.

Mr Selfe, I will not report to you. I will report to this House on how far
I go with that, not to you but to the House to which I am responsible.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:26.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                            FRIDAY, 17 JUNE 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 14 June 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:

         (i)     Patents Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2005] (National Assembly –
              sec 75)


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 16 June 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:

         (i)     Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 20 – 2005]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)

     (3)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 16 June 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a Money Bill:

         (i)     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 77)


TABLINGS


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
     REPORT OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO 49TH SESSION OF UN COMMISSION ON
     THE STATUS OF WOMEN

      The parliamentary delegation to the 49th Session of the United
    Nations Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York from 28
    February to 11 March 2005, consisted of the following members:
      Ms G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde (Deputy Speaker and leader of the
    delegation)

      National Assembly:
      Ms M R Morutua         (ANC)
      Mr N P Nhleko          (ANC)
      Ms C-S Botha                (DA)
      Ms J A Semple          (DA)
      Dr U Roopnarain        (IFP)

      National Council of Provinces:
      Ms S E Mabe                 (ANC)
      Mr V V Z Windvoël      (ANC)

      Support staff:
      Ms Carmine Rustin      (Research Unit)
      Ms Joy Watson          (Research Unit)
      Ms Merle Cannon        (Personal Assistant to the Deputy Speaker)

      The following is the Executive Summary of the Final Report of the
    Parliamentary Delegation to the 49th Session of the United Nations
    Commission on the Status of Women, New York, 28 February to 11 March
    2005 (full text available on www.parliament.gov.za):

1.    Background

      In September 1995, South Africa participated in the United Nations
    Fourth World Conference on Women, which was held in Beijing, China. At
    this Conference, the South African Government committed itself to the
    Beijing Platform for Action (BPFA). The South African Government is
    thus tasked with reporting on its progress in the implementation of the
    BPFA.

      The 49th Session of the United Nations Commission on the Status of
    Women (CSW) was held in New York from 28 February to 11 March 2005. The
    49th Session provided an opportunity to review progress made towards
    gender equality since the Fourth World Conference on Women held in
    1995. The primary objective of the Session was to reiterate, renew and
    enhance the Beijing commitments.

      The Parliament of South Africa has a particular role to play with
    regard to overseeing the implementation of the BPFA. One of the primary
    areas of work of the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of
    Quality of Life and Status of Women is to monitor and evaluate progress
    made in relation to enhancing the quality of women’s lives in South
    Africa, with specific reference to the Government’s commitments to:

    • The Beijing Platform for Action.
    • The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
      Against Women (CEDAW).
    • Any other specific international instruments.

2.    Programme of the 49th Session of the CSW
     The programme for the 49th Session of the Commission on the Status of
     Women was structured around the following thematic areas:


          • Innovations in institutional arrangements for promoting gender
            equality at national level (High-Level Roundtable).
          • Review of the implementation of the Beijing Platform of Action
            and the Outcome Documents of the Special Session of the General
            Assembly and current challenges and forward looking strategies
            for the advancement and empowerment of women and girls (High-
            Level Roundtable).
          • Observance of Women’s Day.
          • Remaining challenges in relation to statistics and indicators,
            building on the discussions at the High-Level Roundtable
            organised in the 48th session of the Commission 2004, as well
            as available data from the World’s Women: Trends and statistics
            (2005) and the world survey on the Role of Women in Development
            (Panel Discussion).
          • Future perspectives on the promotion of gender equality through
            the eyes of young men and women (High-Level Roundtable).
          • The role of regional and inter-governmental organisations in
            promoting gender equality (Panel Discussion).


      In addition to the main programme outlined above, the African Union
    organised a panel discussion on Monitoring Gender Equality Commitments.
    The Inter-Parliamentary Union also organised a session to explore the
    role of Parliaments in giving effect to the promotion of gender equity.
    Various NGOs also organised a series of side events, which ranged in
    thematic focus. These included sessions on violence against women,
    critiques of Beijing +10, women in armed conflict, the economic
    empowerment of women, women and the environment, the trafficking of
    women and girls, etc.

3.    Declaration emanating from the 49th Session of the Commission on the
    Status of Women

      Governments reaffirmed their commitments to the implementation of the
    Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the Outcome Document of
    the Twenty-Third Special Session of the General Assembly in 2000. The
    Declaration emphasises that the full and effective implementation of
    the Beijing Declaration and the Beijing Platform for Action is
    essential in achieving the internationally agreed upon development
    goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and highlights the
    need to ensure a gender perspective in the high-level plenary meeting
    on the review of the Millennium Declaration. It calls upon the United
    Nations systems, international and regional organisations, civil
    society, women and men to commit themselves and intensify contributions
    to the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and BPFA and the
    Outcome Document of the Twenty-Third Special Session of the General
    Assembly.

      Whilst Member States adopted the Declaration, this had come about as
    a result of intense negotiations in relation to its content. A number
    of Member States, including the United States America (USA), the Holy
    See and Costa Rica, made statements after the adoption of the
    Declaration and emphasised that they did not view the Declaration as
    providing any new rights other than the rights agreed to in Beijing.
    Specific reference was made to the right to abortion. The USA and the
    Holy See both argued that the Declaration does not make abortion a
    right. The Holy See indicated that it had wanted a clear statement that
    the Declaration does not include the right to have an abortion. The
    USA, on the other hand, indicated that it does not recognise abortion
    as being an integral part of reproductive rights, and that it
    emphasised the value of the Abstinence, Be Faithful and Condomise (ABC)
    campaign. Other States argued that the text of the BPFA was clear and
    that the reaffirmation of the text was a sign that the international
    world was not interested in engaging with the text, but ensuring that
    there was progress in its implementation.

4.    Resolutions emanating from the 49th Session of the Commission on the
    Status of Women

      The following Resolutions emanated from the 49th Session of the
    Commission on the Status of Women:

4.1   Economic Advancement of Women

      The USA introduced the Resolution. In its preamble, the Resolution
    reaffirms the goals, objectives and commitments made to a number of
    international instruments, including the BPFA and the Outcome Document
    of the Twenty-third Special Session of the General Assembly, the
    Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
    Women (CEDAW) and a Resolution on Microcredit. Furthermore, the
    preamble notes that the empowerment of women is a critical factor in
    eradicating poverty and therefore improving the economic status of
    women, which would lead to improved economic status for their families.
    South Africa supported the passing of the Resolution with its
    amendments.

4.2   Advisability of the appointment of a Special Rapporteur on Laws That
    Discriminate Against Women

      The Phillipines and Rwanda introduced the Resolution. The Resolution
    recalls the commitment made in the BPFA that seeks to ensure equality
    and non-discrimination under the law and in practice, revoke all laws
    that discriminate on the basis of sex, and to remove gender bias in
    justice. The Resolution further recalls commitments by Member States to
    review domestic legislation to ensure that all discriminatory
    provisions are removed. In brief, the Resolution notes that the CSW
    will, at its 50th Session, decide on the advisability of appointing a
    Special Rapporteur on laws that discriminate against women.  South
    Africa supported the Resolution. The USA stated that it disassociates
    itself from the consensus of the Resolution.

4.3   Indigenous Women beyond the ten-year review of the Beijing
    Declaration and Platform for Action

      The Resolution was introduced by Bolivia. The preamble refers to the
    commitments made in the CEDAW, the BPFA, the Millennium Development
    Goals, the Durban Plan of Action, and the General Assembly Resolution
    on the Second International Decade of the World's Indigenous People to
    guarantee the economic, social and cultural well-being of women. It
    recommends that Governments, intergovernmental agencies, the private
    sector and civil society adopt measures that ensure the participation
    of indigenous women in, amongst others, the implementation of the BPFA
    and the Millennium Development Goals. The Resolution was adopted by
    consensus. South Africa supported the Resolution.

4. Eliminating the demand for trafficked women and girls for all forms of
   exploitation

      The USA introduced the Resolution. The Resolution reaffirms
    commitments made through the various international agreements and
    Resolutions against the trafficking of women and girls. The Resolution
    calls on Governments to:


      • Take appropriate measures to address the root causes of trafficking.
      • Criminalise trafficking in persons, especially women and girls.
 • Strengthen or adopt legislative measures.
 • Raise public awareness together with civil society.


      South Africa supported the Resolution.

5. Strengthening of the International Research and Training Institute for
   the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW)

      Jamaica, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, together with
    Mexico, introduced the Resolution. The Resolution recognises the work
    undertaken by the Institute, which includes the strengthening of
    cooperative arrangements with other United Nations entities and the
    expansion of its research programme. The Resolution invites Member
    States to voluntary contribute to the INSTRAW and stresses that
    financial contributions would enable the Institute to carry out its
    functions. The Resolution continues to encourage efforts to strengthen
    the INSTRAW and to monitor progress during the next Session. South
    Africa supported this Resolution.

  6. Integrating a gender perspective in post-disaster relief, recovery,
     rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts, particularly in the
     aftermath of the Indian Ocean Tsunami disaster

      This Resolution was initially sponsored by the Philippines. It
    expresses concern that women and children account for the vast majority
    of those adversely affected by natural disasters and their aftermath,
    including the recent Tsunami disaster. It expresses concern that women
    and girls are more vulnerable to violence, including sexual abuse and
    other forms of sexual and gender-based violence in emergency
    situations. It calls on Governments to integrate a gender perspective
    in planning for disaster preparedness and in responding to natural
    disasters. The Resolution further underscores the need to address the
    gender equality dimensions of livelihood, security, land tenure, land
    rights, property and housing. The Resolution urges donor countries and
    organisations to recognise the vulnerabilities and capacities of women
    and girls in addressing natural disasters and in allocating resources
    in relief, recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts.  South
    Africa supported the adoption of the Resolution

7. Women, the girl child and HIV and AIDS

      Mauritius was the main sponsor of this Resolution, which arose out of
    concern that the HIV and AIDS pandemic disproportionately affects women
    and girls. It takes cognisance of the fact that women’s unequal legal,
    economic, and social status, violence against women and cultural and
    physiological factors increase their vulnerability to HIV and AIDS. The
    Resolution calls on Governments to take all necessary measures to
    empower women and strengthen their economic independence and to protect
    and promote their full enjoyment of all human rights in order to enable
    them to protect themselves against HIV infection. It further urges
    Governments to expand access to treatment in a progressive and
    sustainable manner. South Africa supported the adoption of this
    Resolution.

8. Situation of women and girls in Afghanistan
      This Resolution was initially sponsored by Austria, Belgium, Cyprus,
    the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
    Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands,
    Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom
    of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

      The Resolution recognises that women in Afghanistan continue to face
    violations of their human rights in many parts of the country,
    particularly in rural areas. It emphasises that a safe environment,
    free from violence, discrimination and abuse is essential for a viable
    and sustainable recovery and reconstruction process. It calls on the
    Government of Afghanistan to support measures that ensure the full
    enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms of women and girls
    and to hold accountable those responsible for human rights violations
    in the past.

  9. Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all national policies and
     programmes

      The main sponsors of this Resolution were the United Kingdom and
    Bangladesh. South Africa co-sponsored the Resolution. The Resolution
    affirms that gender mainstreaming constitutes a critical strategy in
    the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome
    of the Twenty-Third Special Session of the General Assembly. It
    recognises that strong and effective national machineries for the
    advancement of women and institutional mechanisms play a central role
    in co-ordinating and promoting a gender mainstreaming strategy and that
    gender-based statistics, indicators, research and gender analysis are
    critical to effective gender mainstreaming. The Resolution acknowledges
    that one of the critical goals of gender mainstreaming is to
    incorporate a gender perspective in all legislation, policies,
    programmes and projects.

  10. Situation of and assistance to Palestinian women

      The main sponsor of this Resolution was Jamaica on behalf of the
    Group of 77 and China. The Resolution expresses concern about the
    situation of Palestinian women in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
    resulting from the severe impact of ongoing illegal Israeli settlement
    activities and the unlawful construction of the wall. It further
    expresses concern for the consequences arising from Israeli military
    attacks on and sieges of civilian areas. The Resolution recalls the
    advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on 9 July 2004,
    on the legal consequences of the construction of the wall. The
    Resolution calls upon concerned parties to exert all necessary efforts
    to ensure the full resumption of the peace process and calls for
    tangible improvement of the living conditions faced by Palestinian
    women and their families. South Africa supported the adoption of the
    Resolution.

   5. Recommendations

      During the course of the 49th Session of the Commission on the Status
    of Women, a number of issues that were of strategic importance to the
    South African parliamentary delegation arose. These include the
    following:
1. Recommendations Pertaining to Content Areas
     1. Trafficking of Women

      South Africa currently does not have legislation pertaining to the
    trafficking of human beings, rendering the criminalisation of
    trafficking and prosecution of offenders problematic. There is a need
    to explore the drafting of legislation in this regard and to engage in
    international agreements pertaining to the trafficking of human beings
    across international borders.

     2. Sex Work

      A number of women’s oganisations in South Africa have called for the
    legalisation of sex work. There is a need to conceptually engage on
    this matter and to explore the merits and disadvantages of both
    legalising and criminalising sex work.

     3. Violence Against Women

      Levels of violence against women, both domestic violence and violence
    perpetrated in the public arena, remain unacceptably high in the South
    African context. There is a need for Parliament to enhance its
    oversight function in this regard especially in relation to the
    implementation of the domestic violence Act (Act No. 116 of 1998).

     4. Women and the Environment

      The role that women play in contributing to the development of a
    sustainable environment emerged as a key theme at the meeting. This
    issue should be explored further in the South African context.

     5. Women and Access to Land and Property Rights

      The issue of women’s access to land and property rights remains a
    critical impediment to the furthering of women’s rights in South
    Africa. Customary practices pertaining to women’s inability to inherit
    needs to be further explored.

     6. Institutional Mechanisms to Further Gender Equity

      In the course of the 49th Session, much discussion ensued on the role
    and efficacy of institutional mechanisms to enhance gender equity.
    There is a need to critically assess the impact of the work of the
    South African machinery and to address the problems negatively
    impacting on the execution of its mandate.

     7. Regional Mechanisms for the Promotion of Gender Equality

      There is a need to continue to take up the issue of the promotion of
    gender equity at the level of the African continent. In its
    contribution to the Pan African Parliament (PAP), the South African
    Parliament needs to continue to be vigilant of the gendered
    implications of the work of the PAP.

2. Process Recommendations

     1. Discussion of report and recommendations

      It is recommended that this report be discussed by the South African
    parliamentary delegation to the 49th Session of the CSW to enable them
    to chart a course of action for acting upon its recommendations.

      One of the mechanisms suggested is that the report be referred to the
    relevant committees for discussion and recommendations on taking the
    issues forward. It is further suggested that a number of debates be
    held in both Houses on the content areas above.

     2. Involvement of the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of
        the Quality of Life and Status of Women

      It is recommended that where appropriate, the Joint Monitoring
    Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women
    (JMCIQLSW) incorporates key issue that emerged at the 49th Session into
    its programme of work.

                            MONDAY, 20 JUNE 2005

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

   1. Membership of Committees

1.    The following changes have been made to the  membership  of  Portfolio
   Committees, viz:


   Agriculture and Land Affairs:
   Appointed: Abram, Mr S


   Correctional Services:
   Appointed:  Fihla, Mr N B
   Environmental Affairs and Tourism:
   Appointed: Cachalia, Mr I M, Swart, Mr M  (Alt)


   Foreign Affairs: Subcommittee on African Union:
   Appointed: Ramgobin, Mr M

   Subcommittee on International Affairs:
   Appointed: Hajaig, Ms F


   Safety and Security:
   Appointed: Diale, Mr L N


   Social Development:
   Appointed: Direko, Ms I W


   Home Affairs:
   Appointed: Ludwabe, Ms C I


   Sport and Recreation:
   Appointed: Saloojee, Mr E


   Trade and Industry:
   Appointed: Turok, Prof B

2.    The following changes have been made to  the  membership  of  Standing
   Committees, viz:
   Private Members’ and Legislative Proposals:
   Appointed: Jankielsohn, Mr R


   Public Accounts:
   Appointed: Ndou, Mr R S

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on  Finance  on  the  Taxation  Laws
    Amendment Bill [B 19 - 2005] (National Assembly –  sec  77),  dated  20
    June 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the  subject  of
        the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 19 - 2005] (National Assembly –
        sec 77), referred  to  it  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
        Mechanism as a Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on  Finance  on  the  Taxation  Laws
    Second Amendment Bill [B 20 - 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated
    20 June 2005:

      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the  subject  of
        the Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B  20  -  2005]  (National
        Assembly – sec 75), referred to it  and  classified  by  the  Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports  the  Bill  without
        amendment.


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land  Affairs  on
    Budget Vote 25, dated 7 June 2005:

    The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
    considered Budget Vote 25, wish to report as follows:



    A.      Introduction


      The most important challenge for the agricultural sector is to provide
      enough, affordable food. Agriculture is  not  only  important  in  the
      international and regional context but also at  the  household  level.
      Agriculture is also important because of  its  contribution  to  Gross
      Domestic Product (GDP), its  forward  and  backward  linkages  in  the
      economy, its share of the labour force, and  its  contribution  as  an
      earner of foreign exchange.


      The  Committee  examined  the  estimates  for  2006/7/8  included   in
      Estimates of National Expenditure.


      1.    Department of Agriculture

      The main features of the 2005/6 budgets are:

      1.1   Strategic overview and key policy developments for 2005/6 &
           2007/8


           The most  important  challenge  for  agriculture  sector  is  to
           provide sufficient food to the nation. This is only important in
           a macro and regional context, but especially at household level.
           Importance of  agriculture  also  highlighted  by  the  relative
           contribution to the Gross Domestic Product  (GDP),  forward  and
           backward linkages in the economy, its share of the labour  force
           and its contribution as an earner of foreign exchange.

           Over the  past  ten  years,  agriculture  in  South  Africa  has
           provided greater opportunities for participants in the sector in
           the form of  greater  access  to  foreign  markets,  smallholder
           participation   among   role   players   in   agriculture.   The
           deregulation  of  local  and  international  markets   and   the
           establishment of preferential trade agreements with a number  of
           countries and trading  blocks  have  created  significant  trade
           opportunities  for  South  African  agriculture   and   farmers.
           Ensuring adequate protection for animal and plant health as well
           as public health remains a priority for the Department  as  this
           has a direct bearing on the ability to take advantage  of  trade
           opportunities.

           The Department has seen rapid growth in its commitments  to  and
           participation in international programmes  of  cooperation.  The
           driving force and basis for the strategy in Africa is the  NEPAD
           Comprehensive   African   Agricultural   Development   Programme
           (CAADP).  The  Department  continues  to   interact   with   key
           continental  and  international  partners  and  stakeholders  to
           generate   greater   access   to   financial,   technical    and
           institutional support for the implementation of NEPAD.  In  this
           regard, the Department on behalf  of  the  government  of  South
           Africa hosted the 23rd FAO  Africa  Regional  Conference,  which
           agreed on a set of actions  within  the  context  of  the  NEPAD
           agriculture plan and reviewed the implementation of the CAADP.


   The presentation was structured in terms  of  programmes.  The  following
   programmes reported:  administration;  farmer  support  and  development;
   agricultural  trade  and  business  development;  economic  research  and
   analysis; agricultural production; sustainable resources  management  and
   use;  national  regulatory   services;   and   communication,   planning,
   monitoring and evaluation.


     1. Overview – Administration


   The Administration Programme  conducts  the  overall  management  of  the
   department and  provides  strategic  leadership  and  corporate  services
   through the activities of the Minister, the Deputy  Minister  and  senior
   management. It also provides for financial,  procurement,  legal  and  IT
   services, an internal audit  function,  human  resources  management  and
   secretariat services. Within the programme, there is also  a  directorate
   that deals with the collection of agricultural debt. The  allocation  for
   2005/6 is approximately R 170 480  million  as  compared  to  R  171  528
   million for 2004/5. There is a decrease of 0.6%.


     2. Overview – Farmer Support and Development

   Farmer Support and Development focuses on developing norms and standards
   for settlement of emerging farmers; food security and rural development;
   agricultural finance and cooperative development and agricultural risks
   and disaster management. The received an amount of R 476 791 for 2005/6
   compared to R 361 272 for 2004/5. There was an increase of 32.0%.

     3. Overview - Agricultural Trade and Business Development

   The programme  aims  to  enhance  agribusiness  development,  competitive
   markets  and  the  international  trade  environment   through   improved
   opportunities and more equitable access  in  order  to  maximize  growth,
   employment and equity in the agricultural sector. It financially  assists
   the National Agricultural Marketing Council. The programme is allocated R
   95 783 million for 2005/6 as compared to R 38 919 million for 2004/5.

     4. Overview – Economic Research and Analysis

    The programme supports the establishment and management of national
    agriculture databases and provides for the collection and analysis of
    agricultural statistics. It also monitors and evaluates the economic
    state and performance of the sector and produces quarterly reports on
    sector trends. The programme received R 25 590 million for 2005/6 as
    compared to R 23 647 million for 2004/5. There is an increase of 8.2%.

     5. Overview – Agricultural Production

   The programme develops policies to facilitate increased and sustainable
   agricultural production. In addition, the programme also ensures support
   for agricultural research, technology development and transfer. An amount
   of R 407 648 million has been allocated for 2005/6 compared to R 382 202
   million for 2004/5. There is an increase of 6.7%.


     6. Overview – Sustainable Resources Management and Use

   The programme develops policies, norms and standards on the management
   and use of land and water resources in agriculture. The programme has
   been allocated R 177 252 million for 2005/6 compared to R 160 597 million
   for 2004/5. An increase of 10.4% has been realized.

     7. Overview – National Regulatory Services

   The programme is responsible  for  managing  the  risks  associated  with
   animal and plant diseases and pests, ensuring food safety and bio-safety.
   This is done through developing policy and legislation  and  implementing
   compliance and operational support systems.  The  programme  received  an
   amount of R 230 513 million for 2005/6 compared to R 216 602 million  for
   2004/5 with an increase of 6.4%.

     8. Overview – Communication and Information Management

   The programme provides agricultural news and information, facilitates and
   manages international relations as well as facilitates skills development
   and the training of new and existing farmers. The programme received R 92
   716 million for 2005/6 compared to R 88 305 million for 2004/5 with  5.0%
   increase in allocation.


     9. Overview – Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation

   The programme consolidates and supports strategic and operational
   planning in the Department as well as facilitating knowledge management
   through tracking and monitoring the implementation of the strategic plan.
   The programme received R 7 965 million for 2005/6 compared to R 6 319
   million for 2004/5 with an increase of 26.1%.


   Total allocation for 2005/6 was approximately R 1.6 billion compared to R
   1.4 billion for 2004/5 financial year. The Budget could also be
   classified into the following functional categories:

     a) Compensation of employees -  R 420 098 million (18.3%)
     b) Goods and Services - R 370 591 million (27.6%)
     c) Transfers and subsidies -      R 864 993 million (14.3%)
     d) Payments for capital assets - R 29 056 million (38.3%)

   2. Strategic Plan for 2005


        Strategic Performance areas for Government and social partners are:

        2.1      The conclusion and implementation of the Grain industry
        strategy with attention to, among others, maize price management;


        2.2      The implementation of the Comprehensive Agricultural
        Support Programme Recharge;


        2.3      The implementation of AgriBEE once it has promulgated as
        the broad based black economic empowerment in agriculture;


        2.4      The launch of the pilot of the Agricultural Credit Scheme:
        Micro-Agricultural Financial Institutions of South Africa (MAFISA)
        in a selected rural development nodes and its gradual scaling up to
        other rural development nodes and eventually to the entire country;


         5. The implementation of the Agricultural Advisory Services
            Programme (Extension);


         6. The establishment of Food Insecurity and Vulnerability
            Information System Management  as part of the strengthening of
            the Integrated Food Security and Nutrition Programme;

         7. Integrating all engagements of South Africa in the field of
            agriculture into the Africa Agricultural Development Programme
            of the International Agricultural Strategy of the Department of
            Agriculture;

         8. The implementation of the Livestock Development Programme; and

         9. The enhancement of the state of continuous surveillance system
            to promptly and decisively deal with natural disasters and bio-
            safety and security threats.

    3.      Budget 2005: Implications for Agriculture and Land Affairs by
    University of Stellenbosch
      The budget must address the barriers to small business development and
      job  creation  that  arise  from  cumbersome  municipal  planning  and
      approval procedures, or from overly burdensome administration  of  the
      tax laws, environmental regulations or labour market controls.

      Tax relief of R 1.4 billion targeted at small business. This  includes
      raising the turnover limit for eligibility from R 5  million  to  R  6
      million. In addition, the graduated rate structure will be adapted  as
      follows: qualifying small companies will pay no tax on the first R  35
      000 of taxable income, 10%  on  R  35  000  to  R  250  000,  and  29%
      thereafter. Small business will also  be  eligible  for  a  simplified
      50:30:20 depreciation write-off  rate  for  non-manufacturing  assets,
      while manufacturing assets will continue to qualify  for  100%  write-
      off.


      Then there are rural development challenges to address.  The  proposed
      allocations to  Department  of  Land  Affairs  will  enable  the  land
      restitution programme to complete its work over the next three  years.
      Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme is in  place  to  support
      for emerging and resource poor producers. The Minister of  Agriculture
      and Land will introduce this year a new credit scheme for  small-scale
      farmers.


      Infrastructure spending by municipalities and public enterprises  will
      impact on  the  sector.  The  Berg  River  Water  Scheme  and  further
      development of the Olifants River and Groot Letaba River dam  systems.
      Transnet’s R 4.9  billion  locomotive  and  wagon  fleet  renewal  and
      modernization programme is important. Land restitution allocated  R  6
      billion. A new Micro agricultural Finance  Scheme  to  complement  the
      CASP and provide further  assistance  to  emerging  farmers  and  land
      reform beneficiaries. An amount of R 1 billion is available, of  which
      R 600 million is expected to be allocated over the next three years.


      Small business: Additional relief of R 367 million will form  part  of
      streamlining ongoing filing obligations. This will involve halving the
      number of VAT payments small business make in  a  year  and  exempting
      them from the skills development levy. The  diesel  refund  concession
      for primary producers will be raised, with  the  rebate  increased  by
      3.14 c/litre. The R 250 million earmarked  for  AgriBEE.  Consolidated
      budget  growth  Agriculture  for  the  period  2001/2  to  2004/5  was
      relatively high. For the years 2004/5 to 2007/8 it is the  highest  of
      all functional spending areas of the state, at 18.7% per year.


  Comments


The Committee considered the reports and agreed that:


a)    It would be fair for the Committee to know the consulting companies
contracted by the Department. Department is to provide the list;


b)    The Language policy is that South Africa has 11 official languages.
The serious challenge to the Department is to ensure that it uses languages
accessible and understandable to farmers;


c)    The Committee could not find the reason behind separating programmes
1 and 9. The Department should consider whether the two programmes are not
duplicating each other;


d)    A concerted message must be communicated to communities about the
importance of agriculture and the end result would be gaining human capital
to the sector;


e)    The Extension Services need a serious revamp or if that is not
possible, the Department must consider closing them completely;

f)    The Committee felt that a curriculum must be developed to link
agriculture and education; and


g)    The Agricultural Research Council must remain within Agriculture and
Government must allocate sufficient resources for this important
institution in order to carry out its public mandate.

4.    The Committee also had an opportunity to engaged on  budgetary  issues
      with the Entities associated to the Department: that are the  National
      Agricultural marketing Council; the Agricultural Research Council; the
      Onderstepoort Biological Products; the Land Bank; and  the  Perishable
      Exports Control Board


4.1   National Agricultural Marketing Council


        The National Agricultural Marketing Council is a schedule 3  public
        entity established in accordance  with  Marketing  of  Agricultural
        Products Act (Act 47 of 1996). Transfers to the NAMC form  part  of
        the Agricultural Trade and Business Development Programme. The core
        mandate of the NAMC is to do investigations and advise the Minister
        of Agriculture and Land Affairs on agricultural marketing  policies
        and  their  application,  and  co-ordinate  agricultural  marketing
        policy in relation to national  economic,  social  and  development
        policies and international trends and developments.

        Funding to the Council amounts to R 11.9 million for 2004/5  and  R
        16.4 million is  proposed  for  2005/6.  The  income  is  from  the
        following sources: transfer from  Department  of  Agriculture;  the
        interest earned;  the  trusts  and  other  bodies;  and  additional
        request from Department.


        The   expenditure   would   be   accounted   for   salaries;    the
        administration;  the  operational  expenditure;  the   professional
        services;  and  stores.   Professional   services   included,   the
        consultants;  the  courier  services;  information  and   knowledge
        management;  the  communication  committee;  and  the   section   7
        committees and / or Working groups.



      Comments


        The Committee considered the report and raised the following
        concerns:


        a) The Council needs to clarify its relevance in the present
        circumstances and its role in relation to small emerging black
        farmers; and


        b) Non-availability of the Business plan that relates to the
        budget.


        The Committee agreed that:


        The Council must provide the Committee with the list of consultants
        currently being utilized and must project clearly its core business
        in relation to the provinces. The  Council  must  as  a  matter  of
        urgency, table the Food Prices Monitoring Report.

4.2   Agricultural Research Council (ARC)

        The  ARC  is  a  statutory  body  established  in  terms   of   the
        Agricultural Research Act, Act 68 of  1990  and  is  the  principal
        agricultural research institution  in  South  Africa.  It  provides
        agricultural research and development, technology  and  support  to
        the agricultural community. It serves as a  custodian  of  national
        collections of insects, fungi as well as  the  South  African  gene
        banks. It delivers various services in the national interest,  such
        as  diagnostic  services,  migratory  pest   control   and   animal
        performance testing.


        Research activities have been aligned to address major government
        priorities such as, to modernize and grow the 2nd economy; to grow
        the competitiveness of the 1st economy and to create social
        security safety nets. Furthermore, to focus on integrated rural
        development, natural resource management, food security and trade
        development support.

        It has embarked on new initiatives,  which  include  introducing  a
        performance  management  culture,  improving   project   management
        systems and becoming more  customer-oriented.   Balanced  scorecard
        targets have been set and are designed to  focus  and  improve  the
        level of outputs  and  improve  the  investment  in  resource  poor
        farmers, while on the other hand ensuring the  delivery  on  public
        mandates with the Department of Agriculture. The priority  will  be
        to contribute to  the  national  agenda  for  stimulating  the  2nd
        economy and sustainable rural livelihoods,  and  to  contribute  to
        transforming the agricultural sector.

        It derives approximately 60% of its revenue from transfers from the
        Department of Agriculture. This amounts to R 312.9 million, R 333.3
        million and R 361.9 million over  the  MTEF  period.  The  external
        revenue ranges from R 215.1 million, R  234.5  million  and  R257.9
        million over the same period. It also  competes  for  supplementary
        research  funding  (transfers)  from  Department  of  Science   and
        Technology Innovation Fund. Commercial revenue as % of total income
        is 37% for 2003/4, 37% for 2005/6 and 38% for 2006/7  respectively.
        In terms of economic classification  for  2005/6,  compensation  of
        employees is R 344.4 million; Goods and service is approximately  R
        203.2 million; Use of infrastructure allocated R 29.1 million;  and
        Payment for Capital  assets  is  R  52.8  million.  Total  resource
        allocation for 2005/6 is R 629.6 million.


        It is still facing challenges in relation to competition for
        skilled capacity; investments made in public interest research; and
        investments in new infrastructure.



      Comments


        The Committee considered the report and noted:


     a) The unavailability of the documentation from Departments and State
        entities on time is unacceptable; and
     b) The non-availability of documents places difficulty to members to
        interact with people appearing before the Committee.


        The Committee agreed that:

        The   ARC   must   within   seven   working   days   forward    the
        Strategic/Business Plan to the committee;  also  must  forward  its
        projections on what is required in order to function effectively in
        serving  the  country.  The  external  funding  should  in  no  way
        influence the ARC to surrender its public mandate as stipulated  in
        the Act of Parliament. The  Council  must  continue  responding  to
        challenges posed both the  1st  and  2nd  economies;  and  also  to
        intensify research on the indigenous knowledge.


4.3   Onderstepoort Biological Products Limited

        The OBP Ltd is a biotechnical company  manufacturing  vaccines  and
        related products for the global  animal  healthcare  industry.  The
        company  was  established  in  accordance  with  the  Onderstepoort
        Biological  Products  Incorporation  Act   of   1999.   In   modern
        agriculture it is impossible  to  farm  profitably  with  livestock
        without  implementing  an  animal  health  programme   which   will
        incorporates vaccination. OBP provides a  wide  range  of  vaccines
        against most  endemic  and  economically  important  diseases  that
        occurs in livestock. It has  responsibility  to  ensure  production
        capacity, which enables quick response to disease outbreak in South
        Africa, SADC region and the continent.
        Strategic initiatives will focus on improvement and development of
        its internal and external customers, products and processes to
        ensure a sustainable and profitable organization. The following
        pillars needed to ensure sustainable and positive growth: efficient
        and effective distribution channels; the emerging sector in the
        domestic market; the development of international markets within
        the continent and abroad; production facility that meets GMP
        standards; the expanding of OBP product range; the development of
        research and development capacity and capability; and the strategic
        alliances.


        Currently, the company is developing and manufacturing 50 vaccines
        and 10 antigens for animal health care industry. Out of 50
        vaccines, 8 vaccines are for prevention of endemic disease in
        Africa and are uniquely produced. The present productive output is
        of the order of 100 million doses of vaccines per annum. In
        addition, the company manufactures 40 000 litres of diluents to
        accompany the vaccines. Direct and indirect exports are more than
        50% of total sales.


        The product line will mainly target the cattle, sheep, goat,  horse
        segment to ensure  good  health  and  growth  in  the  agricultural
        industry. Geographic focus will be South Africa, SADC, East Africa,
        North Africa, West  Africa,  European  Union,  Middle  East,  South
        America and India.
        The company is entirely self-financing. It derives its revenue from
        the  sale  of  vaccines  and  related  biological  products.  Since
        inception in 2000, OBP has consistently shown a positive growth  in
        sales. The contribution of exports since then has risen from 25% to
        50% of total sales, while growth in profits has increased.


        The income of R 36.0 million on local and R 35.5 million on  export
        sales for 2004/5 was realized. Whereas for 2005/6 income  on  local
        and export sales anticipated to  be  R  40.8  million  and  R  52.4
        million respectively. Total revenue for 2004/5 is  R  71.5  million
        and approximately R 93.2 million for 2005/6. Growth of 13% in local
        sales is based on emerging market; tender  business;  increased  in
        marketing  efforts;  sales  personnel  increase;  and  key  account
        management. Export sales growth of 48% is as a result of  increased
        marketing efforts.


      Comments


      The committee considered the report and noted that:

        The OBP is currently performing extremely well and is encouraged by
        the speed required to combat diseases.


        The Committee agreed that OBP must improve its Internal Marketing
        Strategy in other agricultural activities and must pay special
        attention to equity legislation in relation to people with
        disabilities. It must continue revamping old equipment and relate
        experiences to the African continent in order to fulfill NEPAD
        objectives.


4.4   Land Bank


        The Land Bank operates as a development finance institution within
        the agricultural and agribusiness sectors, regulated by the Land
        and Agricultural Development Bank Act (Act No. 15 of 2002). It
        provides a range of finance options to a broad spectrum
        of  clients   in   the   agricultural   sector,   including   rural
        entrepreneurs, women and youth,through its network of  27  branches
        and 37 satellite offices, supplemented by
         mobilebranches, which are primarily located in rural areas.

        The State is the only shareholder, represented by Minister for
        Agriculture and Land Affairs. Bank activities are governed by the
        Act and financial management guidelines provided by the Public
        Finance Management Act (Act No. 29 of 1999). Programmes are aligned
        with government’s key strategic programmes in the agricultural
        sector namely: the Agricultural Sector Plan; the Integrated
        Sustainable Rural Development Programme; the Comprehensive
        Agricultural Support Programme (CASP); and the Shareholder compact.


        The focus priorities are to implement more effective banking and
        financial business systems and implement processes and actions to
        ensure best practice and compliance with AC 133. Reposition the
        Bank to grow the commercial and development books and increased
        focus on financing BEE transactions, in terms of AgriBEE framework.
        Completing the business process review to ensure that there is
        improved productivity; streamlined operations and enhanced customer
        service. Consolidated the management team in order to continue to
        support Government’s priority programmes such as, land reform,
        agricultural credit scheme; and food security.
        Economic developments such as drought and delayed rains in Western
        Cape has a major negative impact on the agricultural sector and
        strong currency causes great difficulty for agricultural exporters
        such as wine and citrus producers. Grain prices are extremely low,
        especially serious for maize producers. Carrying over stocks in
        wine and maize sectors will continue to put downward pressure on
        prices and the sugar industry is benefiting from strong
        international sugar price.


        The role of the Bank in agricultural transformation relates to the
        BEE transactions and other empowerment projects being financed or
        currently being considered for financing by the Banks CFU business
        is approaching R 3.7 billion. Secondly, the current Retail book
        start up farmers amounts to R 663 million. Thirdly, the step up
        adds another R 74 million in loan volume. Since the Bank serves as
        one of the instruments of Government’s effort to encourage and
        support black economic empowerment in agriculture, it is important
        that the Bank’s capital adequacy position be sorted out as a matter
        of urgency. A higher capital adequacy ratio will improve the credit
        rating and dampen investor fears regarding the risk of lending
        funds to the Bank.


        The Bank’s micro-finance product, Step up, was introduced in April
        1998 and 123 564 clients have made use of it and R 169 million was
        disbursed in 2003/4, with participation increasing at an average
        rate of about 3 175 clients per month.


        The Department of Agriculture does not contribute financially to
        the bank, but has a high level representation on the Bank’s board.
        The Bank recorded a profit of R 247 million, accompanied by a 14%
        increase in the number of loans granted in 2003/4. The Capital
        adequacy of an appropriation of R 2 billion will increase capital
        adequacy ration to nearly 20% and will be adequate to shore up
        bank’s financial strength and restore investor confidence. A
        capital injection will require Bank to implement a turnaround plan
        to ensure:


        1. Profitability is maintained;
        2. Sustainability is ensured; and
        3. Capital adequacy is maintained.




      Comments


      The Committee considered the report and noted that:

     a) It is unacceptable to the Committee for the Land Bank to continue
        having male dominated Senior
        Management structure when the majority of South Africans are
        women;
     b) It must be visible and available to the stakeholders; and
     c) The presentation was good as compared to the previous years.

      The Committee agreed that:

        The Bank must address the issue of women representation in its
        Senior Management structures; table its turn-around strategy,
        process and transition once completed and that the turn-around
        strategy should relate to Government direction in terms of
        Presidential Address. It must provide the Committee with its Equity
        Plan and figures; its timeframes, time-lines, objectives and
        targets.

        The Committee further recommended that a closed session meeting
        with the Bank is required where the issue of interest rates will be
        discussed in detail. The Committee’s perspective is that it seems
        as even if the economic conditions improve in the country, the Land
        Bank rates remain the same or simply increase.

4.5   Perishable Products Exports Control Board

        The Perishable Products Export Control  Board  was  established  in
        terms of the Products Export Control Board Act (1983). Its  purpose
        is to ensure that perishable  products  intended  for  export  from
        South Africa  meets  international  quality  standards.  Activities
        include inspections and quality control, and  providing  technical,
        development, and market intelligence and information services.

        The Board is funded by its own revenue and does not receive
        transfers from government. Other non-tax revenue includes income
        derives from inspection services. Total revenue grew at an annual
        average rate of 13.4% between 2001/2 and 2004/5, and is projected
        to grow by 7% over the MTEF period, reaching R112.7 million in
        2007/8.
        Total revenue for 2004/5 amounts to R 93 million, which is
        attributed to Statutory Services; customized services and agency
        services and anticipated to be R 104 million for 2005/6. The Board
        indicates challenges experienced with regards delivery of a quality
        service to fulfill the mandate relates to: the under resourced if
        measured against the current requirements of 2% inspection of
        product and 100% monitoring of containers; a 4% expected volume
        growth for 2006; the increasing demands from customers regarding
        the delivery of information needs; and the added value at service
        delivery. Through a process started and approved by the Board in
        June 2004, the plan and the budget addresses the problem of
        resource shortages through a number of strategic programmes.

        Statutory services show a deficit of R 1 million mainly as a result
        of: the phased approach in adjusting levies to recover full cost
        per industry; and the implementation of five strategic programmes.
        The Expenditure of R 95 million increases by R 9.7 million (11%),
        which is made up as: the increase in statutory services excluding
        strategic programmes by R 4.0 million or 4.8%; and the increase in
        cost of strategic programmes by R 5.7 million or 321%.





      Comments


        Although the Committee has accepted the report, it had a concern
        about the implementation of the Equity Plan within the company.

      The Committee agreed that:

        Both the external and internal bursary programmes should be
        intensified towards historically disadvantaged individuals and
        should embark on recruitment drive that would ensure a better
        balance in staff compliment. It must continue to maintain quality
        standards with regards to our exports.


5.    Conclusion


        While the Committee agrees that during the past year the Department
        has  made  remarkable  progress  on   various   issues,   such   as
        transformation  of  the  sector  at  all  levels,   ensuring   that
        agriculture  is  becoming  inclusive,  competitive  and   alleviate
        poverty. Much, however, remains to be done to  create  an  enabling
        environment to achieve the country’s strategic goals.


        The  Committee  would  like  to  extend  special  appreciation  the
        Department and the associated entities  for  attending  the  budget
        hearings and hoping matters of concern would be attended.


4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
   Budget Vote 29, dated 7 June 2005

     The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
     considered Budget Vote 29, wishes to report as follows:


    A.      Introduction


        The Department of Land Affairs is mandated to provide an equitable
        and sustainable land dispensation that promotes social and economic
        development. The Committee examined the budget of the Department
        (Vote 29) for the financial year 2005/6 as well as the estimates
        for 2006/7/8 included in Estimates of National Expenditure (ENE).


    1.      Department of Land Affairs



        The main features of the 2005/6 budgets are:

1.1   Strategic overview and key policy developments for 2005/6 & 2007/8

        Strategic context for 2005/6: The framework for implementing land
        and agrarian reform is underpinned by the following:


   1. At international level by the Millenium Development goals;
   2. At regional level by the NEPAD;
        3. At sub-regional level by the SADC Land Technical facility; and
        4. At national level the framework takes into account the Vision
           2014 poverty alleviation and job creation; the Ten year review;
           the 2005 Cabinet Lekgotla resolutions; the 2004 and 2005 State
           of the Nation addresses; and the 2005 directives from the
           executing authority; consolidating the African agenda; socio-
           economic development; rural development and urban renewal.

             For 2005/6, the Department of Land Affairs will continue with
             Integrated land and agrarian reform implementation strategy;
             Micro-economic reform strategy (MERS); the comprehensive
             policy review process; the development planning within an
             African context; the contribution towards Urban Renewal
             Programme (URP) and Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
             Programme (ISRDP) land needs; the facilitating development
             planning for land reform projects; the devolution of functions
             to local government; the skilling of land reform
             beneficiaries; the State land disposal and management; the
             land for housing; the land for human settlement strategy; the
             Comprehensive Agriculture Support Programme (ACSP) and Land
             Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD); and
             decentralization of Land Planning and Information function
             (Project Mutingati).


1.2   Governance


       The Department will increase the capacity for the International
       Relations Unit; the training on diplomatic relations and protocol;
       the internship and leadership programme; the management development
       programme; the information security in terms of Minimum Information
       Security Standard (MISS); the skill audit; the citizen satisfaction
       survey; and service delivery improvement plan.
3. Amount of land to be delivered

       The Department indicated that the total size of land in South Africa
       is approximately 122 million hectares. The total farmland is
       approximately 100 million hectares. The total White owned
       agricultural farmland is amounts to 82 million hectares. The
       Government has set itself the target of delivering 30% of commercial
       agricultural land by 2014. This means that about 22 million hectares
       of agricultural land must have been delivered by 2014. Therefore,
       20.6 million hectares must still be delivered. On average 1.87
       million hectares must be delivered per year to meet the target.

4. Land delivered since 1994

       The total size of land delivered is about 3.5 million hectares (3
       536 756.06 hectares). This includes land delivered through the
       restitution, redistribution and state land. The total number of
       households/individuals that have benefited from land reform is 1 028
       887. The contribution per programme is as follows:

   1.4.1    Redistribution        -       1 780 260.35 hectares
   1.4.2    Restitution           -         812 315.00 hectares
   1.4.3    Tenure Reform    -              171 554.72 hectares
   1.4.4    State Land       -        772 660.00 hectares
1.5   Restitution Programme

       From 1999 to 31 December 2004, almost 57 257 claims have been
       settled, and benefited 164 103 households. About 812 315 hectares of
       land have been delivered. By 31 December 1998, validation project
       has ascertained that 79 696 claims had been lodged. The total of 28
       087 claims are yet to be settled by 2008/9. About 18 238 claims are
       to be settled by 2005/6. The remainder of 9 808 claims are to be
       settled between 2006/7 and 2008/9. These claims have an impact on
       the economy of South Africa, that is, agriculture is the backbone of
       the economy in KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and Limpopo.


6. State Land Management and Administration

       The Department stated that contrary to a widely held view, there is
       not much state land available for land reform purposes, especially
       for redistribution. State Land comprises about 24.5 million hectares
       or 20.3% of the total area of Republic of South Africa.
       Approximately 82.5% of state land is national while 17.5 is
       provincial. Department of Land Affairs controls 66.7% while
       Department of Public Works controls 33.3% of national state land.
       Only about 5% - 7% or 1.7 million hectares is available for
       allocation to land reform beneficiaries, the rest is used for state
       domestic purposes. Vesting of state land is necessary to confirm
       which “arm” of government owns it, before it can be used for land
       reform purposes. The Minister of Land Affairs does this by means of
       issuing a certificate.


7. On the Disposal of State Land

       Since 1998, Department of Land Affairs  disposed  of  the  following
       categories of State land for  the  various  land  reform  programmes
       through facilitation:

      1. Department of Land  Affairs  (former  SADT  land)  is  601  276.00
         hectares;
      2. Financial Assistance Agricultural Land is 50 000.00 hectares;
   3. Other Public Works Department Land is 91 350.00 hectares;
      4. Land for Housing projects is 30 000.00 hectares; and
   5. Total amounts to 772 626.00 hectares of land.

       The Department of Land Affairs is mandated to provide  an  equitable
       and sustainable land dispensation that promotes social and  economic
       development. The budget for 2005/6 amounts to total of R 3.8 billion
       while forward estimates anticipates for R 4.8 billion for 2006/7 and
       R 5.6 billion for 2007/8.

1.8   Budget in terms of Economic Classification for 2005/6


   1. Programme 1 – Administration (R 214 523 million);
   2. Programme 2 – Surveys and Mapping (R 75 256 million);
   3. Programme 3 – Cadastral Surveys (R 86 043 million);
   4. Programme 4 – Restitution (R 2.7 billion);
   5. Programme 5 – Land Reform (R 770 098 million);
   6. Programme 6 – Spatial Planning and Information (R 19.2 million); and
   7. Programme 7 – Auxilliary Services (R 10.6 million).

   8. Challenges faced by the Department of Land Affairs

          The Department  is  faced  with  enormous  challenges  related  to
          ensuring implementation of land  reform  at  a  reasonable  level;
          finalizing restitution process in 2007/8; managing risks  inherent
          in the restitution “high drive”; not much state  land  exists  for
          redistribution or restitution purposes  (most  of  it  is  already
          settled); high land  prices;  some  unco-operative  land  sellers;
          organized agriculture must demonstrate more concrete commitment to
          land reform; expropriation is  constitutionally  possible,  but  a
          “political hot potato,” and increasing the culture of respect  for
          land rights of vulnerable groups like  labour  tenants,  occupiers
          and other farm dwellers.


      Comments



          The Committee commended the Department on the expenditure patterns
          as compared to the previous years and noted the bottle-necks in
          relation to the involvement of other sister Departments in the
          land reform processes both at national and provincial levels is a
          serious concern.

2.    The Committee had an opportunity to engage on  budgetary  issues  with
      entities that are reporting to the Department such  as,  the  KwaZulu-
      Natal Ingonyama Trust Board; the Commission  on  Restitution  of  Land
      Rights; the Khula Land Reform Credit  Facility;  and  the  Bala  Farms
      (Pty) Ltd.


    2.1     KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Board


          The KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Board was established  in  terms
          of the KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Act (1994)  as  amended.  The
          Board, Chaired by His Majesty the King (or his nominee) and  eight
          other members appointed by the Minister of Land Affairs, came into
          operation in  October  1998  to  administer  the  affairs  of  the
          Ingonyama Trust.

          The core business of the  trust  is  to  manage  its  2.7  million
          hectares  of  land,  spread  throughout  KwaZulu-Natal,  for   the
          material  benefit  and  social  well  being  of  individual  tribe
          members. Activities undertaken by the board include:  transferring
          townships to local authorities;  granting  permissions  to  occupy
          (PTOs);  granting  servitudes;  issuing  leases;  identifying  and
          transferring land for state domestic purposes; registering assets;
          minerals administration; restructuring  state  forests;  compiling
          asset registers; and developing a land tenure information system.

          The Board has granted 130 leases covering 10 000 hectares, which
          generates revenue of about R 600 000 a year. A further 12 leases
          are being processed, covering 1 684 hectares with an estimated
          revenue of R 145 000 per year. The leases cover land for diverse
          uses, such as shopping centers, game parks, residential
          developments, lodges, petrol filling stations, telecommunication
          base stations, sugar cane farming, grazing and aquaculture
          projects.

          A total income of R 13.3 million is budgeted for 2005/6, of which
          R 11.9 million
           will be redistributed to the communities. The Trust  receives  an
          allocation of
          from the  Department  of  Land  Affairs  to  cover  the  operating
          expenses of its
          Secretariat,which is expected to be R 2.1 million in 2005/6.


      The following programmes will be implemented over the medium term:

     a)  Finalizing  the  transfer  of  KwaZulu-Natal  townships  to  local
        authorities, establishing township registers and  upgrading  tenure
        rights;
     b) Extending the security of tenure on trust land and providing rental
        income to communities living on trust land;
     c) Concluding the registration of all vested assets in the name of the
        trust, which involves the consolidation and registration of  titles
        for each traditional authority area (the trust  currently  holds  1
        478 titles); and
     d) Finalizing the transfer of land used for state purposes to relevant
        government Departments and municipalities



      Comments


        The Committee considered the report and commended the Board on the
        progress made since the last engagement and agreed that:


        The Department of Land Affairs must seriously consider some of the
        models employed by the Ingonyama Trust Board in KZN in particular
        when implementing elements of the Communal Land Rights Act.



2.2   Commission on Restitution of Land Rights



        The President in the State of the Nation Address on 11 February
        2005 gave a directive that additional resources would be allocated
        over the next three years to cover outstanding claims in the land
        restitution programme. In line with the Presidential directive the
        Commission is therefore committed to settle all outstanding urban
        claims in the 2005/6 financial year and all outstanding rural
        claims by 31 March 2008. The settlement of claims would be part of
        the process to reach the delivery of the 30% target of agricultural
        land by 2015 and thus ensuring not only the attainability of
        economical stability and poverty eradication but also the socio-
        political stability in rural areas. The Minister of Finance has in
        the Budget Speech of 23rd February announced that R 6 billion has
        been allocated to complete the land restitution process.

        In relation to claims to be settled, the total number of claims  to
        be settled in 2005/6 is approximately 12 875. Of  this  number,  10
        063 are urban while 2  812  are  rural  claims.  The  breakdown  of
        figures per Province is as follows:


      2.2.1 Eastern Cape (2 869 urban claims) while  the  number  of  (rural
      claims is 338);


      2.2.2 Free State and Northern Cape has a combined  number  of  (1  536
      urban claims) and (269 rural claims);
      2.2.3 Gauteng and North West has (71  urban  claims)  and  (228  rural
      claims);


      2.2.4 KwaZulu-Natal has (3 311 urban claims) and (746 are rural);


      2.2.5 Limpopo there are (56 urban claims) and (448 rural claims);


      2.2.6 Mpumalanga has (215 urban claims) and (415 rural claims); and


      2.2.7 Western Cape has (2 005 urban claims) and (368 rural claims).

        Over the past five years the experience curve shows that the past
        reasons for success are due to: the Section 42D Ministerial
        approval; the integration of the Commission with the Department of
        Land Affairs. This results to a more coherent flow of work. The
        grouping of individual urban claims; the use of Service Providers
        for specific tasks; the location of Regional Land Claims Commission
        offices closer to the people; the increase in resources allocation;
        and the fact that 80% of claims are urban thus it is faster to
        resolve.

        Land prices in KwaZulu-Natal are R 25 000 per hectare and in
        Limpopo and Mpumalanga R 50 000 per hectare for sugar cane. Most of
        the privately owned land that was purchased was agricultural land;
        the lowest price paid was R 900 000 per hectare in Limpopo for a
        farm with macadamia nuts and mango’s (export). Land prices in the
        country are high.


        The outstanding claims are all in various stages in the settlement
        process. Rural claims poses the following requirements: assist
        claimants to structure their various affidavits; the disputes
        resolution and mediation; the land price negotiations with current
        land owners; the protracted and costly processes, for example,
        expropriation; and the institutional capacity for community legal
        entities.


        These requirements shall included the following: the financial
        resources; the human resource requirements; the office
        accommodation and equipment; the administrative support to fast
        track the process; and the strategic partnership with relevant
        stakeholders.

        Restitution programme aims to restore  land  and  provide  suitable
        compensation to victims of forced removals. The programme  consists
        of three  sub-programmes,  that  is,  the  National  Office,  which
        provides administrative and professional support to and Secretarial
        services  to  the  Commission  for  processing  and   investigating
        restitution claims. The sub-programme also develops and coordinates
        restitution policy and oversees court cases. Regional  Offices  are
        responsible for negotiating restitution  agreements  and  providing
        administrative   support   services   to   regional   land   claims
        commissioners.


        Restitution Grants distributes grants that are used to restore land
        and makes provision for alternative land to victims.  Provides  for
        payment of compensation and alternative relief, settlement planning
        and facilitation assistance, and contributes to costs incidental to
        resettling communities.
        In total the budget set out additional allocations of R 2.4 billion
        for 2005/6, R 3.1 billion for 2006/7 and R2.6  billion  for  2007/8
        over the MTEF period. By the end of 2003/4,  approximately  48  825
        claims had been settled: 60.2% of the 79  696  claims  lodged.  The
        cumulative number of settled claims for 2003/4 was 56  719,  (71.2%
        of the total of 79 696 claims lodged). Urban claims  accounted  for
        87% or 42 712 while rural claims accounted for 13% or 6 113. During
        2004/5, up to the six months ending 30 September 2004, 8 143 claims
        were settled, or 46.8% of the targeted amount of 17 383.


        The total allocated budget of R 727.4 million was  fully  utilized,
        with R 464 million or 64% settling urban claims and R  262  million
        or 36% going to acquiring land. These settlements benefited 33  097
        households  and  145  437  beneficiaries.  The   amount   of   land
        transferred was 148 643 hectares, with a total committed amount  of
        R 928 million.

        As a result of ongoing negotiations with Provincial Governments and
        the Department of  Land  Affairs,  various  commitments  have  been
        received from provincial governments and the Department  to  ensure
        that all outstanding rural claims are settled by 31 March 2008. The
        Belgian Government has also donated R 49 million to  speed  up  the
        verification of remaining claims and a further 6 million Euros  for
        post-settlement support for the 2006/7 financial years.
        Although in relation to models for financing, there had been
        several proposals around models for financing land reform, that is
        scheduling of payment, scheduling the return of land, strategic
        partnerships, land tax, subdivision of large farms etc, these
        proposals are still under discussion with various stakeholders.



      Comments


        The Committee considered the report and noted:

   a) The progress made by the Commission despite the difficulties and
      enormous problems;


   b) The issue District and Local Municipalities in relation to sound
      financial management needs to be attended;
   c) The role and contribution of Strategic partners in the restitution
      process needs to be considered to ensure that communities do not loose
      out in such relationships;


   d) The non-utilization of the Expropriation by the Commission despite
      being constitutional in terms of section 25(2) of the Constitution of
      the Republic of South Africa;

   e) The unco-operative role played by organized agriculture in the
      restitution process; and

   f) The role played by unscrupulous valuers in relation to land prices in
      the country.

      The Committee also agreed that:

       In the provinces, there are still many practical challenges that need
       to be addressed; and those people who missed December 1998 deadline
       can in terms of section 6(2)b of the Act, make use of other
       Government programmes such as the Redistribution and Land tenure.



2.3   Khula Land Reform Credit Facility


       The  Department  of  Land  Affairs  established  the   Land   Reform
       Empowerment Facility (LREF), located within Khula  Enterprise  as  a
       revolving  credit  loan  facility  in  1998,  for   financing   land
       acquisition  and  equity  in  commercial  farming  ventures.   Khula
       Enterprise Finance Limited was contracted to administer the funds on
       behalf of the Department.


       The partnership approach with the Private Sector has assisted in
       facilitating the establishment of viable land reform projects. The
       wholesale revolving funding facility is to provide highly
       concessionary (flexible repayment terms, lower transaction costs and
       reduced cost of capital) loans.
       Performance since inception to march 2005  is  approximately  R  107
       million. The sources of capital are: the Department of Land  Affairs
       (R 117 million); the European  Union  (R  27  million);  the  Danish
       Development  Agency  (R  1.7  million);  and   the   Department   of
       Environmental Affairs and Tourism (R20  million).  Khula  Enterprise
       has implemented the following  programmes:  the  Broad  Based  Black
       Economic Empowerment Act; the Financial Sector Charter; the  AgriBEE
       Charter (still at development stage); and the Tourism Charter  (also
       still at development stage).


       The fund is progressing well and performed exceptionally well in that
       it exceeded all its targets. In terms of recapitalization, the
       Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has committed an
       additional R 20 million to the fund. Additional funding requests of
       R 200 million have been put to the Industrial Development
       Corporation (R 100 million) and the Department of Trade and Industry
       (R 100 million). More effort is being made in the current year to
       extend the scheme to under-serviced Provinces and diversify and
       shift the focus away from the Western Cape.

       Currently, Khula is conducting skills gap survey on the projects.
       The partnership approach with Primary Agriculture Education and
       Training Authority (PAETA), the Comprehensive Agricultural Support
       Programme (CASP), and the Small Enterprise Development Agency (SEDA)
       has been entered into.


       On the way forward the  focus  will  be  on  the  provincial  budget
       allocations;    organizational    partnership    approach;    closer
       relationship with provincial  Department  of  Land  Affairs  offices
       (LRAD); the Corporate partners for example,  TSB,  recapitalization,
       and the coordinated and structured capacity building approach.



      Comments


      The Committee considered the report and noted that:

     a) There seems to be no relationship between Khula and the Land Bank;


     b) The after-care support needs to be intensified against the backdrop
        that some of LRAD projects are failing in the provinces; and

     c) The outreach programme to rural communities is not visible;

        The Committee agreed that Khula must ensure the  provincial  equity
        in resource allocations and  improve  on  the  target  market.  The
        report reflects in terms of beneficiaries 46% female and 54%  male.
        There is no reflection in relation to people with disability.


   2.4      Bala Farms (Pty) Limited


        Bala Farms (Pty) is a state-owned company created by the former
        Bophuthatswana administration to buy and administer farms outside
        the homeland territory. The company is being deregistered in line
        with the Department’s land reform policy. A new deadline of 31
        March 2005 was set. Properties that have not been disposed of by
        that date will be transferred to the Department of Land Affairs for
        disposal.


        On progress on the properties remaining, the company reports that 4
        farming units consisting of 7 farm portions had to  be  transferred
        to the identified  beneficiaries.  Portions  41,  64,  83  of  farm
        Grootfontein 115 JO have been transferred to Department to complete
        the disposal process, as this  was  delaying  the  de-registration.
        Portions 22 of farm Blaauwbank 127 JO has also been transferred.

        On the remaining properties, the company reports that Portion 2  of
        farm Logaga 124 KP has been disposed of.  Portion  14  of  farm  De
        Putten 56 JO has been transferred free  of  charge  to  beneficiary
        community.


        De-registration process meant that first, all assets and
        liabilities had to be liquidated or ceded to the Department. All
        debts were settled including an amount of R 1.5 million owed to the
        North West (Loan was originally provided by Agricor). The last
        payments by the company were made on 9 March 2005 and a cession of
        all existing claims in favour of or against the company had to be
        issued as a contingent. All outstanding lease rentals were
        collected and pro rata payments for remaining periods of the leases
        were paid over to beneficiaries.


        Secondly, a Certificate of compliance has to  be  issued  by  South
        African Revenue (SARS). A dispute with  SARS  regarding  the  money
        owed to or by the company took longer to resolve than  anticipated.
        Nevertheless, this was resolved in March
        2005 after excellent co-operation with  SARS  staff  and  in  depth
        analysis of all matters relating to VAT and Income Tax.  The  final
        results have been incorporated into the financial statements of the
        company for 2004/5 financial years. The final certificate  will  be
        issued to the Registrar of Companies after the 2005 audit has  been
        completed. SARS was requested to cancel the company’s  registration
        for PAYE, SDL & VAT.

        Thirdly, relevant resolutions had to be taken by the Board, that
        is, the deregistration of the Company; the transfer of shareholding
        from Chairperson of Company to the Department; the payment of the
        pre-deregistration dividend of R 15.3 million declared and paid to
        the Department on 23 March 2005; and the application of
        deregistration was sent to the Registrar on 30 March 2005.

        Finally,  accounting,  auditing  and  legal  matters  had   to   be
        satisfied. All bank accounts have been  closed  subsequent  to  the
        payment  of  the   pre-deregistration   dividend;   the   financial
        statements were compiled in March  2005;  the  Auditor-General  has
        commenced with the final audit of financial  statements.  Once  the
        audit is complete, the statements will be  lodged  with  SARS.  The
        Registrar of Companies will then in a position  to  deregister  the
        company because the company will hold no  further  liabilities  for
        Income Tax, VAT, PAYE or SDL.

        The company has ceased its operations and the final deregistration
        is now in the hands of the Auditor-General, the South African
        Revenue Service and the Registrar of Companies.



      Comments


        The Committee considered and accepted the report and appreciated the
        work  done  by  the  company  and  the  Department  for   completing
        deregistration process within stipulated time.

3.    Conclusion

       While the Committee accepted the reports presented, the Department
       of Land Affairs is making transfer payments to Provincial
       Governments, Local Authorities and community based legal entities on
       the basis of Agency Agreements. The purpose of such transfers is to
       facilitate the implementation of projects such as infrastructure,
       tenure, and agricultural support arising from the Restitution and
       Redistribution of land to beneficiaries.


       The Department must remain accountable for the expenditure of such
       transfer of funds. Compliance in terms of the Division of Revenue
       Act needs to be examined to assess whether the nature of these
       transactions does not fall within the ambit of the law so that those
       institutions who do not comply, necessary mechanisms could be taken
       to rectify the situation.


       The Committee would like to extend its appreciation to the
       Department and associated entities for attending and participating
       in the budget hearings.



                            TUESDAY, 21 JUNE 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 21 June 2005  in  terms  of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as  a  section  76
         Bill:


        (i)      National Credit Bill [B 18 – 2005]  (National  Assembly  –
        sec 76)

2.    Translations of Bill submitted

    (1)     The Minister of Finance

        (i)       Wysigingswetsontwerp  op   Belastingwette   [W   19—2005]
           (National Assembly—sec 77)

           This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the  Taxation
           Laws Amendment Bill [B 19—2005] (National Assembly—sec 77).

    (2)     The Minister of Trade and Industry

        (i)      Wysigingswetsontwerp op  Beslote  Korporasies  [W  6—2005]
           (National Assembly—sec 75)

           This is the official translation into  Afrikaans  of  the  Close
           Corporations Amendment Bill [B  6—2005]  (National  Assembly—sec
           75).

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Assembly

     The following member has resigned his seat  in  the  National  Assembly
     with effect from 15 June 2005:


       Zuma, J G.



2.    Membership of Committees


    (1)     The following changes have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
       Standing Committees, viz:


       Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions:
       Discharged: Jankielsohn, Mr R

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
      Report of the Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF) for  2003-2004,
      including the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
      Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 153-2004].


2.    SPEAKER AND THE CHAIRPERSON

      REPORT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION TO THE 112TH  IPU  ASSEMBLY  IN
      MANILA, 3-8 APRIL 2005


1.    Introduction


A number of activities and meetings  preceded  the  official  start  of  the
Assembly. These included meetings of the Executive  Committee  of  the  IPU,
the Steering  Committee  and  cultural  activities  organized  by  the  host
country. In communication sent  to  parliaments  the  following  agenda  was
submitted to help delegations prepare for the 112th Assembly:


Agenda

    ▪ Election of the President and Vice-Presidents of the 112th Assembly.
    ▪ Consideration of possible requests for the inclusion of  an  emergency
      item in the Assembly agenda.
    ▪ General debate on the political, economical and  social  situation  in
      the world with the  overall  theme  of  The  impact  of  domestic  and
      international policies on the situation of women.
    ▪ The role of  parliaments  in  the  establishment  and  functioning  of
      mechanisms to provide for the judgement and sentencing of war  crimes,
      crimes against humanity,  genocide  and  terrorism,  with  a  view  to
      avoiding impunity (Committee on Peace and International Security).
    ▪ The role  of  parliaments  in  establishing  innovative  international
      financing and trading mechanisms to address the problems of  debt  and
      achieve the Millennium Development  Goals  (Committee  on  Sustainable
      Development, Finance and Trade).
    ▪ The role of parliaments in  advocating  and  enforcing  observance  of
      human rights in the strategies  for  the  prevention,  management  and
      treatment of HIV/AIDS  pandemic  (Committee  on  Democracy  and  Human
      Rights).
The South African delegation was as follows:


Members


Mbete, B (Speaker and Leader of the Delegation)
Bapela, K O
Coetzee, R
De Lille, P
Mgabadeli, H C
Mahlawe, N M
Njikelana, S J (additional, as IPU Committee rapporteur)
Themba, M P
Van der Merwe, J H

Officials

Hahndiek, K
Paulse, C
Barnard, A
Mamabolo, A M

2. Inaugural ceremony of  the  112th  Assembly  of  the  Inter-Parliamentary
   Union

The inaugural ceremony of the 112th IPU Assembly took place on 3 April. The
Ceremony was addressed by the President of the Republic of the Philippines,
H.E. Mrs Gloria Macapal-Arroyo and Mr Robert Orr, Assistant Secretary-
General for policy planning, United Nations.

Address by Mr Robert Orr

Presenting the message from the UN Secretary-General, Mr Orr said that
world leaders would meet at a summit in New York to review progress since
the Millennium Declaration. Decisions there would set the world on course
to halve global poverty in ten years, reduce the threats of war and
terrorism and reform the United Nations in an unprecedented way. He asked
each developing country to adopt and start to implement comprehensive
national strategies and to complete the Doha round of trade negotiations by
2006 in order to reach, by 2015, the agreed target of spending 0.7 per cent
of GDP on official development assistance. He invited all states to
complete and sign comprehensive conventions on terrorism and nuclear
terrorism, and to form a UN Peacebuilding Commission.

Address by the President of the Republic of the Philippines, H.E. Mrs
Gloria Macapal-Arroyo

The President said that the Assembly had gathered to celebrate democracy
and parliamentarians across the world who had dedicated their lives to
building the fabric of democracy. Pressing issues for the Assembly were:
the eradication of poverty, strengthening security in the face of terrorism
whilst preserving individual liberty, globalisation and equality for all.
She welcomed the biggest delegation of women parliamentarians in the twenty-
year history of the association. She declared the 112th Assembly open.


3.    Africa Group


Six geopolitical groups are active within the IPU. The  geopolitical  groups
exist to facilitate the work of the IPU. The Africa Group, which is  one  of
the geopolitical groups, convenes  meetings  of  all  African  parliamentary
delegations attending IPU Assemblies in order to discuss  issues  of  mutual
interest.


Emergency item


The  meeting  discussed  the  eight  proposals  which  were  submitted   for
inclusion as emergency items in the agenda of the Assembly.

A decision was taken to support the proposal put forward by  Algeria.  Other
delegations, including South Africa,  felt  however  that  the  proposal  by
Algeria was reactive as it dealt only with rebuilding  countries  devastated
by natural disasters and did not address the issue of how  countries  should
plan and prepare themselves to deal with  natural  disasters,  and  proposed
that there should be built into the proposal an element of proactiveness.

The meeting then agreed that the  delegation  of  Algeria  should  meet  the
delegation of Turkey which had submitted a  broader  proposal  on  the  same
topic,  with  a  view  to  coming  up  with  a  new  wording   taking   into
consideration the concerns raised in the meeting of the African Group.


Filling of vacancies


   a) Elections to the Bureaux of the Standing Committees

The Officers of the three Standing Committees were due for election  at  the
end of the 112th Assembly. The Africa Group agreed that  the  incumbents  in
the Bureaux of the Standing Committees who were from the African  Group  and
who were eligible for re-election, be nominated to continue in  their  posts
and complete their four-year terms of office.

   b) Presidency of the IPU
Two candidates had presented themselves as candidates for President  of  the
IPU. The two candidates are Mr P F Casini of Italy  and  Mr  G  Versnick  of
Belgium. The election of the President of the IPU  will  take  place  during
the 113th IPU Conference in October 2005 in Geneva.

The delegations of the Parliaments of  Egypt  and  Morocco  expressed  their
support for Mr Casini and urged the African Group to put its  weight  behind
him. Other delegates felt that they were not against the candidature  of  Mr
Casini in principle but that they  would  like  Mr  Casini  to  address  the
African Group.


4.    Governing Council


The Governing Council met on 4 and 8  April  2005.  The  Council  heard  the
report of the President of  the  IPU  on  his  activities  since  the  175th
session of the Governing Council, and the annual  report  of  the  Secretary
General on the activities of the IPU  in  2004.  The  Council  examined  the
request for  reaffiliation  to  the  IPU  submitted  by  the  Parliament  of
Georgia, and decided to readmit the Parliament of Georgia  as  a  member  of
the Union.

The Council also examined reports on the following issues:


Speakers’ Conference


The Speakers’ Conference is scheduled for 7 to 9  September  2005.  All  the
preparations for the Conference are being made by the Preparatory  Committee
set up by the Union’s governing bodies. The Committee will  hold  its  final
meeting in Libreville, Gabon from 20 to 22 May 2005. On that  occasion,  the
Committee will address four major issues, namely,

    ▪ The draft declaration for the Speakers’ Conference
    ▪ Follow-up to the 2000 Speakers’ Conference
    ▪ Review of the handbook on Framework for democracy
    ▪ Cooperation between parliaments and the United Nations


Meeting of Women Parliamentarians


The tenth Meeting of Women Parliamentarians took place on 3  April  and  was
attended by 120 women from 79  different  countries.  Ms  Mgabadeli,  Ms  de
Lille  and  Ms  Themba  attended  the  meeting.  Men  parliamentarians  also
participated  in  the  meeting.  The  Meeting  of   Women   Parliamentarians
celebrated its twentieth anniversary. The Meeting was briefed  on  the  work
of the Gender Partnership Group on the  activities  relating  to  monitoring
the participation of women at the IPU, examining the budget  from  a  gender
perspective and  monitoring  the  situation  of  parliaments  without  women
members. In this  regard,  the  Group  held  a  dialogue  session  with  the
delegation from Kuwait.

Philippine and South Africa were recognized as some of  the  countries  with
progressive gender laws.


Gender Partnership Group


The Group studied the composition of delegations  attending  the  112th  IPU
Assembly in Manila and previous IPU statutory meetings. As at 7 April  2005,
out of the 614 delegates attending the 112th IPU Assembly,  165  were  women
(26.9%). At the 112th Assembly, the 12 all-male delegations  were  from  the
Parliaments of Algeria,  Bolivia,  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Korea,  El
Salvador, Iceland, Kuwait, Mali,  Malta,  Papua  New  Guinea,  Samoa,  Saudi
Arabia and the Syrian Arab Republic. The Group engaged in dialogue with  the
delegation of Kuwait regarding progress made in  the  promotion  of  women’s
rights in that country. It took note of recent developments  in  Kuwait  and
expressed its support for  a  bill  currently  under  consideration  at  the
Majles Al Ummah which would grant women the right to vote and to  stand  for
elections at both the local and national levels.


Committee on the Human Rights of Parliamentarians


The Governing Council adopted, on the recommendation  of  the  Committee  on
the Human Rights of Parliamentarians, a report with resolutions relating  to
17 countries on individual human rights cases.  Parliaments  were  urged  to
follow up in whatever manner they may deem appropriate on  one  or  more  of
the resolutions on individual human rights cases.


Committee on Middle East Questions


The  Committee  agreed  that  prospects  for  peace  in   the   region   had
considerably improved in recent months, although it was too  early  to  talk
of significant steps forward. The Committee also discussed  the  possibility
of an IPU mission being sent to the region at the time  of  the  Palestinian
legislative  elections  on  17  July  2005  and  expressed  the  hope   that
discussions on the subject under way in the Executive Committee of  the  IPU
would lead to the establishment of an IPU presence on that occasion.


Committee to promote respect for international humanitarian law


The  Committee  discussed  the  results  of   the   regional   parliamentary
conference  on  Refugees  in  Africa:  The  challenges  of  protection   and
solutions held in Cotonou (Benin) in June 2004.  The  African  Parliamentary
Union (APU) will be discussing follow-up to the Conference  at  the  meeting
of its Executive Committee in May 2005. It was  agreed  that  contacts  with
national parliaments should be enhanced within the framework  of  the  APU’s
follow-up mechanism. Furthermore, emphasis was also laid on  the  importance
of engaging  sub-regional  parliamentary  assemblies  in  Africa  to  ensure
efficient implementation of the Cotonou results. A practical booklet on  the
Conference was produced by United Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees
(UNHCR), and the APU will be distributing it to its members.


Consultants’ report on communications strategy


The  IPU  took  the  first  step  to  develop  a  corporate   branding   and
communications strategy. Saatchi & Saatchi Geneva was chosen  to  prepare  a
strategic analysis with specific proposals, inter alia, on how to  make  the
IPU better known and its mission and work better understood.

The consultants identified charter and structure, leadership,  attitude  and
resources as issues to be addressed.

They also observed that the level of investment in  communications  must  be
increased in order to raise the profile of the organization.  Leadership  of
the organization must be visible, and the President,  Executive  and  senior
members of the Secretariat must be directly involved in  brand-building  and
communications and be willing to commit the necessary time.

Future Inter-Parliamentary Union meetings

The Governing Council approved the following meetings:

14 – 19 October 2005   113th Assembly and Related Meetings
                                  Geneva

7 – 12 May 2006                   114th Assembly and Related Meetings
                                  Nairobi (Kenya)


Amendments to the Statutes


The Executive Committee proposed to the Governing Council that when
considering requests from potential members for cancellation of former
debts owing to the Union, particular consideration should be given to the
following: whether the parliament in question has relinquished a single-
party system in favour of a multi-party one, the amount of time that has
elapsed since previous membership of the Union, the severity of the
economic circumstances prompting the request, and the external factors
causing those circumstances, such as recent civil strife. The Governing
Council approved in principle a new rule in that regard.

5.    The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union

The Assembly met on 4, 5, 7 and 8 April. At the first sitting of the
Assembly on 4 April, Mr Franklin M Drilon, President of the Senate
(Philippines) was elected President by acclamation and took the chair.
The Assembly held a general debate on the political, economic and social
situation in the world with the overall theme of “The impact of domestic
and international policies on the situation of women”. During the general
debate, a number of speakers from different parliaments took the floor. The
Speaker and Mr Coetzee participated in the general debate on behalf of the
South African delegation. The Speaker also chaired part of the morning
session of the Assembly on Monday, 4 April.

In her speech, the Speaker said that African leaders needed to be commended
for adopting positions which favoured women especially in the African Union
(AU). 50 per cent of AU’s commissioners were women. In the South African
Government, 41.2 per cent of Ministers were women. Resources were needed to
turn policies into better lives for women. International and national
policies were good and effective only if those committed to them allocated
resources for their implementation. They would be effective when
parliamentarians played the necessary oversight role to ensure that the
executive complied with the international conventions ratified by
individual countries.

In his speech, Mr Coetzee said that the situation of women was best in
those countries which had a culture of protecting the individual rights of
every person. One underlying factor in the pandemic of HIV/AIDS in Sub-
Sahara was the fact that many women did not have the power, either physical
or social, to control what happened to their bodies. The empowerment of
women in the fight against HIV was two parts of the same struggle.

The Assembly was also addressed by Ms Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of
UNICEF.

Ms Bellamy said that there had been an 18 per cent decline in child
mortality since 1990, but the marginalisation and exploitation of children
continued. She appealed to delegates to use their power to create real and
lasting improvements for children. Beyond charity, there was a need for
acts of law and leadership by legislators. Powerful interests wished to
spend money on the military and bureaucracy. However, there were even
stronger reasons to fight for women and children, to enable them to realize
their full potential and protect them from abuse. A UNICEF report in 2005
had identified conflict, poverty and HIV/AIDS as the key challenges facing
children and women. It had found that more than one billion children were
being robbed of their childhood by these three forces.

Half a million women died in childbirth every year. HIV/AIDS spread ever
more rapidly amongst women, whilst the use of systematic rape as a weapon
of war was increasing. One of UNICEF’s Millennium Development Goals was the
empowerment of children and women.

6.    Consideration of possible requests for the inclusion of an mergency
   item in the Assembly agenda

Eight items,  all  on  natural  disasters,  were  submitted  by  Sri  Lanka,
Algeria, Japan, Chile, Hungary, Turkey, Indonesia, and the Islamic  Republic
of Iran. After discussion, the nine sponsors finally agreed  to  submit  the
following item to the Assembly:

Natural disaster: The role of parliaments in prevention, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and the protection of vulnerable groups.

The item was unanimously agreed to and referred to a Drafting Committee.  Mr
Bapela represented the South African delegation on the  Drafting  Committee.
The Drafting Committee examined  various  proposals  and  prepared  a  draft
resolution which was subsequently adopted by the  Assembly.  The  resolution
is attached as annexure “A”.

7.    First Standing Committee on Peace and Security

The Committee considered the following agenda item:
The role of parliaments in the establishment and functioning of mechanisms
to provide for the judgement and sentencing of war crimes, crimes against
humanity, genocide and terrorism, with a view
to avoid impunity.
The Committee had before it a report and a draft resolution prepared by  the
co-rapporteurs, as well  as  amendments  and  sub-amendments  to  the  draft
resolution that had been submitted within the statutory deadline.
Mr Van der Merwe and Ms Mahlawe represented the South African delegation  on
the Committee.
Following the debate, the Committee  appointed  a  Drafting  Committee.  The
Drafting  Committee  examined  the  draft  resolution   submitted   by   the
rapporteurs and proposed amendments, as well as sub-amendments  and  amended
the draft resolution accordingly. The drafting  committee  then  prepared  a
draft resolution which was considered by the Standing Committee and  adopted
by consensus.
The plenary sitting of the Assembly adopted the draft  resolution  (attached
as annexure “B”) unanimously.
The Committee proposed to the Assembly the inclusion on the agenda of the
114th Assembly a subject item entitled “The role of Parliaments in
strengthening the control of trafficking in small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition”, and the appointment of the following persons as co-
Rapporteurs: Mr Francois-Xavier de Donnea (Belgium) and Mrs Ruth Oniango
(Kenya). The proposals were subsequently approved by the Assembly.
8.    Second Standing Committee on  Sustainable  Development,   Finance  and
Trade

The Committee considered the following agenda item:
The role of parliaments in establishing innovative  international  financing
and trading mechanisms to address  the  problem  of  debt  and  achieve  the
Millennium Development Goals.
The Committee considered a report and draft resolution prepared by  the  co-
rapporteurs, as well as amendments and sub-amendments.
Ms De Lille and Ms Mgabadeli represented the  South  African  delegation  on
the Committee.
Following the debate, the Committee  appointed  a  Drafting  Committee.  The
Drafting  Committee  examined  the  draft  resolution   submitted   by   the
rapporteurs and proposed amendments. The drafting committee then prepared  a
draft resolution which was considered by the Standing Committee and  adopted
by consensus.
The draft resolution (attached as annexure “C”) was  subsequently  submitted
to the plenary sitting of the Assembly and unanimously adopted.
The Committee proposed to the Assembly the inclusion on the  agenda  of  the
114th  Assembly  a  subject  item  entitled  “The  role  of  Parliaments  in
environmental  management  and  in  combating  global  degradation  of   the
environment”,  and  the  appointment  of  the  following  persons   as   co-
Rapporteurs: Mr Shuichi Katoh (Japan) and Mr Jose Thomaz Nono (Brazil).  The
proposals were subsequently approved by the Assembly.
   9. Third Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights

The Committee considered the following agenda item:
The role of parliaments in advocating  and  enforcing  observance  of  human
rights in the strategies for the prevention,  management  and  treatment  of
the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
The Committee had before it a report and a draft resolution prepared by  the
co-rapporteurs, as well as amendments to the draft resolution.
Ms Themba and Mr Coetzee represented the South  African  delegation  on  the
Committee. Mr Coetzee participated in the debate.
Following the debate, the Committee  appointed  a  drafting  Committee.  The
drafting  Committee  examined  the  draft  resolution   submitted   by   the
rapporteurs and enhanced it  with  some  of  the  proposed  amendments.  The
drafting committee then prepared a draft resolution which was considered  by
the Standing Committee and adopted by consensus.
The draft resolution (attached as Annexure “D”) was subsequently adopted  by
consensus by the plenary sitting of the Assembly.
The Committee proposed to the Assembly the inclusion on the  agenda  of  the
114th Assembly a  subject  item  entitled  “How  parliaments  can  and  must
promote effective ways of combating violence against women in  all  fields”,
and the appointment of the following persons as  co-Rapporteurs:  Mrs  Maria
Antonia Martinez Garcia (Spain) and Mrs Hyehoon  Lee  (Republic  of  Korea).
The proposals were subsequently approved by the Assembly.

10. Committee on the Human Rights of Parliamentarians

The South African delegation requested an opportunity to  be  heard  by  the
Committee on the Human Rights of Parliamentarians, which  is   investigating
a complaint about the manner in  which  a  former  member  of  the  National
Council of Provinces (NCOP), was removed as a  permanent  member  after  the
Provincial Legislature of the  Western  Cape  had  passed  a  motion  of  no
confidence in her, as a  result  of  which  the  party  that  nominated  her
recalled her as a permanent delegate.

Mr Van der Merwe had prepared and forwarded to  the  Secretary  of  the  IPU
Parliament’s written reply to the complaints. Mr Van der Merwe, Ms  Mahlawe,
and Mr Hahndiek appeared before the Committee in person. Mr  Van  der  Merwe
stated Parliament’s case and  reacted  to  various  questions  by  Committee
members. The Committee has not yet, however, made  known  their  verdict  to
the Governing Council.”

11. Bilateral meetings

The following bilateral meetings took place:

    ▪ The Speaker met the Speaker of the Zambian Parliament wherein  it  was
      agreed that a meeting of SADC country delegations should  be  convened
      at each IPU Assembly.

    ▪ The Speaker met the delegation from the Ivory  Coast  to  discuss  the
      peace process in that country.

    ▪ Mr Van der Merwe met the delegation  of  Israel.  The  delegation  met
      their counterparts from Palestine to discuss the  political  situation
      in that country.

12. Observations and conclusions

The general organisation and security of the Assembly was  commendable.  The
delegation wishes to express gratitude for the hospitality accorded  by  the
South African Embassy staff in the Philippines,  the  Philippine  Ambassador
to South Africa, and the people of Philippine.

The quality of inputs and participation of all speakers at the Assembly  and
the South African delegation in particular is laudable.

During the debates, the  ever-growing  potential  and  visible  momentum  of
parliaments to contribute to world peace, stability and a  better  life  for
all and the need to enhance cooperation between the  IPU  and  the  UN  were
highlighted.
13.   Challenges

    ▪  It  is  important  for  adequate  preparations   to   be   done   for
      international events such as this.
    ▪ South Africa as a country should add more value  in  its  contribution
      to the proceedings of the IPU and also benefit from the IPU.

    ▪ Adequate interest and publicity on IPU within  our  Parliament  should
      be generated.

    ▪ The IPU presents an opportunity  of  cross-pollination  of  ideas  and
      further triggers and emphasises the need to craft local programmes  of
      the legislature and integrate them with global activities  in  such  a
      way that there is visible reciprocation.

14.   Recommendations

The National Assembly should:

   a) ensure the provision of adequate resources  and  better  planning  in
      order for the National Assembly to contribute to a better  world  for
      all through the IPU.

   b) develop short, medium and  long-term  strategies  and  plans  on  its
      participation in the IPU.

   c) establish a joint National  Assembly/National  Council  of  Provinces
      structure that will consistently strategise, plan and implement above
      plans and other activities at international level.

   d) Appoint a core of 3-4 representatives to IPU for the rest of the term
      of the current Parliament, and another group of  8-9  representatives
      on rotation basis.


   e) Assign the Presiding Officers to  take  the  responsibility  for  the
      above recommendations and report  to  the  National  Assembly  on  an
      annual basis.

ANNEXURE “A”

NATURAL DISASTERS:
THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN PREVENTION, REHABILITATION, RECONSTRUCTION AND
THE PROTECTION OF VULNERABLE GROUPS

Resolution adopted unanimously by the 112th Assembly
(Manila, 8 April 2005)
The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Concerned that earthquakes, tsunamis, torrential rains,  heavy  snows,  high
winds  (including  typhoons  and  tornados),  floods,  landslides,  volcanic
eruptions, forest fires, droughts, locust  infestations  and  other  serious
natural disasters are a great  transnational  threat  to  all  people,  that
socially  vulnerable  poor  people  in   developing   nations   particularly
vulnerable to disasters are frequently the ones who suffer great damage  and
become internally displaced persons or refugees  after  a  natural  disaster
strikes, and that the secondary effects of natural disasters, such  as  food
shortages and the deterioration of sanitary conditions, become enduring  and
serious problems,
Aware that all disasters, including man-made disasters, are a direct  threat
to  human  beings;  and  that  from  the  viewpoint  of  guaranteeing  human
security, it is  essential  when  they  strike  to  ensure  that  aid  truly
addresses the suffering of those affected by the disaster, and  to  increase
the capacity of individuals and local communities to take the initiative,
Taking note that over 270,000 innocent citizens  of  Indonesia,  Sri  Lanka,
India, Thailand,  Malaysia,  Myanmar,  the  Maldives,  Bangladesh,  Somalia,
Kenya, Tanzania and other countries were killed on 26  December  2004  as  a
result of the major earthquake off the coast of Sumatra and the  tsunami  in
the Indian Ocean, that tens of thousands of people are  still  missing,  and
that  many  hundreds  of  others  lost  their  lives  as  a  result  of  the
aftershocks in Indonesia three months later,
Expressing its sincere condolences to those  who  lost  loved  ones  in  the
tsunami disaster and the aftershocks, as well as to the people,  parliaments
and governments of the nations affected by the disaster,
Praising the leadership role played by the affected  nations  in  responding
to  the  disaster  and  holding  in  high  regard  the  speedy   cooperation
demonstrated  by  the  international  community  in  carrying   out   relief
activities in response to the United Nations appeal for emergency support,
Appreciating the fact that the United Nations and its specialised  agencies,
such as the Office of the United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees
(UNHCR), the United Nations  Children's  Fund  (UNICEF),  the  World  Health
Organization (WHO), the World Food Programme (WFP), and the World Bank,  the
International Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  other  institutions  such  as  the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and the Asian  Development
Bank (ADB), as well as governments and so  many  international  humanitarian
organisations, have come forward immediately to provide urgent  humanitarian
assistance to meet the needs of the victims of the tsunami disaster  and  to
provide emergency health care,  shelter  and  food  to  the  people  of  the
affected countries, and expressing respect and thanks to the United  Nations
Secretary-General for his prompt action to visit the affected  countries  in
order to carry out an on-the-spot investigation  into  the  devastation  and
havoc caused by the tsunami,
Recalling  the  Declaration  on  Action  to  Strengthen  Emergency   Relief,
Rehabilitation, Reconstruction  and  Prevention  in  the  Aftermath  of  the
Earthquake and Tsunami Disaster of 26 December 2004, adopted at the  special
meeting held in Jakarta on 6 January 2005  of  the  leaders  of  the  member
States of  the  Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations  (ASEAN)  in  the
aftermath of the earthquake and tsunami, and the numerous other  discussions
that have taken place on this subject at the international level,
Recalling the resolution adopted  by  the  108th  IPU  Conference,  held  in
Santiago in 2003,  on  international  cooperation  for  the  prevention  and
management of transborder natural disasters and their impact on the  regions
concerned,
Aware that the damage from the recent earthquake and  tsunami  was  worsened
due to the lack of a tsunami early warning system in the  Indian  Ocean  rim
area and the lack in the affected  area  of  disaster  prevention  awareness
regarding the cause-and-effect relationship between  major  earthquakes  and
tsunamis,
Noting that the Special Session on the Indian Ocean  Disaster  held  at  the
World Conference on Disaster Reduction (Kobe,  Japan,  18–22  January  2005)
emphasised the importance of  comprehensively  evaluating  all  the  lessons
learned from the tsunami disaster and continuing international and  regional
dialogues and discussions to build an early warning system,
Noting that a report of UNICEF estimated that over one third  of  those  who
died in  the  recent  earthquake  and  tsunami  were  children,  and  deeply
concerned that the surviving children who have suffered  from  the  disaster
are now being exposed to such threats as human  trafficking  and  infectious
diseases,
Emphasising the  importance  of  emergency  humanitarian  relief  activities
promoted  in  response  to  this  tragedy  by  UNICEF,   the   International
Organization for Migration (IOM), WHO and others, for both the survival  and
the protection of children,
Reconfirming the importance of a multifaceted  contribution  by  parliaments
and  parliamentarians  to  emergency  humanitarian  relief  for  women   and
children who are vulnerable in post-disaster situations,
Recognising  the  need  for  psychological  assistance  and  counselling  to
eliminate the mental trauma for millions of innocent victims of major  human
disasters, and acknowledging the  effectiveness  of  the  various  kinds  of
support provided by non governmental organisations,
Considering the importance  of  international  cooperation,  solidarity  and
partnership, as well as good governance  at  all  levels,  in  strengthening
global disaster reduction activities,
   1. Calls upon the international community to renew its  determination  to
      prevent disasters  where  possible  and  to  minimise  the  impact  of
      unavoidable natural disasters by making maximum use  of  past  lessons
      learned in order to prepare for natural disasters,  which  can  strike
      anywhere in the world,  and  to  achieve  the  common  desire  of  all
      humankind to prevent extensive damage, and particularly  the  loss  of
      life;
   2. Proposes that nations around the world that are frequently  struck  by
      disasters further strengthen their cooperation in disaster  prevention
      efforts; encourages them to provide  and  share  know-how,  expertise,
      technology, and other information for the establishment  of  an  early
      warning system; and urges concerned governments to move  forward  with
      concrete efforts to establish a tsunami early warning  system  in  the
      Indian Ocean region under international coordination, administered  by
      United Nations entities, including the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
      Commission (IOC) of the United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and
      Cultural Organization (UNESCO)  and  the  International  Strategy  for
      Disaster Reduction (ISDR);
   3. Calls upon the parliaments of every nation to urge  their  governments
      to support, in partnership with the United Nations, effective projects
      conducted by international organisations such as the International Red
      Cross and Red Crescent Movement, UNICEF, IOM, the United Nations Human
      Settlements  Programme  (UN-HABITAT),  WHO,  and  the  United  Nations
      Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) to support  children,  women,  the
      poorest and other members of  society  who  are  vulnerable  in  post-
      disaster situations;
   4. Proposes that the parliaments of affected  nations  and  international
      organisations involved in relief  efforts  call  upon  governments  to
      implement plans for the protection and survival of children, including
      (i) measures  to  combat  human  trafficking  and  to  support  family
      reunification, (ii) the establishment of child  protection  facilities
      and temporary housing for single-parent families,  (iii)  services  to
      relieve psychological trauma,  (iv)  measures  to  control  infectious
      diseases, and (v) nutritional support for children;
   5. Calls upon  the  parliaments  of  the  affected  countries  and  their
      neighbours to protect from human trafficking, infectious diseases  and
      other secondary damage children who have been orphaned or  who  remain
      unidentified after the disaster, by disseminating  information,  inter
      alia by drawing society’s attention to this matter and  educating  the
      government and police, and by appealing to their national  governments
      to take institutional preventive measures, including  the  proper  and
      prompt strengthening of the legal  system,  for  example  through  the
      temporary suspension of adoption procedures;
   6. Urges the parties  concerned  to  be  particularly  attentive  to  the
      importance of local ownership of the reconstruction process;  suggests
      that efforts should be made at all levels to promote the participation
      of vulnerable populations in planning, decision-making and operational
      activities,  thereby  making   reconstruction   more   effective   and
      strengthening  local  democracy;  and  urges  all  concerned  in   the
      reconstruction effort to take steps to create societies and  economies
      that are environmentally and ecologically sustainable;
   7. Urges the United Nations and other institutions of  the  international
      community, and particularly  donor  countries  and  the  international
      financial  institutions,  to  honour  their  pledges  of  funding  and
      assistance   in   support   of   the   national   rehabilitation   and
      reconstruction efforts  of  affected  countries;  and  encourages  IPU
      Member Parliaments whose governments have made pledges  of  assistance
      to take decisive steps towards  their  realisation  in  a  timely  and
      urgent manner;
   8.  Strongly  urges  all  parties  engaged  in  the  rehabilitation   and
      reconstruction process to be rigorous in the fight against every  form
      of corruption, including profiteering, in the drafting and  management
      of all programmes;
   9. Calls upon the countries  affected  by  the  tsunami  disaster  to  be
      responsible,  accountable  and  transparent   and   to   provide   the
      international community as quickly as possible with  death  tolls  and
      all other relevant information regarding the resulting damage in order
      to ensure the delivery of aid suitable for the actual situation and to
      facilitate decisions relating to the distribution of  assistance;  and
      further calls upon the affected countries  to  make  every  effort  to
      ensure that such assistance is used as quickly  as  possible  for  the
      direct benefit of the tsunami victims, and is used conscientiously  to
      rebuild their respective nations;
   10.      Recognises the important role played by both the print  and  the
      electronic  media  in  providing  updated  information  regarding  the
      tsunami disaster,  in  encouraging  the  world  community  to  provide
      assistance to the tsunami victims and in  disseminating  all  relevant
      information on this disaster; and urges the media to do  the  same  in
      all disaster situations;
  10. Calls upon all countries to be prepared to face such natural disasters
      in the future and to help  developing  countries  to  acquire  natural
      disaster warning systems and natural disaster preparation  plans;  and
      further  calls  upon  scientifically  developed  countries  to   share
      information on such disasters with the rest of the world,  the  United
      Nations and appropriate international institutions;
  11. Calls upon the parliaments of every nation  to  support  all  disaster
      prevention measures, humanitarian  aid  and  long-term  reconstruction
      assistance implemented by governments, international organisations and
      others; and urges  governments  to  take  part  in  the  international
      coordination of assistance in order to ensure  the  efficient  use  of
      available resources, without prejudice to bilateral  support  and  aid
      provided by individual countries  or  international  organisations  to
      afflicted nations;
  12. Calls upon Member Parliaments to urge their governments to draw up  or
      strengthen existing legislative policies  relating  to  the  creation,
      training and support of local field disaster  response  teams  in  all
      areas, and particularly disaster-prone areas, to predict, prepare for,
      plan for and prevent natural and man-made disasters, to cope with  and
      mitigate  the  effects  of  the  resulting  damage,  and  to  relieve,
      rehabilitate and resurrect  areas  affected  by  disasters,  employing
      inter alia the following methods:
        (a)       Capacity-building  through  the  establishment  of  early
                 warning systems and  hazard  mapping,  and  by  determining
                 escape routes, setting up evacuation centres and  preparing
                 disaster prevention measures;
        (b)       The  establishment  of  quick  and   efficient   disaster
                 reporting mechanisms, providing information on  inter  alia
                 the extent of the damage, the number of affected  families,
                 and  the  number  of  dead,  missing  and  injured  people,
                 prioritising  the  needs  to  be  met,  coping   with   and
                 minimising the damage,  and  distributing  relief  supplies
                 such as food, non-food items, emergency  shelter  materials
                 and provisions for rehabilitation, including financial aid,
                 housing and loans;
        (c)      Creating emergency medium-  and  long-term  rehabilitation
                 plans, giving particular consideration to women,  children,
                 the elderly and other  members  of  society  who  are  most
                 vulnerable in every aspect of a disaster;
  13. Calls upon Member Parliaments to create strategically located regional
      disaster training, logistics and reaction centres, inter alia to train
      local field disaster response teams, to share international  technical
      know-how, expertise, technology, and  other  information  relating  to
      disaster  prevention,  training  and   management,   to   pre-position
      emergency equipment  for  quick  delivery  and  use  by  international
      response teams  that  respond  immediately  in  affected  areas  using
      information  previously  gathered  on  disaster-prone  areas,  and  to
      coordinate, mobilise and liaise with  local  field  disaster  response
      teams in the affected areas; and further urges  collaboration  between
      these regional disaster training, logistics and reaction  centres  and
      international humanitarian organisations such as those of  the  United
      Nations, its affiliates and agencies, and the International Red  Cross
      and Red Crescent Movement, without prejudice to bilateral support  and
      aid provided by individual countries or international organisations to
      afflicted nations;
  14. Invites all Member Parliaments of the IPU to  take  urgent  action  to
      follow up on the recommendations contained  in  this  resolution,  and
      thus reaffirm their commitment to provide steadfast  support  for  all
      initiatives, especially during times  of  extreme  emergency,  and  to
      preserve the sanctity of life, alleviate human suffering,  and  uplift
      the dignity of all peoples.

ANNEXURE “B”

THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN THE ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNCTIONING OF MECHANISMS
TO PROVIDE FOR THE JUDGEMENT AND SENTENCING OF WAR CRIMES, CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY, GENOCIDE AND TERRORISM, WITH A VIEW TO AVOIDING IMPUNITY
Resolution adopted unanimously by the 112th Assembly
(Manila, 8 April 2005)
The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Deeply concerned by the fact that in today’s world, many regions  and  whole
societies are brutally affected by the persistence  of  war  crimes,  crimes
against humanity, genocide  and/or  terrorism,  all  of  which  are  serious
crimes of concern to the international community as a whole,
Convinced that there is no justifiable cause for those abhorrent crimes,
Considering that, in keeping with the principles  enshrined  in  the  United
Nations Charter, international human rights law, international  humanitarian
law and  international  criminal  law,  appropriate  instruments  have  been
developed, and that it is of  paramount  importance  to  ensure  that  their
provisions be enforced, in conformity  with  the  international  obligations
assumed by States,
Recalling in this respect the particular importance of ensuring respect  for
the rights and fundamental freedoms enshrined in the  Universal  Declaration
of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and  Political  Rights,
the International Covenant on Economic,  Social  and  Cultural  Rights,  the
Geneva Conventions for the protection of victims of war of  12  August  1949
and their  Additional  Protocols,  the  Convention  on  the  Prevention  and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide  and  other  instruments,  treaties  and
agreements ensuring respect for human dignity, as well as the  human  rights
norms of customary international law as reflected by state practice,
Considering that under international law, no  statutory  limitation  applies
to war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide  and  terrorism,  and  such
crimes are not subject to amnesty, clemency or pardon,  and  that  this  has
been confirmed by the judgements of national and international courts,
Recalling the resolutions on peace, security and disarmament adopted by  the
IPU since 1990,
Stressing the importance  of  the  International  Criminal  Court  (ICC)  in
preventing and punishing war crimes, genocide and crimes  against  humanity,
and recalling in this respect that States party to the Rome Statute  of  the
ICC have a duty to prosecute such crimes  themselves  or  to  refer  persons
suspected of such crimes to the jurisdiction  of  the  ICC,  and  also  that
international humanitarian law, as enshrined in the Geneva  Conventions  for
the protection of victims of war of 12  August  1949  and  their  Additional
Protocols, places the obligation on States to search  for  and  try  persons
alleged to have committed, or have ordered to be committed, grave  breaches,
regardless of the persons' nationality or where the violations take place,
Recognising that the jurisdiction of the ICC is limited to crimes  committed
on or after 1 July 2002 and that there is a need for mechanisms  to  address
war crimes, crimes against  humanity  and  genocide  committed  before  that
date,
Considering the Rome Statute, which requires  States  Parties  to  cooperate
with the ICC in order to combat war  crimes,  crimes  against  humanity  and
genocide, and considering the 12  international  conventions  and  protocols
relating to terrorism,
Concerned at the lack of progress made,  on  the  one  hand  by  the  States
Parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC and on the other hand by all  States,
in implementing the  necessary  mechanisms  to  support,  respectively,  the
Statute, and the provisions adopted by the United Nations and  other  bodies
to combat these crimes,
Recognising that political will to speak out against racism, xenophobia  and
intolerance is an essential element in ending impunity,
Concerned  at  the  fact  that  the  implementation  of  agreements  on  the
prosecution of war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide  and  terrorism
has been delayed, set aside, or omitted  by  some  States,  thus  subjecting
these  agreements  to   different   interpretations   and   reducing   their
effectiveness, alarmed at the possibility that this may signal a  permissive
attitude towards impunity, and concerned at the fact that many  States  have
not yet ratified or acceded to the Rome Statute,
Convinced that parliaments have  a  primary  responsibility,  and  must,  by
enacting necessary legislation, play  a  central  role  in  the  prevention,
punishment  and  avoidance  of  impunity  for  war  crimes,  crimes  against
humanity, genocide and terrorism, and that  a  multilateral  approach  among
parliaments is an  appropriate  way  to  facilitate  the  implementation  of
mechanisms required for the enforcement  of  judgements  and  penalties  for
these abhorrent crimes,
Recalling that each State has the obligation and the duty  to  prosecute  or
extradite the perpetrators of war crimes, crimes  against  humanity,  crimes
of genocide and terrorist crimes, irrespective of the location of the  crime
or the nationality of the perpetrator or the victim,
Recalling that victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide  and
terrorism have the right to truth, justice and reparation,
   1. Strongly condemns, without exception, all acts, methods and  practices
      of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide;
   2. Strongly condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in  all
      its forms and manifestations, wherever and  by  whomsoever  committed,
      including those in which States are directly or  indirectly  involved,
      which threaten friendly relations  among  peoples,  endanger  or  take
      innocent lives, have a deleterious effect on  international  relations
      and may jeopardise the security and territorial integrity of States;
   3. Strongly advises all IPU Member Parliaments to  assume,  before  their
      States and citizens, in conformity with  their  national  legislations
      and the international obligations of States,  the  responsibility  for
      implementing and enforcing, through the enactment  of  national  laws,
      the international agreements that have been concluded  to  punish  and
      prevent war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism;
   4. Recommends  that  through  the  inter-parliamentary  activity  of  IPU
      Members, efforts should be combined and experiences shared in order to
      develop the necessary mechanisms to pursue these  objectives,  and  to
      avoid impunity for those individuals, organisations  and  States  that
      commit war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism;
   5.  Urges  Member  Parliaments  duly  to  codify,  in   accordance   with
      international law, in particular international humanitarian law, human
      rights law and refugee law, these abhorrent crimes in  their  domestic
      criminal  law,  and  to  establish  the  corresponding  penalties  and
      mechanisms to avoid impunity;
   6. Invites those States which have not yet done so to ratify or accede to
      the Rome Statute and to ratify the Agreement  on  the  Privileges  and
      Immunities of the International Criminal  Court;  and  encourages  all
      Member Parliaments whose States are parties to  the  Rome  Statute  to
      pass domestic legislation in order to allow them to cooperate with the
      ICC;
   7. Recommends that all parliaments, including those of States which  have
      not ratified the Rome Statute,  enact  laws  for  the  prevention  and
      punishment of  war  crimes,  crimes  against  humanity,  genocide  and
      terrorism;
   8. Recommends that all parliaments support and cooperate with the ICC and
      other competent bodies (such as national and international commissions
      for the investigation of crimes  against  humanity  and  national  and
      international courts), and thus  strengthen  parliamentary  action  to
      eradicate war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and terrorism;
   9. Recommends that States specifically address the issue of  war  crimes,
      crimes against humanity and genocide committed before the  entry  into
      force of the Rome Statute in a  framework  of  justice  and  legality,
      which are the necessary conditions to attain peace and the respect  of
      human rights in each country and in the international community;
  10. Urges Member Parliaments to reject  bilateral  agreements  that  would
      provide for immunity from investigation and prosecution, by the ICC or
      otherwise, for the nationals of any State;
  11. Recommends that all parliaments do everything in their power to assist
      with  the  criminal  prosecution  of  persons  being  sought  by   the
      International Criminal Police Organization  (Interpol),  including  by
      facilitating their hand-over;
  12. Calls on parliaments to consider ratifying, if they have not yet  done
      so, the  12  multilateral  treaties  on  terrorism  and  the  relevant
      regional instruments, to incorporate their  provisions  into  domestic
      legislation and to see to it that they are duly implemented;
  13. Recommends that all parliaments urge their respective  governments  to
      intensify  efforts  to  come  to  a  global  agreement  on  terrorism,
      expressing  the  common  awareness  of  States  of   the   threat   of
      international terrorism and providing  a  precise  definition  of  the
      nature and actual features of this phenomenon, so as to combat it more
      effectively;
  14. Calls for recognition of  the  need  to  strengthen  capacity-building
      assistance for countries which have the political will  but  lack  the
      technical  resources  necessary  to  conclude  and  implement  the  12
      conventions and protocols relating to terrorism;
  15. Recommends that  all  parliaments  enact  legislation,  in  line  with
      international law, to create civil procedures to provide  compensation
      to victims of  war  crimes,  crimes  against  humanity,  genocide  and
      terrorism;
  16. Encourages parliaments to make  the  fullest  possible  use  of  their
      competences and roles to achieve these objectives;
  17. Recommends that parliaments take account of international declarations
      and conventions on these subjects and of  the  considerations  of  the
      United Nations, the ICC and  all  related  international  or  regional
      agencies, authorities and bodies;
  18. Invites parliaments to include in their agendas, as  a  priority,  the
      activities required to implement all mechanisms which  may  contribute
      to the prosecution of war crimes, crimes  against  humanity,  genocide
      and terrorism, including the strengthening of rule of law  mechanisms,
      so as to avoid impunity for these crimes and to ensure the  rights  of
      the victims of such crimes to just reparation;
  19. Invites the  United  Nations  and  parliaments  to  promote  voluntary
      contributions to the ICC Trust Fund for Victims.


                                ANNEXURE “C”


 THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN ESTABLISHING INNOVATIVE INTERNATIONAL FINANCING
    AND TRADING MECHANISMS TO ADDRESS THE PROBLEM OF DEBT AND ACHIEVE THE
                        MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS
            Resolution adopted unanimously by the 112th Assembly
                           (Manila, 8 April 2005)
The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Recalling the Declaration adopted on  1  September  2000  by  the  Presiding
Officers of  National  Parliaments  entitled  The  Parliamentary  Vision  of
International Cooperation on the Eve of the Third Millennium,
Recalling also the Millennium Declaration of 8 September  2000,  which  sets
out  eight  time-bound  and  measurable  goals  collectively  known  as  the
Millennium  Development  Goals,  as  criteria  established  jointly  by  the
international community for the elimination of poverty, and also  the  Human
Development Reports drawn up by the  United  Nations  Development  Programme
(UNDP),
Recalling the final declarations of specialised United Nations  conferences,
in particular the International Conference  on  Financing  for  Development,
held  in  Monterrey,  Mexico  in  2002,  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable
Development, held in Johannesburg, South  Africa  in  2002,  and  the  Third
United  Nations  Conference  on  the  Least  Developed  Countries,  held  in
Brussels, Belgium in 2001,
Recalling the Declaration adopted in New York on 20 September  2004  by  120
countries at the end of the Summit for Action against  Hunger  and  Poverty,
the September 2004 report by the Technical  Group  on  Innovative  Financing
Mechanisms and the final reports of the UN Millennium Project, delivered  on
17 January 2005,
Recalling the resolutions of  the  Inter-Parliamentary  Union,  particularly
those adopted by the 73rd Inter-Parliamentary  Conference  (Lomé,  1985)  on
the role of parliaments and their contribution towards  the  elimination  of
poverty by eliminating the burden of international  debt;  the  74th  Inter-
Parliamentary Conference (Ottawa, 1985) on the contribution  of  parliaments
to the search for measures and actions  aimed  at  removing  the  burden  of
foreign debt that weighs  on  the  developing  countries;  the  88th  Inter-
Parliamentary Conference  (Stockholm,  1992)  on  the  need  for  a  radical
solution to the problem of debt in  the  developing  world;  and  the  102nd
Inter-Parliamentary Conference (Berlin, 1999) on  the  need  to  revise  the
current global financial and economic model, as well as the  Final  Document
of the  Inter-Parliamentary  Conference  "North-South  Dialogue  for  Global
Prosperity" organised by the IPU in Ottawa  in  1993,  and  the  resolutions
adopted  by  the  107th  Conference  (Marrakech,  2002)  on  the   role   of
parliaments  in  developing  public  policy  in  an  era  of  globalisation,
multilateral institutions and international trade agreements,  and  also  by
the  Parliamentary  Meeting  on  the  occasion  of  the  World   Summit   on
Sustainable  Development  (Johannesburg,  2002),   by   the   108th   Inter-
Parliamentary  Conference  (Santiago,  2003)   on   parliament's   role   in
strengthening democratic institutions and human development in a  fragmented
world, and by the  109th  Inter-Parliamentary  Assembly  (Geneva,  2003)  on
global public goods: a new challenge for parliaments,
Greatly concerned by the fact that 1.2 billion  people  –  or  one  in  five
persons in the world – survive on less than a US dollar a day in  purchasing
power parity per capita, below the  international  poverty  rate  set  at  a
dollar a day, and that in the  1990s,  poverty  worsened  in  54  countries,
including 35 African countries, leaving  them  poorer  at  the  end  of  the
decade than in 1990,
Concerned by the fact that even if  the  proportion  of  people  in  extreme
poverty were to be halved by 2015 in comparison with 1990, it is clear  that
hundreds of millions of people in the developing  world  would  continue  to
live in complete destitution,
Recognising  that  the  role  of  parliaments  in  championing   the   eight
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) is crucial, and  that  the  adoption  of
the corresponding  legislation  and  appropriate  budgetary  allocations  is
indispensable,
Stressing the need for assistance and support to improve  the  institutional
capacity of parliaments in developing countries, with  a  view  to  enabling
them to  exercise  effectively  the  legislative,  oversight  and  budgetary
functions related to the MDGs,
Recognising the  importance  of  ensuring  environmental  sustainability  in
achieving the MDGs, stressing the role  of  the  United  Nations  Decade  of
Education for Sustainable  Development  and  the  International  Decade  for
Action: Water for Life, starting in  2005,  and  welcoming  the  entry  into
force of the Kyoto Protocol on  16  February  2005  as  a  significant  step
forward,
Deeply concerned that in the current state  of  affairs,  the  financing  of
efforts to achieve the MDGs, and thus their implementation, is not ensured,
Noting that economic growth, debt relief and public  development  assistance
- the three main sources of funding for development -  are  in  the  current
circumstances unable to  generate  the  extra  50  to  100  billion  dollars
required annually to achieve the MDGs,
Noting that the official development assistance (ODA) commitment  (provision
of 0.7 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)) is still not being  met  by
most countries, but noting with satisfaction  the  undertakings  by  several
countries to meet these commitments within the next decade,
Noting that despite the progress  made  on  debt  cancellation,  relief  and
rescheduling both bilaterally, and multilaterally in the  framework  of  the
Bretton  Woods  institutions,  the  burden  of  the  debt  remains  a  major
constraint and an obstacle to economic growth and human development,
Convinced  that  increased  development  assistance  funding  can  only   be
beneficial  if  the  receiving  countries   promote   democracy   and   good
governance,
Convinced that globalisation is at the same time a source  of  opportunities
and challenges for all countries, and that it  has  an  impact  on  people's
everyday lives,
Noting  that  many  developing  countries  are  increasingly  excluded  from
international trade and capital flows, which results in poverty,
Noting the growing importance of  international  trade  and  investment  and
their direct influence on the development and well-being of the  nations  of
the entire world, and concerned at the fact that the  current  international
trade and investment system is distorted in many sectors in  favour  of  the
developed countries, and poses problems for many developing countries,
Noting  that  awareness  of  the  importance  of  trade  and  investment  to
furthering countries' development has grown  since  the  Fourth  Ministerial
Meeting of the World Trade Organization (WTO), held in  Doha,  which  sought
to place the needs and interests of the developing countries at  the  centre
of international  trade  negotiations  and  drew  up  the  Doha  Development
Agenda,
Welcoming the Geneva framework agreement of July  2004,  a  breakthrough  in
the negotiations conducted by the WTO, following the failure of  the  Cancún
meeting,
Nonetheless concerned about the many  uncertainties  that  remain  in  those
negotiations, in particular with regard to issues  of  great  importance  to
developing countries,
Noting the striking lack of resources currently available  to  achieve  most
MDGs by 2015, and underscoring the responsibility  of  governments  and  the
parliaments which provide them with oversight  to  respect  the  commitments
made at the Millennium Summit in 2000,
Strongly believing that 2005 will be the key year for governments to act  to
achieve the MDGs, at such high-level meetings as the G8 summit, to  be  held
in July, the high-level plenary meeting to review the implementation of  the
United Nations Millennium Declaration of the sixtieth session of the  United
Nations General Assembly, to  be  held  in  September,  and  the  Sixth  WTO
Ministerial Conference, to be held in December,
Looking forward to the forthcoming Millennium+5 Summit, to be  held  in  New
York from 14 to 16 September 2005, and strongly wishing that the event  will
re-energise global partnerships for the achievement of the MDGs;
   1. Urges the parliaments of the countries  that  adopted  the  Millennium
      Declaration which are Members of the IPU to support the implementation
      of the MDGs in their countries by allocating funds for this purpose in
      their national budgets;
   2. Encourages the parliaments of developed countries to demand that their
      governments fulfil their commitments to allocate 0.7 per cent of their
      GDP for ODA,  as  set  out  in  the  Millennium  Declaration  and  the
      Monterrey Consensus;
   3. Urges the parliaments of the developing countries to  make  sure  that
      their governments mobilise the  resources  required  for  development,
      combat corruption, continue institutional reform, adopt  the  economic
      and  social  policies  appropriate  to  stimulate  growth,   establish
      national strategies which place  the  MDGs  at  the  centre  of  their
      policies, and promote  democracy  and  human  rights,  paying  special
      attention to the implementation of the new World Programme  for  Human
      Rights Education, and follow the principles of good governance;
   4. Encourages the parliaments of the developing countries to  defend  the
      interests of their people in WTO negotiations and to strengthen  their
      mutual cooperation;
   5. Urges the governments of the developed  and  developing  countries  to
      provide annual reports on the application and implementation of  these
      strategies to their parliaments;
   6. Suggests that such reports should give rise to a parliamentary  debate
      at the national, and if possible, regional level;
   7. Suggests that provisions should be made for the same kind of approach,
      involving a strategy and a report, at the regional level;
   8. Urges donor countries, in particular members of the  Organisation  for
      Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), to draw  up  reports  on
      the implementation of Goal 8 of the MDGs (develop a global partnership
      for development), specifying the action they  have  taken  to  achieve
      such objectives both quantitatively and qualitatively;
   9. Calls  for  efforts  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  aid  at  the
      international and regional levels,  through  better  harmonisation  of
      procedures and improved donor coordination;
  10. Urges donor countries to  pursue  collaboration  with  United  Nations
      organisations,  international  financial  institutions,  other   donor
      countries, NGOs and the private sector;
  11. Underscores the unbearable nature of the debt for a  large  number  of
      developing  countries;  and  calls   urgently   for   effective   debt
      cancellation and viable rescheduling procedures to be speeded up while
      measures are taken to avoid  new  over-indebtedness  among  developing
      countries;
  12. Suggests that a vital link be established  between  debt  cancellation
      and the earmarking of resources thus freed up for investments  related
      to the MDGs, in particular in the  fields  of  health,  education  and
      gender equality, as  set  out  in  each  country's  Poverty  Reduction
      Strategy;
  13. Recommends the study of other mechanisms to help countries  that  have
      serious debt crises, but that have too high a  per  capita  income  to
      qualify for the assistance  afforded  to  the  heavily  indebted  poor
      countries (HIPCs);
  14. Expresses the wish that the  needs  of  the  developing  countries  be
      systematically  taken  into  consideration  in   international   trade
      negotiations under way in the framework of the WTO, in  particular  in
      respect of poverty alleviation, food security and sustainable income;
  15. Emphasises the central role  of  parliaments  as  the  incarnation  of
      popular sovereignty in expressing the will of peoples in international
      forums;
  16. Recommends the establishment by IPU Member Parliaments of  specialised
      committees to follow up on international trade negotiations and on the
      actions of the international financial institutions,  and  to  provide
      oversight of government action;
  17. Requests governments to inform their parliaments fully of the state of
      relevant international negotiations and the stakes involved;
  18. Requests the IPU,  working  with  the  WTO,  to  help  strengthen  the
      capacities of parliaments in this field;
  19. Suggests that governments include parliamentarians in the  delegations
      that they send to take part in WTO ministerial meetings;
  20.  Welcomes  the  adoption  at  United  Nations  Headquarters   of   the
      Declaration on Action against Hunger and Poverty by 120  countries  on
      20 September 2004, aimed in particular at supporting the establishment
      of new international financing tools for the MDGs;
  21. Recommends that a  new  resource  should  be  set  up,  additional  to
      existing  mechanisms,  and  that  it  should  be  at  the  same   time
      predictable and stable;
  22.  Supports  further  work  on  proposals  for  international  financing
      mechanisms as a creative  and  at  the  same  time  realistic  way  of
      providing additional resources for development;
  23. Requests that the Second World Conference of Speaker  of  Parliaments,
      to be held at the United Nations in 2005, follow up on this matter.

                                ANNEXURE “D”

   THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN ADVOCATING AND ENFORCING OBSERVANCE OF HUMAN
  RIGHTS IN THE STRATEGIES FOR THE PREVENTION, MANAGEMENT AND TREATMENT OF
                            THE HIV/AIDS PANDEMIC
            Resolution adopted unanimously by the 112th Assembly
                           (Manila, 8 April 2005)
The 112th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the  IPU,  especially  the  resolution
entitled Action to  combat  HIV/AIDS  in  view  of  its  devastating  human,
economic and social impact, adopted in Windhoek in 1998, and convinced  that
HIV/AIDS is an all-embracing threat  against  development,  rather  than  an
isolated health problem,
Further  recalling  the  International  Guidelines  on  HIV/AIDS  and  Human
Rights, issued by the Joint United Nations Programme  on  HIV/AIDS  (UNAIDS)
and the Office of the United Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights
(OHCHR) in 1998, and the  Declaration  of  Commitment  on  HIV/AIDS  "Global
Crisis - Global Action" adopted  by  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly
Special Session on HIV/AIDS in 2001,
Taking note of the UNAIDS 2004 Report on the global AIDS epidemic,
Affirming the recommendations contained in the document Guidance  on  ethics
and equitable access to HIV treatment and care, issued  by  UNAIDS  and  the
World Health Organization (WHO),
Referring to the  Handbook  for  Legislators  on  HIV/AIDS,  Law  and  Human
Rights, published jointly by the IPU and UNAIDS in 1999,
Reaffirming the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) contained  in  the  United
Nations Millennium Declaration, which aims to halt and begin to reverse,  by
2015, the spread of HIV/AIDS,
Aware  that  the  achievement  of  all  MDGs,  including  those   concerning
education and food security, will not be feasible unless  progress  is  made
in addressing the challenge of HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases,
Deeply concerned that each year the  number  of  people  infected  with  HIV
continues to grow, and also deeply concerned by the  exponential  growth  in
the number of women, young people and children affected by HIV/AIDS,
Recognising that discrimination against women, both de jure  and  de  facto,
renders them particularly vulnerable to HIV/AIDS,
Alarmed by the unprecedented number of children around  the  world  who  are
being orphaned by HIV/AIDS, who are thus rendered far  more  vulnerable  and
face a much greater risk of hunger, of having limited access  to  education,
health and  social  services,  and  of  violence,  abuse,  exploitation  and
recruitment as child soldiers, and aware that these factors  increase  their
likelihood of becoming infected with HIV themselves,
Further concerned that the reluctance of  some  governments  to  acknowledge
the existence and gravity of the HIV/AIDS pandemic,  and  to  recognise  the
stigma  and  discrimination  faced   by   people   living   with   HIV/AIDS,
particularly  women,  hampers  the  effectiveness  of  responses   to   this
pandemic,
Aware that stigma and discrimination continue to prevent people from  having
access to HIV testing and  counselling  services,  which  are  of  paramount
importance in the prevention and treatment of the pandemic,
Recognising that the  global  HIV/AIDS  pandemic  constitutes  a  formidable
challenge to human life and dignity and  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  human
rights, and that the  full  realisation  of  human  rights  and  fundamental
freedoms for the people affected is  an  essential  element  in  the  global
response to the pandemic,
Affirming that respect for, and the protection and fulfilment of, the  human
rights of women and girls are necessary and fundamental  components  of  the
approach to addressing HIV/AIDS,
Concerned about the negative economic and social impact  of  the  denial  of
the human rights of people living  with  HIV/AIDS  to  work,  education  and
other social services, and further concerned that women and  children  often
suffer the greatest economic and social impact as a result of the pandemic,
Underscoring that the struggle against HIV/AIDS  cannot  be  separated  from
the struggle against poverty, which affects primarily  women  and  children,
thus  undermining  the  workforce  and   hindering   economic   and   social
development,
Concerned that  ignorance  and  intolerance  are  still  a  reason  for  the
marginalisation of persons affected or presumed to be affected by  HIV/AIDS,
which causes discriminatory acts in the fields of  medical  assistance,  job
opportunities, education, housing and, in general, in every  aspect  related
to their social well-being,
Considering that although the use  of  antiretroviral  medications  combined
with proper therapies  can  delay  the  advance  of  HIV/AIDS,  millions  of
infected people  in  developing  nations,  particularly  in  Africa,  cannot
afford these treatments,
Considering  that  under  the  Agreement   on   Trade-Related   Aspects   of
Intellectual  Property  Rights  (TRIPS  Agreement)  of   the   World   Trade
Organization (WTO),  WTO  members  may  allow  the  production  of  patented
medicines in the event of health emergencies, and realising that  the  World
Health Assembly  passed  a  resolution  encouraging  WHO  member  States  to
utilise fully the flexibilities in the TRIPS Agreement to promote access  to
antiretrovirals and other essential pharmaceutical products,
Aware that the realisation of the rights  of  people  living  with  HIV/AIDS
requires non-discriminatory access for them to  services,  including  health
care, treatment and social and legal services, within  a  supportive  social
environment,
Convinced that recognising  the  degree  of  the  infection  levels  of  the
HIV/AIDS pandemic within each country will help the  respective  governments
tailor their prevention and treatment programmes to  meet  their  particular
needs,
Further convinced that capacity-building in the field of  public  health  is
critical to the effective prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS,
Also  convinced  that  countries  particularly  affected  by  the   HIV/AIDS
pandemic should receive special support  from  the  international  community
for their efforts to comply with their commitments,
Considering that ensuring access to affordable medication, including  access
to antiretroviral therapy for those suffering from HIV/AIDS, is  fundamental
to achieving progressively the full realisation of the  universal  right  to
the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health,
Considering that conflict situations, particularly in Africa,  have  led  to
an increased incidence of HIV/AIDS, and recalling  United  Nations  Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000), which states that the HIV/AIDS pandemic,  if
unchecked, may pose a risk to stability and security, and the report of  the
United Nations High-Level Panel on Threats,  Challenges  and  Change,  which
places  infectious  diseases  among  the  economic  and  social  threats  to
international security,
Aware of the fact that any response to the epidemic will be  effective  only
if it addresses the causes of its spread, including  human  trafficking,  in
particular trafficking in women and  girls,  drug  abuse  and  illicit  drug
trafficking and gender-based violence, and considering in this context  that
the pivotal roles of the family, religion and  long-established  fundamental
ethical principles and values need to be underlined,
Emphasising that the HIV/AIDS pandemic  is  at  the  same  time  a  medical,
social and economic emergency,
   1. Calls upon parliaments and governments  to  ensure  that  their  laws,
      policies  and  practices  respect  human  rights  in  the  context  of
      HIV/AIDS, in  particular  the  rights  to  education,  work,  privacy,
      protection and access to care, treatment and social services; and also
      calls upon them to protect people living with HIV/AIDS from all  forms
      of discrimination in both the public and the private sectors,  promote
      gender  equality,  ensure  privacy  and  confidentiality  in  research
      involving  human  subjects,  and  provide  for  speedy  and  effective
      judicial, administrative and civil remedies  in  the  event  that  the
      rights of people living with HIV/AIDS are violated;
   2. Reminds States of the  commitments  they  have  made  to  promote  and
      encourage respect for human rights instruments such as  the  Universal
      Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant  on  Economic,
      Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant  on  Civil  and
      Political Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of  All  Forms  of
      Discrimination  against  Women  and  its   Optional   Protocols,   the
      Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention against  Torture
      and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading  Treatment  or  Punishment,  the
      International Convention on the Elimination of  All  Forms  of  Racial
      Discrimination,  and  the  Declaration  on  Fundamental   Rights   and
      Principles at Work  of  the  International  Labour  Organization;  and
      requests States that have not yet done so to take the necessary  steps
      to ratify and implement these international instruments;
   3. Invites States that have not already  done  so  to  include  in  their
      national reports on the MDGs the objective of  stopping  by  2015  the
      spread of HIV/AIDS and of beginning to reverse the development of this
      pandemic; further invites parliaments to sponsor the  official  launch
      of these reports from their  premises;  and  encourages  the  periodic
      establishment of national and regional reports  taking  stock  of  the
      degree of achievement of the MDGs, in particular in the field  of  the
      fight against HIV/AIDS;
   4. Urges governments in the developed countries both to continue  and  to
      increase the financial and technical assistance that they  provide  to
      developing countries and especially the least developed countries, and
      to share their expertise in addressing HIV/AIDS with  those  countries
      that seek to create or strengthen their own human rights  institutions
      in the context of HIV/AIDS;
   5. Further urges governments to allocate sufficient  resources  to  their
      health systems, including resources for prevention and care;
   6. Strongly urges governments to implement the  measures  recommended  in
      the UNAIDS/WHO document Guidance on ethics and equitable access to HIV
      treatment and care to promote equity in the distribution of  HIV  care
      in resource-limited settings;
   7. Further urges parliaments and governments to  adopt  and  finance  the
      measures necessary to  ensure,  on  a  sustained  basis  and  for  all
      affected persons (irrespective  of  social  status,  legal  situation,
      gender, age or sexual orientation), the availability and accessibility
      of good quality services  and  information  for  HIV/AIDS  prevention,
      management, treatment, care and support, including  the  provision  of
      HIV/AIDS prevention supplies such as male  and  female  condoms,  safe
      injection needles, microbicides and basic preventive  care  materials,
      as  well  as  affordable  antiretroviral  drugs  and  other  safe  and
      effective  medicines  in  poor   countries,   psychological   support,
      diagnostics and related technologies, for all persons, with particular
      attention to vulnerable individuals and populations such as women  and
      children;
   8. Also urges  parliaments  and  governments  to  implement  measures  to
      increase the  capacity  of  women  and  adolescent  girls  to  protect
      themselves from the risk of HIV  infection,  principally  through  the
      provision of health care and health services, including those  related
      to sexual and reproductive health;
   9. Invites parliaments and governments to adopt the measures necessary to
      continue, intensify, combine, make mutually beneficial  and  harmonise
      national and multinational research and development efforts  aimed  at
      developing new treatments for the fight against HIV/AIDS, new means of
      prevention and new diagnostic tools and tests, including vaccines  and
      female-controlled prevention methods such as microbicides;
  10. Calls upon parliaments and governments to recognise the health, socio-
      economic and other  effects  of  HIV/AIDS  on  individuals,  families,
      societies and nations, and to take  the  appropriate  legislative  and
      executive social measures to halt its spread;
  11. Calls upon governments to make services related to treatment, care and
      support for people living with HIV/AIDS  comprehensive,  by  including
      the prevention  and  treatment  of  other  infectious  diseases  often
      associated  with  HIV/AIDS,  such  as  pneumonia,   tuberculosis   and
      opportunistic infections;
  12. Urges all parliaments and governments to adopt and implement  policies
      that respect the human rights of persons  living  with  HIV/AIDS,  and
      through all available media, to advocate for and  raise  awareness  of
      their rights;
  13. Calls upon  parliaments  and  governments  to  develop  and  implement
      national legislation and policies that address  the  needs  and  human
      rights of the growing number of children orphaned and made  vulnerable
      by the HIV/AIDS pandemic;
  14. Calls upon parliaments:
           (a)   to draw up laws or amend existing  legislation  to  define
                 national standards of protection for those  suffering  from
                 HIV/AIDS, and especially for people in  vulnerable  groups,
                 such as women and children, with particular attention  paid
                 to the situation of anyone suffering from the loss of close
                 family members as a result of HIV/AIDS;
           (b)   to  review  and  adjust  legislation  to  ensure  that  it
                 conforms to the International Guidelines  on  HIV/AIDS  and
                 Human Rights;
           (c)   to enact legislation to punish those  who  knowingly  take
                 the risk of transmitting HIV/AIDS, or who wilfully do so;
  15. Further calls upon parliamentarians in the IPU's Member Parliaments to
      promote appropriate  legislative  measures  to  tackle  discrimination
      against persons affected by HIV/AIDS and to contribute to the creation
      of  a  social  environment  of   tolerance   and   human   solidarity,
      indispensable for the prevention of  this  terrible  disease  and  for
      assisting those affected by it;
  16.  Also  calls  upon  parliaments,  governments  and  the  international
      community to ensure free access to HIV testing for all;
  17. Calls upon parliaments to promote an effective and  efficient  use  of
      resources for HIV/AIDS response, including by means  of  country-level
      coordination that takes into consideration  the  UNAIDS  "Three  Ones"
      guiding principles for national authorities and their partners;
  18. Urges parliaments to  create  parliamentary  committees  and/or  other
      structures formally linked to parliaments with the  specific  task  of
      tackling the issue of halting and reversing the spread of HIV/AIDS, to
      share experiences, information and best practices and to  involve  all
      sectors  of  society  through  partnership  programmes  in  high-level
      decision-making processes;
  19. Calls upon  organisations,  agencies,  bodies,  funds  and  programmes
      within the United Nations system to  incorporate  public  health  into
      their development activities and programmes, and to  support  actively
      the capacity-building of the public health systems of Member States in
      respect of the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS;
  20. Urges parliaments and  governments  to  take  into  consideration  the
      linkage between sexual and reproductive health and rights on  the  one
      hand, and the fight against HIV/AIDS on the other;
  21. Further urges parliaments to develop comprehensive policies to provide
      for an improved food supply in  countries  affected  by  the  HIV/AIDS
      pandemic;
  22. Calls upon parliaments and governments to ensure the  development  and
      accelerated  implementation  of  national   strategies   for   women’s
      empowerment, inter alia by  ensuring  they  have  access  to  property
      rights, by promoting and protecting  women’s  full  enjoyment  of  all
      human rights and by reducing their vulnerability to  HIV/AIDS  through
      the elimination of all forms of discrimination, as well as  all  forms
      of violence against women and girls, including harmful traditional and
      customary practices, abuse, rape and other forms of sexual violence;
  23. Strongly urges governments to coordinate efforts with and support  the
      work of the United Nations, non-governmental organisations  and  other
      bodies or institutions involved in HIV/AIDS  prevention  in  order  to
      ensure that the human rights of individuals living with  HIV/AIDS  are
      upheld and protected;
  24. Calls on  all  parliaments  and  governments  to  strengthen  national
      mechanisms such as commissions, tribunals, legislation and coordinated
      strategies to  protect,  enforce  and  monitor,  in  their  respective
      countries, the human rights of individuals infected with and  affected
      by HIV/AIDS, and to eliminate all forms of stigma and  discrimination,
      especially in respect of vulnerable groups such as women and  children
      – both boys and girls – as they bear the brunt of the epidemic and are
      most likely to care for sick people and to lose jobs, family  members,
      income and schooling opportunities as a result of the illness, and  to
      pay equal attention to other vulnerable groups, such as prisoners;
  25. Urges parliaments and governments  to  design  HIV/AIDS  policies  and
      programmes  that  effectively  recognise  the  needs   of   women   in
      particular, and that are sensitive to differences in terms of  culture
      and religion that may exist in societies;
  26. Further urges parliaments  and  governments  to  consider  the  public
      health safeguards provided for by the 30 August 2003 decision  of  the
      General Council of the WTO allowing members to produce  and/or  export
      pharmaceutical products needed to combat infectious diseases  such  as
      HIV/AIDS  that  threaten  societies,  and  to  incorporate   permitted
      flexibilities into national laws enacted in compliance  with  the  WTO
      TRIPS Agreement;
  27. Calls upon parliaments and  governments  to  ban  compulsory  HIV/AIDS
      screening for people applying for travel visas, university  enrolment,
      jobs, or asylum, in favour of voluntary testing;
  28. Further calls for special attention to be given to preventing HIV/AIDS
      by disseminating adequate and target group-oriented information, using
      all available media and multipliers, raising awareness  and  educating
      both men and women, with particular attention paid to adolescent  boys
      and girls; and requests the  inclusion  of  sex  education  in  school
      curricula, for both boys and girls, as a means of prevention;
  29. Urges the national and local agencies concerned to give high  priority
      to assisting pregnant and breastfeeding women suffering from  HIV/AIDS
      in order to protect their babies from infection;
  30.  Requests  parliaments  and  governments  to  establish   coordinated,
      participatory,  transparent  and  accountable  national  policies  and
      programmes for HIV/AIDS response,  and  to  translate  these  national
      policies into action  at  the  district  and  local  levels,  wherever
      possible  involving,   in   development   and   implementation,   non-
      governmental    and    community-based    organisations,     religious
      organisations, the private sector, and more importantly, people living
      with HIV/AIDS,  and  particularly  the  most  vulnerable  among  them,
      including women and children;
  31. Calls upon men and women  parliamentarians  to  ensure  that  national
      budgets are gender-sensitive, thereby efficiently addressing the needs
      of both men and women;
  32. Calls for the enhancement of support and resources for UNAIDS, and for
      increased financial contributions for the Global Fund to  Fight  AIDS,
      Tuberculosis and Malaria;
  33.  Urges  parliaments   and   governments   to   promote   international
      cooperation, growth and development as steps towards  the  containment
      of conflict situations and the reduction of their possible  impact  on
      HIV/AIDS;
  34. Urges States, in  conformity  with  United  Nations  Security  Council
      resolution 1325  (2000)  on  women,  peace  and  security,  to  ensure
      adequate HIV/AIDS awareness training for members of the  military  and
      the police, and for peacekeeping personnel;
  35. Reiterates its call to  governments  to  recognise  the  International
      Partnership against AIDS in Africa and to promote it, along  with  the
      Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, as the  framework
      for action to fight AIDS in Africa;
  36. Affirms the importance of narrowing  the  economic  and  cultural  gap
      between the developed and developing countries,  while  ensuring  that
      the strategies and programmes employed in the fight  against  HIV/AIDS
      take   into   consideration   the   natural,   human   and    cultural
      characteristics of the regions  where  they  are  applied,  so  as  to
      reflect both the characteristics of the demographic structure of  each
      region and the social and economic conditions of its inhabitants;
  37. Emphasises that countries should integrate the development  of  public
      health  undertakings  into  their   national   economic   and   social
      development strategies, which should  include  the  establishment  and
      improvement of effective public health  mechanisms,  in  particular  a
      network for the supervision, prevention, and treatment of the HIV/AIDS
      epidemic, and for the exchange of information.

3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


      Report of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority on the Facilities  for
      Members of the  National  Assembly  and  Permanent  Delegates  to  the
      National Council of Provinces (generally referred to as L.19):



   Creda Please Scan in attached document



COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate R
   Ameer, an Additional Magistrate at Pinetown, dated 21 June 2005:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the provisional suspension from office of
   magistrate, R Ameer, tabled by the Minister for Justice and
   Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the
   Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) reports as follows:


        1. The Portfolio Committee noted that the Minister provisionally
           suspended Mr Ameer from office on 13 April 2005 in terms of
           section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

        2. The Portfolio Committee further noted that Mr Ameer was
           suspended de facto by the Magistrates Commission since 16 August
           2004, a date prior to the Minister’s decision and therefore in
           contravention of the provisions of section 13(3)(a)(i) of the
           Magistrates Act which reads - “The Minister, on the advice of
           the Commission, may provisionally suspend a magistrate from
           office if the Commission, after affording the magistrate a
           reasonable opportunity to be heard regarding the desirability of
           such provisional suspension, is satisfied that reliable evidence
           exists indicating that an allegation against that magistrate is
           of such serious nature as to make it inappropriate for the
           magistrate to perform the functions of a magistrate while the
           allegation is being investigated;”.

        3. The Portfolio Committee considered the possibility of condoning
           the de facto suspension, however considered that this would be
           legally tenuous and in any event would not have complied with
           the requirement of section 13(3)(e) in that an inquiry had not
           been initiated by the Magistrates Commission within 60 days of
           the de facto suspension.

        4. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, Parliament
           must, as soon as possible, pass a resolution as to whether or
           not the provisional suspension of Mr Ameer is confirmed.  The
           Portfolio Committee is of the opinion that the procedures
           prescribed by the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) were
           not followed and accordingly recommends that the House resolves
           not to confirm the provisional suspension of Mr R Ameer.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate, Mr M
   K Chauke, Additional Magistrate at Pretoria, dated 21 June 2005:


   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the provisional suspension from office of
   magistrate M K Chauke, tabled by the Minister for Justice and
   Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the
   Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) reports as follows:

        1. The Portfolio Committee noted that the Minister provisionally
           suspended Mr Chauke from office on 13 April 2005 in terms of
           section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.


    2.      The Portfolio Committee further noted that Mr Chauke was
           suspended de facto by the Magistrates Commission since 6 October
           2004, a date prior to the Minister’s decision and therefore in
           contravention of the provisions of section 13(3)(a))(i) of the
           Magistrates Act which reads - “The Minister, on the advice of
           the Commission, may provisionally suspend a magistrate from
           office if the Commission, after affording the magistrate a
           reasonable opportunity to be heard regarding the desirability of
           such provisional suspension, is satisfied that reliable evidence
           exists indicating that an allegation against that magistrate is
           of such serious nature as to make it inappropriate for the
           magistrate to perform the functions of a magistrate while the
           allegation is being investigated;”.


    3.      The Portfolio Committee considered the possibility of condoning
           the de facto suspension, however considered that this would be
           legally tenuous and in any event would not have complied with
           the requirement of section 13(3)(e) in that an inquiry had not
           been initiated by the Magistrates Commission within 60 days of
           the de facto suspension.


        4. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, Parliament
           must, as soon as possible, pass a resolution as to whether or
           not the provisional suspension of Mr Chauke is confirmed.  The
           Portfolio Committee is of the opinion that the procedures
           prescribed by the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) were
           not followed and accordingly recommends that the House resolves
           not to confirm the provisional suspension of Mr M K Chauke.


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Senior
   Magistrate, Mr M S Makamu at Benoni, dated 21 June 2005:
   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the provisional suspension from office of senior
   magistrate M S Makamu, tabled by the Minister for Justice and
   Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the
   Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) reports as follows:


      1.    The Portfolio Committee noted that the Minister provisionally
           suspended Mr Makamu from office on 13 April 2005 in terms of
           section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

        2. The Portfolio Committee further noted that Mr Makamu was
           suspended de facto by the Magistrates Commission since 3 August
           2004, a date prior to the Minister’s decision and therefore in
           contravention of the provisions of section 13(3)(a)(i) of the
           Magistrates Act which reads –“The Minister, on the advice of the
           Commission, may provisionally suspend a magistrate from office
           if the Commission, after affording the magistrate a reasonable
           opportunity to be heard regarding the desirability of such
           provisional suspension, is satisfied that reliable evidence
           exists indicating that an allegation against that magistrate is
           of such serious nature as to make it inappropriate for the
           magistrate to perform the functions of a magistrate while the
           allegation is being investigated;”.


        3. The Portfolio Committee considered the possibility of condoning
           the de facto suspension, however considered that this would be
           legally tenuous and in any event would not have complied with
           the requirement of section 13(3)(e) in that an inquiry had not
           been initiated by the Magistrates Commission within 60 days of
           the de facto suspension.

        4. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, Parliament
           must, as soon as possible, pass a resolution as to whether or
           not the provisional suspension of Mr Makamu is confirmed.  The
           Portfolio Committee is of the opinion that the procedures
           prescribed by the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) were
           not followed and accordingly recommends that the House resolves
           not to confirm the provisional suspension of Mr M S Makamu.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Senior
   Magistrate  M J S Nhleko at Lusikisiki, dated 21 June 2005:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the provisional suspension from office of
   magistrate Mr M J S Nhleko, tabled by the Minister for Justice and
   Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the
   Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) reports as follows:

        1. The Portfolio Committee noted that the Minister provisionally
           suspended Mr Nhleko from office on 13 April 2005 in terms of
           section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.


        2. The Portfolio Committee further noted that Mr Nhleko was
           suspended de facto by the Magistrates Commission since 3
           December 2004, a date prior to the Minister’s decision and
           therefore in contravention of the provisions of section
           13(3)(a)(i) of the Magistrates Act which reads - “The Minister,
           on the advice of the Commission, may provisionally suspend a
           magistrate from office if the Commission, after affording the
           magistrate a reasonable opportunity to be heard regarding the
           desirability of such provisional suspension, is satisfied that
           reliable evidence exists indicating that an allegation against
           that magistrate is of such serious nature as to make it
           inappropriate for the magistrate to perform the functions of a
           magistrate while the allegation is being investigated;”.
        3. The Portfolio Committee considered the possibility of condoning
           the de facto suspension, however considered that this would be
           legally tenuous and in any event would not have complied with
           the requirement of section 13(3)(e) in that an inquiry had not
           been initiated by the Magistrates Commission within 60 days of
           the de facto suspension.

        4. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, Parliament
           must, as soon as possible, pass a resolution as to whether or
           not the provisional suspension of Mr Nhleko is confirmed.  The
           Portfolio Committee is of the opinion that the procedures
           prescribed by the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993) were
           not followed and accordingly recommends that the House resolves
           not to confirm the provisional suspension of Mr M J S Nhleko.




