---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 October 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-10-27
---

THURSDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2005
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Ladies and gentlemen, the Chief Whip of the ANC
has requested to move a motion without notice, and I’m told that there is
consensus among all the parties that we deal with it before the President
answers questions.

                DEATH OF US CIVIL RIGHTS ACTIVIST ROSA PARKS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House -
     1) notes the death of Rosa Parks, US civil rights activist,  who  died
        on Monday, 24 October 2005;


      2) recalls that -


         (a)      Mrs Rosa Parks, African-American heroine, a humble
             seamstress from the City of Alabama, USA, sat on a whites-only
             seat on a city bus, thus inspiring millions of her fellow
             citizens to stand up for their rights and in defence of the
             constitution of the USA which successive federal governments
             had failed to enforce; and


         (b)      it was Rosa Parks and other icons of her generation who
             inspired all freedom-loving people, especially in South
             Africa, to act fearlessly in fighting the monster of
             legislated racism; and


     3) conveys its heartfelt condolences to members of her family and  dip
        our flag in homage to this courageous  woman  who  passed  away  on
        Monday, 24 October 2005.

Agreed to.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY: The President



          Statement by SA Communist Party regarding land occupation


13.   Mr A H Nel (DA) asked the President of the Republic:



      (1)   Whether Cabinet has taken a position in respect of the statement
           by the SA Communist Party that it intends embarking on a
           campaign of mass land occupation around the country; if not, why
           not; if so, (a) what is the Government ’s position and (b) what
           action does it intend taking should the SACP implement this
           plan;




      (2)   whether the Presidency has taken advice on the implications for
           the public’s confidence in the rule of law if such land
           invasions take place; if so, what advice;


      (3)   whether the Government remains committed to the protection of
           property rights in South Africa; if not, why not; if so, what
           are the relevant details?                          N2053E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, let me start by
thanking the House for the motion that has just been approved. Indeed, I
think it is very important that we communicate this message, because Rosa
Parks was indeed, as described in the motion, a very important mover of the
process that sought to address the problem of racism and civil rights in
the United States.
Coming to the question, the hon Nel asks whether the Cabinet has taken a
position in respect of the statement by the SA Communist Party that it
intends embarking on a campaign of mass land occupation around the country,
and so on.

I’m afraid that the question is based on a misconception about what the
Communist Party said – probably based on wrong reporting of what the
Communist Party said. The Communist Party expressed its concern about the
slow pace in terms of movement with regard to the issue of land
redistribution. It said that it was necessary to highlight this and,
therefore, among other things, that it would carry out symbolic occupations
of land to draw attention to land distribution in order to highlight the
problem of land shortage and land hunger among the poor - symbolic
occupations.

Indeed, the only national land occupation that took place was in the Brits
municipality on vacant land owned by the municipality. That occupation
occurred with the permission of the municipality. So we are not talking
here about a process, suggested by the question posed by the hon Nel, of
mass land occupation, which results in the further questions.

This is a decision taken to highlight what indeed is an important matter –
the challenge of the proper distribution of land in our country. As in the
case of any other organisation or person in the country, the SA Communist
Party indeed has a constitutional right to embark on protest action on
whatever issues it feels should be brought to the attention of the
authorities and the general public. Therefore this is not a matter that
required that the Cabinet should take any particular position, except to
respect the right of the Communist Party to protest.

With regard to the substance of the matter itself, the hon member might be
aware that the Communist Party also took an important initiative when it
called for a land summit to bring in all role-players who are interested in
this issue, so that we could all get together to do what needed to be done
to speed up this process of ensuring the equitable distribution of the
land.

The government itself has been concerned about this matter because, as the
hon member will know, we had said that by 2014 30% of agricultural land
would have been subjected to this process of redistribution. So far we have
only been able to get up to 3%. Now there are various reasons for this,
such as capacity and budget constraints, and the time taken to formulate
policy. A factor of significance, of course, is the willing-buyer, willing-
seller approach; and various other matters have slowed down the process of
land redistribution.

Therefore, indeed we agreed as government with what the Communist Party
called for - the need for a land summit – so that we could then see what it
was that needed to be done. The land summit and the decisions that it took
respected the provisions in our Constitution with regard to the matter of
property rights, and focused especially on section 25 with regard to this
matter, which also makes provision for other interventions with regard to
the property question, including the issue of land.

The government participated, of course, in that conference, took seriously
the decisions that were taken there and therefore necessarily looks at what
it is that can be done in response to the decisions of the land summit to
speed up this process of land reform. Therefore government’s position with
regard to constitutional and legal matters in terms of property rights
remains unchanged. I am saying, however, as the land summit said, that
section 25 of the Constitution provides for other interventions to speed up
this process, and the government is looking at that. Thank you, Madam
Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, thank you, Mr
President. It may well be that their statements were reported wrongly, but
I will come back to that.

I recently attended the congress of AgriSA and also visited northern
KwaZulu-Natal where we spoke to many farmers. There is a willingness and a
lot of good will to make land reform a success. There are problems, of
course, but it is widely accepted that effective and sustainable land
reform can only come about through the joint efforts of government and the
farmers.

Now I was at the land summit myself, Mr President, and my perception is a
little different from what you perceived there. I perceived the SA
Communist Party as recklessly and cynically exploiting the emotion around
land to further its own political ends. And, Mr President, it is your
alliance partner. Are you prepared to tell them that their methods are
irresponsible and reckless, not only undermining the rule of law but also
jeopardising the economic future of our country? Thank you very much.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, as I said, I’m quite
certain that the reason the SA Communist Party deliberately and consciously
spoke about symbolic occupations was precisely because it wanted to respect
the rule of law. It didn’t say, “We are going to seize land”. It said: “We
will make these symbolic occupations”, and, as I indicated, the first one
and the only one as far as I know that has taken place actually took place
with the agreement of the Brits municipal council. So, I do not believe
that we have anything in particular to fear with regard to this.

Indeed, the view of the government coincides with yours, hon Nel, with
regard to the need to co-operate with organisations like Agri SA. Indeed,
the land summit itself spoke about a supply-led approach to land reform, so
that we should deliberately go out to find this land. It’s best to handle
this – and, again, this was said by the land summit – in the context of a
public-private partnership; that the government should indeed act in
partnership with the landowners, as represented for instance by AgriSA, to
access this land so that then it becomes possible to say to the people,
“There is land available of this kind for these particular purposes”.

So we are not in disagreement at all about that. But also, as I was
indicating, there are many other things that need to be done in this
regard, which include – again within the context of the Constitution –
interventions that would relate to expropriation of land and payment for it
in the manner that is prescribed in the Constitution. This includes issues
that were, again, raised at the land summit that had to do with scrapping
restrictions on subdivision; reversing concentration; promoting the
principle of one farmer, one farm; changing the current large farm-size
culture; foreign ownership; land tax; using land for optimal social
benefit; and extensive support for small-scale agriculture.

We have to intervene in all of these various ways in order to address this.
I know that in some instances we have had problems. Issues have been raised
about the possibility of negative things happening in this country - of
grabbing land. I’m saying that the government is committed to respecting
the Constitution with regard to the approach to this. Indeed, what we are
saying is not peculiar to South Africa.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It’s gone, Mr President.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, I think so too. Thank you, Madam Deputy
Speaker. [Applause.]

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Speaker, agriculture had a central role to play in
building a strong economy and in the process reduce inequality by
increasing income and employment opportunity for the poor. For many decades
Africans were deprived of economic opportunities. The denial of property
rights prevented them from raising capital for investment.

With regard to the pace of land reform, would the President agree that in
addition to the recommendations made at the Land Summit that the government
must designate certain land or areas for land reform purposes even if it
calls for expropriation? [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, yes, indeed. As I was saying,
this is provided for in our Constitution and therefore must be one of the
interventions we make with regard to speeding up this process of land
redistribution.

I was going to say that none of this is peculiar to South Africa. Our
ambassador in the United States, Barbara Masekela, earlier this month
responded to an opinion item that appeared in one of the United States
newspapers which was entitled “South Africa’s land grab” and she said that
the South African government has not taken and will not take the land of
any one farmer or otherwise without compensation or due process of law. To
do so would be unconstitutional.

Our Constitution gives the state the power of eminent domain to take land
for a legitimate public purpose. The US Supreme Court has held that
eliminating the social and economic evils of a land oligopoly is a
legitimate purpose. We are using eminent domain to redress land oligopoly
resulting from generations of legalised racial discrimination. Then she
asked under what set of circumstances does a remedy that passes muster
under the US constitution become a recipe for disaster when we apply it
under ours? [Applause.]

Madam Speaker, I might add for the benefit of the hon members that the US
Supreme court judgment would indeed be instructive to read. It is Hawaii
Housing Authority v Midkiff 467 US 229 (1984). So, yes this is indeed one
of the interventions that must be made to address both the maldistribution
of land, and indeed, the other challenges as the hon Ntuli has mentioned,
such as helping to generate economic growth and encourage equity in our
society. Thank you Madam Speaker. [Applause.]
Mnu V B NDLOVU: Somlomo neNdlu ehloniphekile, mhlonishwa Mongameli, ngicela
ukukusho kumhlonishwa uMongameli ukuthi kuyazeka ukuthi isikhathi sesiside
kakhulu abantu belindile, abanye babo bekhala ngokuthi mhlawumbe uMnyango
wenza kancane ukuthi ubuyisele umhlaba kubona. Kwake kwezwakala
nomhlonishwa iSekela likaMongameli lithi mhlawumbe iZimbabwe ibafundise
isifundo yini, bangafunda yini nakhona.

Ngicela ukubuza mhlonishwa Mongameli ukuthi ukungenelela kuzokwenza yini
ukuthi abantu laba abafuna umhlaba nabafanele ukuthi bawuthole babe nevuso
lokuthi bazowuthola ekugcineni, kungabi sengathi bayethenjiswa noma
kukhulunywa nje into engezukwenzakala?

Okwesibili, nalaba okuzothathwa  kuwo  umhlaba  kuhle  kungabukeki  sengathi
bayephucwa umhlaba kodwa bakubone kufanele  ukuthi  umhlaba  kufuneka  bonke
abantu babe nawo. Iyiphi  leyo  ndlela  okungenziwa  ngayo  ukuze  kukwazeke
ukuthi zonke lezi zinhla  ezisebenzayo  ukufuna  umhlabathi  zikwazi  ukuthi
ziphumelele zonke? (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, hon House and hon  President,  what  I  would
like to say, is that it is a well-known fact that people have  been  waiting
for a long time. Others are complaining about the department that is  taking
too long to return their land. We once heard the hon  Deputy  President  say
that perhaps Zimbabwe had taught them a lesson; they have got to learn  from
it.
I would like to know, hon President, whether interference will  cause  those
people who want their land to have hope that in the end they  are  going  to
get it, and not to feel like they are being  promised  something  that  will
never happen.

Secondly, regarding those from whom the land is going to be taken  away,  it
would be a good thing if they did not feel as if the land were  being  taken
from them by force but deemed it necessary that everybody  must  have  land.
Which way is going to be used so that all the structures  that  are  working
to redistribute land are successful?]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Of the two basic points with regard to this,
and there may be more than two, one of them is that indeed it is
fundamentally part of government policy to ensure that we speed up the
process of redistribution of land.

Kufanele singathembisi nje abantu balinde balinde iminyaka singenzanga
lutho. [We don’t have to promise people without doing something; they wait
for years.]

It is fundamentally the government’s determination to make sure that we
speed up the process of land redistribution. That is why these two
particular questions arise. The first one is the question about
expropriation within the context of what the Constitution provides for and
this issue of how we handle the so-called principle of willing sellers and
willing buyers.

Those issues arise in the context of precisely this determination to move
forward fast. That is one thing, and the second thing is that this means
that we have to do all of these things that I have mentioned to look at the
totality of issues that have served as blockages in terms of faster
movement forward and then remove the blockages. One of them obviously, and
the expropriation issue is related to this, is affordability, the provision
of resources to make sure that indeed we do acquire this land. Because we
say expropriation is provided for in the Constitution but the Constitution
also provides that there must be compensation, fair compensation. So, you
need those resources even when you have expropriated.

I am saying that these are important elements in terms of what government
has done, what it thinks and certainly the impact of the land summit with
the decisions it took. These must surely be that they encourage the
government to move forward faster with regard to this.

Lokho kuzokwenza ukuthi abantu bangahlali iminyaka belokhu bethembile.
USekela Mongameli badlala ngaye. [That will ensure that people do not have
to live in hope for years. The Deputy President is not to blame.]
What the Deputy President said was that here we have a challenge of the
land question in Zimbabwe and as we look at what it is that we need to do.
Naturally we will as part of answering the challenges that we face, look at
all examples including the example of Zimbabwe.

Now, to look at the example of Zimbabwe is not to say that we are therefore
going to copy what is happening in Zimbabwe, but to look at the question of
Zimbabwe would very well be to say that if things went wrong, there is no
reason why we should repeat that because we have got that prior experience.

Well, I am sure we are all accustomed to the scarecrows that are raised
everyday and this was one of them. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Thank you, Madam
Speaker.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker and the hon President, the ACDP welcomes your
commitment to protect property rights in terms of the Constitution and the
rule of law. We also appreciate the need for land redistribution in our
country.

The experience of the Modderklip land invasion case, however, shows a
distinctly different approach for certain state organs. You will recall,
hon President, that in that matter the eviction order was obtained but the
state refused to enforce it, obliging the owners to again approach the
courts for an order.
The Chief Justice Langa said in the Constitutional Court in this matter,
failure by the state to act in an appropriate manner would mean that
Modderklip and others similarly placed could not look upon the state and
its organs to protect them from invasions of their property. He emphasised
that this would be anarchy and a recipe for disaster, and he added that the
state failed to do anything and accordingly breached Modderklip’s
constitutional rights to an effective remedy as required by the rule of law
and entrenched by section 34 of the Constitution.

Whilst the ACDP appreciates that the mere fact that they were able to
approach the courts and obtain liberal recourse indicates that property
rights and the rule of law are being upheld in South Africa. Do you not
agree, hon President, that it is deplorable that certain state organs in
this case did not take active steps to prevent the land invasion in
question and that the very least to enforce the eviction order granted? If
so, how can similar situations be avoided to prevent what the
Constitutional Court referred to as a recipe for anarchy? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I am quite certain that we
don’t have time to discuss the Modderklip case the hon member has spoken
about, and he quoted quite correctly what the Chief Justice said. There is
a whole range of other matters that relate to this, but I am saying that I
am quite certain we do not have to discuss all of those.
The principal point of course is that in the end the law is obeyed and
indeed as he says, Modderklip had the possibility to resort to the courts
to lodge whatever complaint it had and I am quite certain that in the end
the executive organs of state, as they usually and normally do, would
respect the decisions taken by the courts. But the difficulties relating to
similar sorts of cases will persist.

However, I think that we should not carry the impression that there was a
wilful decision by any executive organ to ignore the courts, but that there
was an argument. There was a case that the executive authorities thought
they had, but in any case, the matter has moved and everybody has respected
what the judiciary has said. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

  Tensions regarding selection of candidates for local government elections

   14. Mr N T Godi (PAC) asked the President of the Republic:


        1) Whether ongoing tensions regarding the selection of candidates
           for the local government elections will adversely affect these
           elections; if so, what are the relevant details;




        2) what are the underlying causes of these tensions?  N2134E
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, indeed, I think that
the hon Godi has raised an important question, namely whether ongoing
tensions regarding selection of candidates for the local government
elections will adversely affect these elections, and what the underlying
causes of these tensions are.

Part of what I’ve heard is that indeed there is, certainly in some areas of
the country – it might be everywhere in the country – an intense
competition among people who are contesting the election as candidates for
their various parties for the forthcoming local government elections.

I’ve been told, for instance, that in some instances people will even come
to meetings with guns in order to ensure that they get elected. I’ve been
told that in some instances people threaten to destroy the very
organisations that they want to represent in the councils if they don’t get
elected as candidates.

I’ve heard of stories where people have been organised to carry out clearly
lawless acts, which have involved burning down houses, and so on, in order
to eliminate people that some think would be their opponents within the
context of the choice of these candidates.

As we go around, doing municipal izimbizo, one of the things that comes
across very strongly is that we have quite a number of people who serve on
our councils, who think that to be a councillor is to access resources for
themselves. This is perhaps the underlying cause of the tensions to which
the hon Godi refers, that people think that by becoming mayors and
councillors they’ll be able to access resources that they otherwise would
not.

The Minister of Finance persuaded the Cabinet to agree, in the Municipal
Finance Management Act, that councillors should be excluded from the
tendering processes, precisely to address this. Nevertheless, it does seem,
from the stories I hear, that people still continue to act in this manner,
which in reality shows disrespect for democratic processes and for the will
of the people by using unacceptable means to ensure that they get elected
as candidates.

The underlying cause seems to be that people believe that by gaining these
positions in local government, it would give them access to resources and,
indeed, when they go around - some of them - asking people to support them
as such candidates, they make specific promises: When I become mayor,
you’ll get tenders. When I become mayor, I will do the following for you.
And by doing so they do not address the fundamental interests of the poor
of our country.

This is a matter of concern, and I appeal to all parties to make sure that
we deal with this matter, particularly because of the great importance of
the system of local government, which is the coalface of delivery, the
coalface in terms of the improvement of the lives of our people.

Nevertheless, I would say to the hon Godi that I do not believe that those
tensions that might exist within parties would adversely effect the
forthcoming elections. It’s necessary that the parties should act very
firmly against this kind of behaviour, but we all must indeed ensure that
those elections are peaceful, free and fair. Thank you very much, Madam
Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Deputy Speaker, I thank Comrade President for the reply. I
must confirm that as a leader in the PAC, going around in the country, I
have come across such instances where some of our comrades act in ways that
seem to emphasise the personal needs over the organisational needs.

From your response, I think that there are two things that came out, which
I think are a challenge and on which we’d be interested to hear your
opinion; one, the need to find cadres or people to deploy who will remain
loyal to the vision of the people and who will be able to resist the
temptations of those who would want to corrupt them to be able to make a
quick buck or to get rich in the fastest and shortest possible way; two,
the challenge of seeing that at the local government level you have the
carrot of the tenders, which becomes the basis on which these fights and
this jostling occur.

Has the government not thought of a way in which some of these functions,
especially around infrastructural development, could revert back to
government responsibility rather than being tendered out as private
responsibility? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, Comrade Godi ...
[Laughter.] [Applause.] ... one of the things that we have to do is indeed
to ensure that the provisions of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
Management Act are honoured.

This is a critical legal instrument in terms of dealing with this issue
that both of us are addressing. However, in the end this problem is not a
government problem; it’s a problem of parties.

The members of the DA have just heckled and said: “Especially the ANC” ...
and they added, “... including the PAC”. They haven’t yet said: ”...
excluding the DA.” [Laughter.] [Applause.]

This is a problem of the parties, and, indeed, I think that all of the
parties have a very serious challenge in terms of responding to this,
because – and I’ve said this a number of times before – it’s quite obvious
that there is very prevalent in our society a very, very strong
acquisitive, materialistic spirit; it’s quite clear. Hence this drive for
people to acquire wealth as quickly as they can, without regard for any
legality in the way you’ve just indicated.

Therefore, the particular problem with local government is that here you’ve
got ward councillors. You need people who are respected by the communities
that they represent. You need precisely the kind of person that you
describe, who’s loyal to the concerns and interests of the ordinary people.
The parties have to find these people, and have to do whatever is necessary
to ensure that the self-seekers do not emerge triumphant.

If we don’t do it, then indeed we are going to face crises with regard to
local government. Even the interventions that are being made, such as
Project Consolidate, for instance, which will attend to issues of
personnel, structure, manner of functioning, and so on, won’t succeed as
well as they should and can if the people who sit on these positions of
authority in our councils are self-seekers.

However, that is a challenge that all parties must respond to: the DA, the
IFP, the ANC, the UDM, the PAC, the FF Plus, everybody . . .
[Interjections.] . . . even the new ones. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Thanks,
Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr B M SOLO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I thank Mr President for the clear
answer with which he has provided us.

A new system of local government has been established since 2000, in terms
of Chapter 7 of the Constitution. Accordingly, local government becomes an
integral part of a developmental state.

Ndiyeva ukuba impendulo yakho ithi onke amaqela ezopolitiko kufanele
athathe inxaxheba ukuqinisekisa ukuba abantu abanyulwayo ngabantu
abathembekileyo, ngabantu abaza kukwazi ukusebenzisana nabantu bazalisekise
iimfuno zabantu.

Kodwa ke, kwimithetho ekhoyo kukho nendawo ethi abantu nabo mababe nendima
abayidlalayo kwiikomiti ezisekiweyo ngokwaseburhulumenteni. Ndiyabona ukuba
loo nto ibalulekile, Mongameli. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I understand your reply, to the effect that all political parties must
ensure that elected members are honest and are people who are able to
assist communities to fulfill their desires.

Nevertheless, in the existing policies there is a clause
stating that people must participate in committees set up by government. I
think that is important, Mr President.]

Given the huge challenges facing local municipal councillors and their
communities, can the hon President share with this House his views on how
his Office can assist in ensuring that local government gets more focused
in its mandate in terms of the Intergovernmental Relations Act? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, hon member, we decided that rather than
continuing with the practice of holding provincial izimbizo, we should hold
municipal ones. And as you would have seen, we are engaged in that process
precisely because of the critical importance of this sphere of government.

One of the things that we always look at during those izimbizo is the issue
to which you referred, of the role of the people. Indeed, you are quite
correct, that it’s critically important that the people should make an
impact on what happens to them.

This is the sphere of government where you come closest to the realisation
of the vision that “the people shall govern”. And therefore the ward
committees are very important with regard to this.

So in all of the izimbizo that we’ve held, we always meet all of the ward
committees in the districts to discuss with them how they are functioning,
what their problems are, and so on; and indeed there are problems. One of
them, in some areas, has to do with funding. Despite the fact that the law
says that the municipalities must provide the necessary resources to ensure
that the ward committees function properly, you find, in some local
municipalities, that such funds are not made available, with the result
that the ward committee members are not able to do the work that they are
supposed to do.

You find other problems, such as that even when the ward committees are
functioning properly and report, through the municipal speakers, on issues
raised by the people, these matters never reach the councils so that they
can respond to the concerns expressed by the people.

So we are, indeed as you are suggesting, hon member, intervening with
regard to this. I think that the meetings that we have had now enable us to
draw some general conclusions about what is happening, and, therefore, we
are in a much better position to impact on all of these questions, in all
the municipalities, to make sure that they do indeed function as they
should. Thanks, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, we believe that party
discipline is to blame for much of the maladministration, lack of delivery
and corruption that we have in the local government sphere.

The then mayors of Kannaland and Beaufort West are cases in point. If their
party had adequately dealt with them, the public would not have had to wait
for the outcome of protracted legal processes.

So Mr President, I would like to ask you: Do you agree that parties should
not only appoint hard-working and honourable candidates, but that they
should exercise strong discipline over councillors and hold them
accountable for their behaviour, and that we definitely should not
reappoint those who have transgressed in the past?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: This must be a historic day, hon member ...
[Interjections.] ... because I agree with you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Indeed, I think the hon member is perfectly correct. The parties surely do
have a responsibility over the councillors who represent them. We have very
democratic and people-friendly laws, and sometimes it’s not so easy to
impose party discipline when people have got resort to various kinds of
laws to protect them – which is correct; they must have that resort.
However, I think that you are correct.

Centrally important is indeed that the parties have got to do what you are
saying. One of the matters that gets raised by the communities is that in
many instances they never see their councillors. They elect the people this
year and will see them again in the run-up to the next elections, which is
a regular complaint. Again the question must arise: What are the parties
doing in terms of ensuring that their members discharge their
responsibilities?

So I’m going to write this down in my diary; today I agreed with the DA.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] Thanks, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr C M MORKEL: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, looking back at the pre-
1994 negotiations, the proportional representation system was introduced in
an attempt to reduce tensions in local communities where two parties
contest a particular area, and avoid conflict and tensions in that manner.

Now in local government we have both the proportional and geographical
representation system. And in certain instances it’s around the
geographical representative, the ward councillor, that some of this tension
has been taking place, and further potential for conflict is evident in
certain communities.

Mr President, would you be prepared to express yourself on the multimember
system being proposed by the Slabbert commission and its application at
various levels, including local government, potentially?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, no, I wouldn’t. We
might want to discuss the question of the electoral system more
comprehensively. I don’t think that a response to it now, in this limited
way, would help.

Indeed, we might want to discuss it globally and see what we need to do if
there is any need for improvement. However, I’m glad that you raised the
point about the kind of conflict that arises around ward councillors.
Indeed, that has been part of the discussion about the electoral system,
that we should design it in such a way that it doesn’t result in that kind
of conflict.

Given the age of our democracy and given where we come from, it is
necessary to ensure, surely, that the system is democratic and properly
representative, but also sensitive to the tensions that can arise if we
design a wrong system. However, I think that perhaps another day, hon
member, we can discuss this matter a bit more comprehensively. Thanks,
Madam Deputy Speaker.

            Contribution made by United Nations 2005 World Summit

  15. Mr D K Maluleke (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:


      What contribution has the United Nations 2005 World Summit – High-
      level Plenary Meeting of the 60th Session of the General Assembly made
      to creating a better Africa and a better world?

            N2057E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, there were high
expectations about this high-level meeting of the United Nations with
regard to a variety of matters. One of them had to do with the
restructuring of the United Nations, including the Security Council; to
quote the outcome document that was adopted by that high-level meeting:

  [...the Security Council becomes more broadly representative, efficient
  and transparent to enhance its effectiveness and legitimacy and the
  implementation of its decisions.]

That decision was not taken with regard to the restructuring and as you
know this would have given the possibility to the African continent, among
other things, also to have permanent members on the Security Council, and
to that extent, therefore, we can say that the high-level meeting did not
succeed to create those conditions for a better Africa and a better world.

The second matter that it had to deal with was the progress report on the
Millennium Development Goals. A report had been commissioned by the UN on
this matter before this summit, known as the Sachs Report. It was done by
Prof Jeffrey Sachs. It is called: Investing in Development – A Practical
Plan to Achieve Millennium Development Goals.

In that report Prof Sachs indeed says that Africa is the only continent
that will not be able to achieve these goals. He also indicates the sorts
of resources that will be required in order to meet those Millennium
Development Goals, and it says that for the developing world the cost of
meeting the MDGs in all countries would amount to $121 billion in 2006,
rising to $189 billion in 2015.

Now, that is $121 billion in 2006. This compares with the 2002 official
development assistance of roughly $28 billion. You can thus see that even
just looking at this one particular matter, the resources that have been
committed to meeting the Millennium Development Goals are not enough. But
again, we believe that the Millennium Summit +5 high-level meeting in New
York did not attend to this matter adequately.

There is another issue, which relates to the conflict between
multilateralism and unilateralism. The outcomes document says that one of
the main challenges facing the UN is to reach a security consensus that is
–

   ... based on the recognition that many threats are interlinked; that
  development, peace, security and human rights are mutually reinforcing;
  that no state can best protect itself by acting entirely alone; and that
  all states need an effective and efficient collective security system,
  pursuant of the purposes and principles of the UN Charter.

We were not able to arrive at a common response to these interlinked
threats and to say what we should do in a multilateral manner, rather than
a unilateral manner. So, that is another problem.
The Secretary-General of the UN pointed to another problem, which was
failure to reach agreement on nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament. So,
I would say, hon member, that in many respects, the high-level meeting did
not meet the expectations of the African people, and indeed, I think the
expectations of billions of people elsewhere in the world. But it it’s a
start, and the matters that are on the agenda are continuing to be
discussed by the General Assembly and hopefully it will be possible to make
faster progress.

The Prime Minister of Sweden - and Sweden is currently the President of the
General Assembly - has taken the initiative to put together a group of
countries, including South Africa, to see what we can do to contribute to
speeding up of the process of responding to all of these challenges. We
have joined that group, and we will contribute whatever we can, because it
is important that the objectives that were set should be achieved, sooner
rather than later, to create that better Africa and that better world.
Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr D K MALULEKE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to thank the President for
his informative response. Mr President, it is quite obvious that an African
seat in the UN Security Council will help focus the attention of the United
Nations on African affairs. Would His Excellency share with the House the
efforts South Africa has made, as well as problems it has encountered, in
securing that seat? In what particular ways would South Africa, if it
obtained that seat, use it to force development on the African continent?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, there has been a
decision of the African Union that none of us are allowed to campaign for a
seat on the Security Council, so I am not going to, otherwise I will get
myself into a lot of trouble.

The position that the African continent has taken is that with regard to
the permanent seats we have to argue for two permanent seats. A further
decision in this regard was that we should oppose the creation of a two-
tier system with regard to those permanent seats - with some members, the
current permanent five, having a right of veto, and the new ones who would
come aboard not enjoying that right. The decision was that we should, as
the African continent, argue for equality. If the other members have the
right of veto, the new ones should have. We would prefer that there was no
veto, but clearly experience shows that those who have the veto now are not
about to give it up. So, that is the position.

Negotiations took place, I would imagine that the Minister of Foreign
Affairs has reported on all of this, with all countries and all groups, and
in the end the delegation of African Foreign Ministers agreed with the
group which includes Germany, Japan, India and Brazil, that we should not
insist on this veto for now. We should get into the Security Council, but
continue the struggle with regard to the matter of the veto. This is the
position that was explained by President Mogae, speaking here yesterday.

But nevertheless, an extraordinary summit of the African Union decided that
we should still pursue this matter of equality of treatment among permanent
members, and therefore constituted a group of 10 heads of state to go
around and canvas this and report back to an AU summit which will be taking
place on Monday next week. So, that group of 10 will report as to what sort
of response they had. We will see what decision comes out of that.

It is only after that, once this matter has been settled, whether we are
getting two members and so on, that the African Union will engage the
question as to who those two members should be. It is in that context that
we are prohibited from canvassing. We will see what the continent decides
with regard to this matter. Thanks, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, hon President, one of the outcomes of the
United Nations 2005 World Summit was the following:

  We acknowledge that good governance and the rule of law at the national
  and international levels are essential for sustained economic growth,
  sustainable development and the eradication of poverty and hunger.

The major expected outcome of the African Peer Review Mechanism is to
arrive at international best practice codes for good governance.

In the light of the fact that Zimbabwe provides a prime example of flagrant
disregard for the rule of law, and that our government has steadfastly
refused to openly challenge the deplorable conditions under which our
neighbours are living, will the President tell us what contribution our
government will make towards creating a better Africa and better world,
while we seem to be failing to create a better SADC region, where one of
the member countries is causing untold suffering to its own people? Thank
you. [Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, the United Nations
2005 World Summit - High-Level Plenary Meeting of the 60th
Session of the General Assembly, did not discuss Zimbabwe at all. The
matter did not arise. The question that we are dealing with is the outcomes
of this high-level meeting of the United Nations.

However, we can discuss Zimbabwe and its challenges. Last week, for
instance, I had to receive a delegation from the opposition party, the MDC,
who had come to raise some concerns about what was happening. They asked us
to intervene, which we did. I am quite sure they will return and ask us to
further pursue those matters. So, I have said this many times before, that
from our point of view the way we should approach the situation in Zimbabwe
is to see what contributions we can make to assist the people of Zimbabwe
to solve their problems. That is why I am saying that the MDC came to ask
us whether we could help them to solve their problems. And we tried, as we
would.

We will continue to do that, and again, as we have said, unfortunately, or
maybe fortunately, Zimbabwe is not a province of South Africa. So, we
cannot instruct them. We cannot compel them. But what we can do is engage
them, whether ruling party, opposition party, or other forces, to
contribute what we can to the solution of this problem.

I have yet to be convinced that there is any other approach that would help
Zimbabwe to solve its problems. I know that you might, if I issued a
statement later this afternoon denouncing Robert Mugabe, very well applaud
me, and say: “Mr President, very well done.” But, will that have solved the
problems of Zimbabwe? [Interjections.] It might have made me popular in
your eyes, but will it have solved the problems in Zimbabwe? I doubt it.
[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, Mr President, Government and opposition both
support the reform of the United Nations, and in particular the Security
Council. I can say something that you can’t, which is that we strongly
support the claim of South Africa to one of the proposed new seats.

President Mogae spoke very directly yesterday, and talked about better half
a loaf than no loaf at all, and he was referring to the tactics of some of
our brothers, which have contributed to the fact that reform of the
Security Council seems to have come to a halt.

Our hon Minister of Foreign Affairs indicated a while ago that if this
summit failed to come to grips with reform, it could even be a decade or
more before a real chance came again. I would like to ask you, Mr
President, what steps are we going to take, together with our allies and
partners in Africa, and our friends in other places in the world, like
Japan, Germany, Brazil and India, to get the reform momentum going again?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chair, I would like to believe, hon Gibson,
that the 10 African heads of state and government who were charged with
this responsibility to interact with people - other countries and regions
and so on – by the time they report back on Monday, will give us a good
sense of what we will be able to achieve, also regarding this matter of the
veto. I think we should wait for that, because what they might well
communicate, in terms of the interactions that they have had, that the
African continent might have to adjust its position in this regard.
I have indicated that the Prime Minister of Sweden, the hon Göran Persson,
had taken an initiative to put together a group of countries to look at
what it is that can be done to speed up this process of the reform of the
United Nations. He asked us to serve on this group, which we have accepted.
The group will work with the Secretary-General, and as I have indicated,
currently Sweden is also the President of the UN General Assembly.

It is our belief that that grouping, which is broadly representative of the
regions of the world and countries at different levels of development, etc,
has a possibility to produce some outcomes, which would be accepted by
consensus by everybody else. So, nothing has stopped. We have not reached a
dead-end. I would hope that the forthcoming summit of the African Union,
having received a report from this committee of 10, would have a
possibility to reflect on this matter, perhaps in the context of what
President Mogae was saying.

They might come back and say that the rest of the world - which was the
report of Foreign Ministers - is of the view that we should proceed to
restructure and that we should leave this veto matter for now - although we
should continue to fight for it, or its removal for everybody, but that we
should move. It may very well be that they might come back with that
report. I don’t know, but I think we should wait for that. I am quite
certain, though, that the forthcoming summit will look at this matter quite
seriously, because I do not get a sense on the continent that the continent
wants to stall the process of reform, but it seems to want a process of
reform that is equitable. But how much equity we can reach tomorrow of
course depends on a lot of things. But I think it will move. Thanks, Mr
Chairperson.

Dr P W A MULDER: Chair, Mr President, the FF Plus agrees with the whole
attitude from your side of being more pragmatic in handling the situation
of an African seat on the Security Council. I also agree with what was said
yesterday by the President of Botswana.

I am convinced that the present position of the African countries will
delay a seat, even for 10 years, as the Minister has said. My question is:
How permanent is this African decision? You said we can’t force Zimbabwe,
but we can engage with them. Can we engage with these countries to try to
convince them? Is there some possibility that this position will change?
Because I can’t see any movement on this issue as long as their position is
firmly set, namely, no seat without the veto.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chair, when the Foreign Ministers reported
at the last extraordinary summit of the AU on their consultations, and came
with a proposal that we should, for instance, agree with the G4 - Brazil,
India, Japan and Germany – to have these permanent seats without the veto,
the general view was that perhaps the Foreign Ministers had not done enough
consultation.
This principle of equity, equality of treatment, seems so obvious as a
principle that to have it rejected and saying that we are going to have a
two-tier system of representatives looked at bit strange, and therefore I
am saying the view seemed to be that the Foreign Ministers did not consult
sufficiently, and did not bang tables hard enough to assert our rights.
Therefore it was decided to take the matter to a higher level. It was
decided that the heads of state and government themselves had to deal with
this – ten of them.

So, presumably by the time they report on Monday they will have done this
consultation, which they thought the Foreign Ministers had not done - which
they had. I am saying all of this, hon Dr Mulder, to say that the
nonacceptance of the Foreign Ministers’ report was not so much based on an
ideological conviction as on the belief that the Foreign Ministers had not
consulted enough, hadn’t pushed our case hard enough.

Presumably the heads of state and government would have consulted enough,
pushed our case hard enough, and then we will see what kind of response
they get. If they come back to say that everybody agrees we should have
permanent seats with right of veto, we will all applaud. If they say that
they had consulted, but that the rest of the world did not agree with us,
then obviously Africa cannot subtract itself from this process and say that
unless we get these permanent seats, with right of veto, we are not going
to sit there, because the rest of the world might very well move forward.

So, I don’t think that one would have an ideological position such as that
one would indeed, regardless of what the rest of the world says, get into a
position of take it, or leave it. I don’t believe that that would happen.
Thanks, Madam Deputy Speaker.

         Remarks by President regarding civil society organisations

16.   Moulana M R Sayedali-Shah (DA) asked the President of the Republic:



      (1)   Whether his remarks on Wednesday, 28 September 2005, that civil
           society organisations represent the wishes of their
           international donors, is supported by the actions or statements
           of any particular organisations; if not, what factors did he
           take into consideration in reaching the conclusion that civil
           society organisations are not reflecting the needs or views of
           ordinary people; if so, what are the relevant details;




      (2)   whether he or the Government is planning any interventions to
           limit the ability of civil society organisations to determine
           their own priorities and modus operandi; if not, what action is
           he planning with regard to these organisations; if so, (a) what
           interventions and (b) when;


      (3)   whether he intends inviting civil society organisations to
          respond to his remarks; if not, why not; if so, what are the
          relevant details?                                         N2054E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I must apologise, Chairperson, for referring
to you in the feminine case. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, Mr President.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The hon member wants to know about the
remarks I made on Wednesday, 28 September 2005, regarding the independence
of civil society organisations.

What I said, twice, was in the context of the discussion of the African
Peer Preview Mechanism. What I said twice at two different meetings is that
there is a general view around the African continent, and there is a
question that is asked around the African continent, which is: Do we have a
genuine African civil society? A question is raised around the question of
the funding of civil society organisations. What I am saying is that I can
give the hon member a whole lot of reports, which will show him that this
is correct. There is a concern around the continent about this. That is
what I talked about.

It is a genuine concern around the continent, and it gets expressed like
this. It’s an important part of the discussion about the peer review
system, which we will come to, because the peer review system is a review
of countries, and therefore, the issue arises about the role of
nongovernmental organisations and civil society in those countries with
regard to meeting the challenges of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development.

The issue of foreign funding is a matter of very regular discussion among
the NGOs themselves, so I was not being particularly creative or inventive
when I raised this matter. It is very much on the agenda of the NGOs very
regularly.

For instance, Fazila Farouk wrote an article in one of our papers in 2002.
She was reporting about an international conference of NGOs which met
specifically to discuss this question. In the article, she said:

  NGOs around the world are asking the same question: how can we survive
  without international donor funding?


She said the conference –

  ... was motivated by the need to steer Southern NGOs away from a
  detrimental dependence on international donors that are driven by
  Northern agendas.


It’s a regular, standard issue that is discussed within the NGO community.
So it’s not anything particularly new.

I am going to quote from Kisiangani Emmanuel’s review of a book called
Agenda Setting and Public Policy in Africa:

  Most local NGOs, however, depend on foreign funding to run their
  operations. Foreign funding institutions on the other hand prescribe
  particular programmes that they fund. This restricts the local
  organisations to programme choices that are already determined by the
  funding institutions.


  Local NGOs need to overcome their dependency on external donor funding.
  This will help them to develop their own original approaches, and present
  courses of action for influencing policy in their respective countries.

There are many of these things that I can cite. Terence Smith at the School
of Development Studies at the University of KwaZulu-Natal had the following
to say:

  Prior to 1994, NGOs in South Africa enjoyed a remarkable degree of
  freedom and independence from donors. Donors imposed minimal controls on
  what recipients spent funds on. After 1994, however, the donors have
  arguably had much more of an influence on what South African NGOs do, and
  how they do it. This has occurred primarily through the criteria that
  donors set for who and what they will and won’t fund, which has limited
  the freedom NGOs have to determine what kind of work they will undertake.


And so on.

  Larger institutional donors whose criteria are usually set by political
  imperatives in the home country leave little room for negotiation or
  influence by recipient donor organisations in the country.

I am saying that I can quote many of these things. This is a particular
challenge. I mentioned that I have also been told that around September
2003, one of these donor organisations offered a sum of R80 million to fund
NGOs in what was called a “civil society advocacy programme”. It was said
that these moneys were going to be provided and various NGOs needed to be
found which could then challenge the government in the run-up to the 2004
elections with regard to delivery, with regard to various matters.

The issue was not acted on because there was a debate that went on for
quite a long time between the donor and the people who were supposed to
administer the funds.

So, I am saying that I do not believe that there is anything new about
this. NGOs are very, very familiar with this subject, and there is no
particular reason why there is a need for us to hold a conference with them
about matters that they are discussing. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Applause.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Thank you Chairperson and hon President. Mr
President, with all due respect, if one took your argument that civil
society organisations represent the wishes of their international donors,
while it may be true in some instances, but as a generalisation, to its
logical conclusion and extended that argument to the political domain, then
one may easily deduce – and I am not saying that it is true – that the ANC
is in fact doing the bidding of its foreign donors, because it received
funding during the struggle and continues to do so even in post-apartheid
South Africa. [Interjections.] I am not saying that it is true.

Furthermore, are you not then sending a wrong signal, for example, to
foreign countries such as the G8 group of countries, whose financial
assistance we require in order to realise the Nepad initiative. Aren’t we
then saying to them: We don’t want your money; it’s dangerous; it’s not
safe to take your money?

What about the role NGOs are playing in South Africa and continue to play
in the social, political and economic life of this country? These kinds of
remarks, if they are not specific and qualified, can have a demoralising
effect on the NGOs. Thank you. [Time expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The hon member has not listened. [Laughter.]
What I said was that this issue is actually a matter that is very actively
discussed by the NGOs themselves. I didn’t say anything at all that they
are not considering themselves. They are looking at specific interventions
and manners in which they should act in order, precisely, to avoid this
danger.

The hon member might think that this is perhaps a piece of juicy political
meat, but the fact of the matter is that the NGO community itself is
concerned about this matter. I think that if we want to engage this issue,
we should engage it with a view to assisting the NGO community to address
the matter. I think that is what we should do.

As I was saying, I can quote lots and lots of things from the NGOs. The
reason why you hold an international conference of NGOs by NGOs to discuss
the issue of what they should do to ensure that the foreign funding doesn’t
compromise them is because there is a problem.

Two staff members of the Republican Party in the United States’ House of
Representatives in 1996 raised this question about US Agency for
International Development, and said – this is the Republican party – that
this programme is not so much support for the Mandela government as support
for AID’s undisclosed political activities within the South African
domestic political arena, involving the most difficult, controversial
issues in South Africa. By funding advocacy groups to monitor and lobby for
changes in government policies, and even setting up trust funds to pay for
legal challenges in court against the new government’s action or inaction,
AID is, in some respects, making President Mandela’s task more difficult.

This was the Republican Party talking about US government funding; they
were staff of the Republican Party in the US House of Representatives.

This is precisely the concern the NGOs have – that they don’t run into this
problem. So, if the hon member wants to intervene in this matter, he should
read what the NGOs say about this, and maybe he can contribute something to
help them to find a solution. Thank you, Madam. Oh, sorry, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Mr President, we went way
over the time as prescribed, and I allowed you to conclude, but we will
have to observe the time for the responses.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: He mustn’t call you “Madam Speaker”! [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Yes, we can strike a deal, Mr
President.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Your Excellency, hon Mr President, whilst the important
role of civil society organisations is acknowledged and accepted as a basic
tenet of a healthy democracy, would you nevertheless care to comment on the
most cherished myth that they operate in a political, ideological and class
vacuum? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon member, I wouldn’t imagine that they
would themselves claim that they are operating in such a vacuum, because I
think that people get together to serve particular purposes and are
advocates for something or the other.

One of the NGOs here - I remember it was some time back, it must have been
around 1999 – appealed for funds from abroad on the basis that once Nelson
Mandela leaves and Thabo Mbeki takes over as President, human rights are
going to be challenged, and therefore they should get money to fight for
the protection of human rights. They wouldn’t say that they were operating
in a political vacuum. No, I think that all of us have got particular
purposes that we pursue. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson and hon President, as you have expressed the fear
that foreign donors expect the NGOs they are funding to pursue a particular
agenda, the ACDP’s question is: To what extent does the Government itself
direct a particular NGO to pursue a given agenda when the NGO receives
state funding? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chair, this would be true also, that
governments - whether here or anywhere else in the world – would give
funding to NGOs in order to support, encourage and promote government
programmes.

The difference is that these are matters that are domestically decide, and
have got to do with the domestic agenda. The democratically elected
Government says that we must address the challenge of poverty, and can
civil society please join us in this. That is an agenda that is decided by
the people themselves, not an agenda that comes from outside. Somebody else
might say that you are wrong about the issue of poverty. I, coming from the
North, have decided on a different thing.

So, of course, no government is going to hand out public funds for purposes
with which it does not agree, obviously. I am saying the issue that is
raised is the impact of forces out there in terms of directing national
policies, simply because they have got funds, and NGOs don’t have. I think
that is a very important distinction in terms of the impact of the funding
on the NGOs. Thank you.

Mr T E VEZI: Chairperson, hon President, are you aware of any civil
organisations which are aligned to the ruling party who have betrayed the
party in any way? Thank you. [Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Shenge, can you help? No, I don’t.
[Applause.] I am trying to think what . . . [Interjections.] Pardon? No, I
really don’t. Thank you, Chairperson.

   Progress with national unity and new patriotism; moral regeneration and
              social cohesion programmes; and youth empowerment

17.   Prince N E Zulu (IFP) asked the President of the Republic:



       1) whether any progress has been made in the country in terms of
          national unity and new patriotism; if not, why not; if so, what
          are the relevant details;




       2) whether the moral regeneration and social cohesion programmes are
          making an impact in our society; if not, why not; if so, what are
          the relevant details;



    (3)     whether youth empowerment in rural areas is receiving priority
          attention; if not, why not; if so, how?  N2048E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson, this obviously is an important
question, but perhaps not that easy to answer. Clearly, the matters, which
hon Prince Zulu is raising - national unity, new patriotism, moral
regeneration, social cohesion - are of course matters that are very
important in terms of the future of our country. The report prepared by the
Presidency, Towards a Ten Year Review, which details the extent of progress
that has been made towards the realisation of these goals, indicated what
had happened in all sorts of areas.

I’m quite sure that the hon member is aware that all the interactions we
have with various sectors of South African society, as government, are
targeted at ensuring that we are able to act together as South Africans
within the context of that national unity and new patriotism. A point of
focus of the celebrations of the 50th    anniversary of the Freedom Charter
this year has been to emphasise that South Africa belongs to all who live
in it, black and white.

But research on the subject - social cohesion, new patriotism and so on – I
think hon member, indicates that we are indeed making some progress. For
instance, surveys conducted in 1994, 1996 and 1999 would show this. In
1996, 65% of South Africans indicated that they were often or very often
proud to be South African. In the following year, 1997, 85% said that they
were very proud to be South Africans. And much later, in 2004, 96% of
respondents indicated that they were proud to be South Africans.

I think that you can see that there is this growth and development with
regard to this matter of national unity, new patriotism and a sense of
pride in what the country is doing. So, yes, indeed I would say that we are
making progress, bearing in mind where we come from - which, I am sure, the
hon member is very familiar with, and bearing in mind that our racist past
is always lurking away there somewhere in the shadows. And indeed, it will
take time to overcome this. But you can see it in responses, for instance,
to the decision of Fifa to award us the right to host the 2010 Soccer World
Cup. I think the response in the country generally indicated that sense of
cohesion among our people.

The Moral Regeneration Movement also is an example of what we seek to
achieve with regard to all these matters. Currently, the process of the
development of a draft charter of positive values, which is an initiative
which comes from the religious leaders, is designed to give ordinary South
Africans an opportunity to make inputs into this process of developing
these positive values. I have been informed that road shows have already
taken place in some provinces. Of course this document will come back to a
moral regeneration conference, as planned sometime during November this
year.

But nonetheless, all of these things obviously need time in order to take
effect. But I’m quite certain that we are making progress with regard to
all of these.

We decided sometime back on an Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
Programme and targeted particular rural nodes to focus on the matter of
rural development, particularly those areas which were worse than others,
if that is at all possible. In part, this was to address the question that
the hon member has asked concerning youth empowerment in rural areas. So,
the programmes with regard to that integrated and sustainable rural
development indeed do say quite specifically that they need to focus on the
youth and on women. So, indeed, I’m sure that with regard to that, some
progress has been made – not sufficient, not fast enough – but the matter
is being attended to. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Thank you, Chairperson. Mr President, I am also quite
aware of the long distance we have walked together in our new democracy and
the efforts made and the successes that have been attained. But, putting
together national unity, new patriotism, moral regeneration and social
cohesion gives expression, Mr President, to your powerful and meaningful
speech of 21 May 2004 on that very same podium. However, no impressive
returns - I am not saying, “no returns” - have been attained.

Instead, Mr President, we have seen turmoil at the University of Zululand,
the Ongoye Campus. I believe this very afternoon the turmoil has turned
into bloodshed. My question is: If these noble ideas you have don’t
succeed, do we have any contingency plan towards it?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chair, I want to thank hon Prince Zulu. I’m
afraid I don’t know what happened at the university and what the issues
are. I do think that we have had impressive returns. I think that part of
the problem we experience in the country is that it becomes very easy to
forget where we come from. Maybe the transition has been too smooth and too
good, and so it becomes easy to think that many things are easy to realise.

I think that given the fact of where we come from, we have had impressive
returns; not just returns, but impressive returns. [Applause.] And indeed,
hon Prince Zulu, I think that we actually don’t have a choice but to stick
to this path of national unity, of a new patriotism, of social cohesion, of
respect for our diversity, all of these things. There is no other way that
you could take. Any other way would result in the destruction of the
country. So, if we are failing anywhere, let’s try again and settle it.

I am afraid I really don’t know what has happened at the university.
Hopefully, whatever problem there is will be solved. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Thank you, Chair. Mr President, a person cannot be a
patriot if that person has no respect for the rule of law. The present
mobilising of unruly supporters, when high-profile politicians appear in
court for criminal charges, borders on the promotion of mob rule. All the
more so when the theme of the grandstanding changes from “Give me my day in
court” to “Bring me my machinegun”. Mr President, this is a war talk and
poses a serious threat to national unity, patriotism and moral
regeneration. How will you, Mr President, deal with this, using a lame-duck
approach; or will you take off your gloves? Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson, I haven’t had gloves for many
years. As we were saying with regard to an earlier question relating to the
Communist Party, I believe we have to respect the right of people to
demonstrate and to express their views. It’s very fundamental, I think, to
the practice of democracy in the country.

In any instance where the law might be broken I’m quite sure that the
police would take the necessary action to deal with that. I think there
should be no stage at which the people come to a conclusion that the
democracy that they fought for and which they created is intolerant of them
expressing their views by way of demonstrations or any other way. So, I
think people must be allowed to demonstrate, and I don’t think each time
somebody walks down the street with a banner we should think that the skies
are going to collapse. They won’t. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr S L DITHEBE: Thank you, Chairperson. Comrade President, this year, being
the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter, government has recommitted
itself to contributing towards building a South Africa that truly belongs
to all. What in your view, Comrade President, is the role of government and
the governed in view of the need to nurture and maintain social cohesion,
as well as building a caring society within the context of a social system
dominated by a market economy, that not only has institutional inequalities
but encourages greed and materialism as well?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson, that is a difficult question!
But I think that, as I was saying just now, we in reality don’t have a
choice but to work for that social cohesion, and to work to build that
caring society. There are practical challenges that we have to face. We
have to fight and defeat poverty, unemployment and the things they produce.
You couldn’t have a society where you could say we have social cohesion, we
have a caring society, while those problems persist.

So, it has to be part of the central programmes of government that in
addressing those issues of social cohesion and a caring society, we fight
and defeat poverty and unemployment. That’s critical. We’ve got to say we
carry with us this long heritage of the racial division of the country,
whether in the schools or in the settlement patterns or in the constitution
of rugby teams or whatever. What do we do about that? Gradually, to
dismantle this apartheid edifice, which continues to be with us, that must
be part of the process of building social cohesion and building a caring
society.

We have spoken about two economies here. Fundamental to how the government
is approaching that matter is that you must ensure the continued success
and growth and prosperity of this first economy, because it is only in that
way that we are going to be able to generate resources that we must be able
to devote to addressing the challenges of the second economy. That
intervention too, even within the context of the market economy, addresses
these issues of social cohesion and a caring society.

I must say that in that context, we have looked at other examples around
the world about this, and it’s quite clear that in order to address these
issues in the context of a market economy, as the hon member is saying, you
need government intervention and a deliberate process of the transfer of
resources from the rich parts of the economy to the poor parts. Otherwise
you can’t have this kind of integration that we are talking about. Thank
you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Thank you, Chairperson. Mr President, the national flag of a
country can be a great asset by which a growing nation like South Africa
can be united and be proudly South African. Are you therefore of the
opinion that the national flag and the anthem is promoted well enough in
South Africa? If not, has the government perhaps considered embarking on a
flag promotion project that would see a national flag on every desk in
schools and in workplaces, but not a flag with the emblem of a political
party on the one side?
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chair, hon member, yes, I am of the view
that we have not promoted these national symbols sufficiently. Indeed, I
was very pleased when I saw that the Minister of Education has taken steps
with regard to this in the schools. It’s something that, surely, we do need
to attend to. We still see, 11 years into our democracy – you would have
noticed this in some public meetings – that we still have people who are
unable to sing the national anthem, who will sing parts of it. I think it’s
a reflection of the concern that you show.

Perhaps there are many members of the Cabinet present here, hon member.
Maybe they have heard you. They must then discuss this question: What do we
do further to encourage and popularise these national symbols, and to
follow the example of the Minister of Education. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

 Contribution of African Peer Review Mechanism to achievement of objectives
                                  of Nepad

18.   Mrs L Maloney (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      (a) How will the African Peer Review Mechanism’s review of South
      Africa contribute to achieving the objectives of the New Partnership
      for Africa’s Development (Nepad) and (b) what mechanisms will be put
      in place to ensure maximum participation in this process?
                                                   N2056E


The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson, with regard to this
contribution of the African Peer Review Mechanism to the achievement of the
objectives of Nepad, the hon member, of course, will be familiar with the
fact that the OAU was established in 1963 and its central focus became,
naturally, the struggle for the total decolonisation of the African
continent. Indeed this became a matter of focus over the decades during the
life of the OAU.

With the liberation of South Africa, I think it became clear that the OAU
then needed to shift focus and to shift focus to address the very serious
problems on our continent of poverty, underdevelopment and the global
marginalisation of the continent. It was out of that that the idea of Nepad
was born to say the time had come that the African continent should now
unite to address these development challenges in order to extricate the
millions of African people from these conditions of poverty.

The view was then arrived at that you can elaborate on those development
programmes, but you needed the setting, the conditions, within which those
programmes would succeed. So, the founding conference of the African Union
here in Durban in 2002 adopted a declaration on democracy, political,
economic and corporate governance, which set the framework for the peer
review mechanism.

So the view was that we did indeed need development to address these
problems of poverty and underdevelopment, but then you needed democracy and
good governance, peace and security, good economic governance,
socioeconomic development, good corporate governance and so on, in order to
ensure that you are able to realise these objectives. The peer review
mechanism was then agreed upon as an instrument to assist the African
countries to achieve these objectives of democracy, good governance,
socioeconomic development and so on; as an instrument so that we can
evaluate ourselves, so that we can criticise one another, so that we can
help one another to develop so that indeed we create the conditions for
that development.

That is the impact therefore on South Africa of the peer review process
that we are now engaged in and it ought to be the case that it helps us to
make an assessment as to what progress we are making in terms of creating
the conditions to produce that socioeconomic development. What are we
doing, what have we done, what do we need to do to make sure that the
review produces results which must result in the eradication of poverty.

The particular institution, the mechanism that leads this process, of
course, as the hon member knows, is the APRM governing council, which has
five government ministers and then representatives of Business Unity South
Africa, Disabled People South Africa, South African Youth Council, the
Council of Churches, Cosatu, Sanco, National Women’s Coalition, Nactu – all
of them representing civil society. In order to ensure that there is
maximum participation, of course, this process is being taken down to the
provinces to ensure that people in the provinces are also able to engage
this, to make their own comments, to do a review of the country.

Again, I must insist that this a review of South Africa and not a review of
government, so that we can look at all elements of South African society to
see in what ways we can improve so that we do meet these objectives of the
eradication of poverty and underdevelopment. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mrs L MALONEY: Thank you, Chairperson and thank you, Mr President. I am
very glad about your response and I also want to thank those wise men and
women who came up with such a document, a pure African document. Indeed
this makes me to be a true South African. I think most of us agree on that.

Nevertheless, I want to know: In your assessment of the current process on
the African Peer Review Mechanism, are you satisfied that the broader
communities are playing a crucial role in making sure that this programme
is a success?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson, the process has just started,
as the hon member is aware. It has just been launched and I am quite sure
that we haven’t by now reached the numbers of people that we need to reach.
It is critically important that we have to do more to popularise the
process, to use the media to ensure that the population is informed about
what this process is and how they can engage it. I am sure that there is a
need to do that.

I think the decision to hold a similar kind of conference at provincial
level as was held at national level to launch this thing is an important
initiative, also to address the matter of ensuring that people are drawn
in. The translation of the questionnaire into the various official
languages so that people are able to make their own comments and give their
own views as to reviewing this country, I think, is a very important
intervention to make sure that it reaches out to the people.

Maybe one of the things that could happen, and maybe should happen, is that
members of the National Assembly should themselves join the process, apart
from the processes that would go on here with regard to this, but also to
assist with regard to the mobilisation of the people to intervene in this,
because indeed, it is very fundamental that this matter is not just handled
by a few people, but that the country actually joins in to look at itself.
Out of that must come a programme of action to say what do we do to correct
the things that are wrong. I am quite sure that we haven’t reached out
sufficiently. We should all of us try. Thanks, Chairperson.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Thank you, Chairperson. Mr President, our affirmative
position in terms of both Nepad and the APRM is well known and needs no
reiteration. [Interjections.] I hope I’m not gatecrashing into the diary of
the President by saying this!

To look at another dimension of the question or to broaden it a little bit,
looking at the big picture, if the peer review process leads to
unflattering or even unpalatable results or outcomes about some countries,
does the AU have the collective political will to encourage or to goad or
to compel such defaulting countries to rectify the negative findings of the
process about them? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, hon member, you are not going to get
into my diary! [Laughter.]

We have looked at the first two reports of the peer review system. Let me
talk about one of them, which has some very sharp comments about pervasive
corruption and gives all sorts of instances to demonstrate what is
happening to this society.

What is supposed to happen is that there should then be a peer review,
which means that the heads of state and government who have acceded to the
African Peer Review Mechanism will then meet with the head of state and
government and a delegation of the country that’s been reviewed to say
that, “Well, we have looked at this report. One of the things it says is
there is pervasive corruption. What are you doing about it”?

In the context of that, as I was saying, a programme of action should be
agreed on in order to address that issue, even to the point of saying, if
the country concerned says, “You are asking us to do things and we don’t
have the means”, it must be part of the peer review system to say that how
can we then help to generate the means in order to address this.

It’s a fundamental condition of the accession to the Peer Review Mechanism
that indeed you accede to it saying “I will be prepared to respect what
comes out of the peer review system as well as act on that”. This is very
fundamental, otherwise it has no meaning.

So indeed, I think that’s what would happen, that when the negative things
show up the resolve would be there then to act to assist that country to
get out of that kind of negative situation. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Mr President, you have correctly identified the need for South
Africa to be exemplary as we embark on this historic review, and in a way
this is the imbizo to beat all imbizos. This is the imbizo, so do you agree
that there is a need for you and us all to encourage the people of South
Africa to accept that it is equally important that the APRM process
constructively highlights our successes, but equally our failures as we
hold up a mirror to ourselves as a country and in a parallel APRM process
here in this Parliament?
Do you also agree that as part of this process the message must go out from
all of the leaders – the leaders in this House and in civil society – that
it should not be seen as undemocratic for us all as patriots to hold this
mirror up honestly to our country and ourselves, and reflect to Africa and
beyond the truths as we know them to be and has seen them to be? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, indeed, hon member, I would agree.
There would be no point to the peer review system if it sought to tell
untruths, because the basic aim, as I was trying to indicate at the
beginning, is to say we need to create the conditions so that we can
succeed with these development tasks that challenge us, that all of us
face. What are the things that subtract from the possibility of success?
What should we do to improve the possibility for us to achieve success? So
I think it is critically important for us to tell the truth.

We were discussing earlier, as you would remember, hon member, what’s
happening with regards to selection of candidates for municipalities and
municipal councils. We’d allow things to go wrong if we didn’t admit that
there are some people, at least, who are driven by the need to access
positions of power so that they can get hold of the tenders. If we don’t
admit it we won’t correct it, so I do indeed agree with you fully that we
should talk truthfully about the successes and the failures.

It would be interesting to see whether, in fact, the country does develop a
consensus about the successes and the failures. It would be very
interesting to see whether that actually does happen. Thanks, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates mobilising the nation and all security agencies to
  fight the current situation with regard to the kidnapping and
  disappearance of children. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chair, on behalf of the ACDP, I hereby give notice that on
the next sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House debates the issue of rail commuter safety in view of this
  morning’s collision between two passenger trains, Shosholoza Meyl and the
  Blue Train, which occurred between De Aar and Victoria West. I thank you.
  [Applause.]

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, on behalf of the DA, I hereby give notice that I
shall move on the next sitting day of the House:

  That the House discusses South Africa’s skills shortages, particularly in
  engineering and technical fields, as a major impediment to economic
  growth.

Ms D M RAMODIBE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

   That the House discusses the report of the Presidential Economic Advisory
   Council with a view to further advise on steps that our country should
   take to ensure rapid economic growth and reduce unemployment. [Applause.]

              FILLING OF THE VACANCY OF DEPUTY PUBLIC PROTECTOR

    (Consideration of Report of Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of Deputy
                              Public Protector)

There was no debate.

Question put: That the nomination for the appointment of Adv Mamiki Shai,
as Deputy Public Protector, be approved.


The House divided:

   AYES - 257: Abram, S; Anthony, T G; Asiya, S E; Asmal, A K; Baloyi, M R;
   Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M;
   Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V;
   Cachalia, I M; Camerer, S M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chauke,
   H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Coetzee, R; Combrinck, J J;
   Cronin, J P; Cupido, H B ; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davidson, I O; De
   Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe,
   S L; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; du Toit, D C ; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Fihla, N
   B; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ; Gerber, P A;
   Gibson, D H M; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E ; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L;
   Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Hanekom, D A;
   Hangana, N E; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P; Hogan, B A; Huang, S;
   Jacobus, L ; Jankielsohn, L; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M;
   Jordan, Z P; Kalyan, S V; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Khoarai, L P;
   Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M S; Khunou, N P; Kohler-Barnard, D;
   Komphela, B M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Labuschagne, L B; Landers, L T;
   Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E;
   Louw, S K; Lowe, C M; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Maake, J J; Mabandla, B
   S; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Madlala-
   Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magubane, N E ; Magwanishe,
   G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine,
   M S; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H
   P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Mars, I; Martins, B
   A D; Mashangoane, P R; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F;
   Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matsomela, M J J ;
   Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Mdladlose, M
   M; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mfundisi, I S; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S;
   Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J;
   Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D;
   Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A;
   Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morgan , G R; Morobi, D M;
   Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I;
   Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E;
   Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nefolovhodwe, P J;
   Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D;
   Ngcobo, B T; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngwenya, W;
   Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkabinde, N C; Nogumla,
   R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, R S;
   Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A;
   Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J;
   Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E; Rabie, P J; Radebe, B A;
   Rajbally, S ; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ramphele, T
   D H; Rasmeni, S M; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G
   D; Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
   September , C C; Seremane, W J; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S ;
   Sigcau , Sylvia N; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W
   M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Solo, B M; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
   Surty, M E; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S
   L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Van der
   Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van der Walt, D; van Schalkwyk, M C J;
   Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vezi, T E; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Xingwana, L M ;
   Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L; Zulu, N E.

Question agreed to.

Nomination accordingly approved in accordance with section 2(A) of the
Public Protector Act, 1994

      REMUNERATION AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF DEPUTY PUBLIC PROTECTOR

       (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Justice and
                         Constitutional Development)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the Report
be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:19.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS





ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bill passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 26 October 2005:


            i) Road Accident Fund Amendment Bill [B 64B – 2003] (National
               Assembly – sec 75)


