---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 31 May 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2005-05-31
---

TUESDAY, 31 MAY 2005
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                  UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT IN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnu M A MZIZI: Ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kwesaziso:

    Ukuthi lo Mkhandlu-


    (1)    uzwakalisa ukudumala ngesenzo esenzeke ngomhlaka-25 kwephezulu
         eNdlini yeSishayamthetho sikaZwelonke;

    (2)    uyezwa ukuthi lo mkhuba wenzeke ngasesihlalweni somholi weqembu
         leNkatha Freedom Party lapho kutholakale khona indle yesilwane
         ingcanga phela lena engikhuluma ngayo;

    (3)    uyabona ukuthi lokhu kuthunaza isithunzi somholi neseNdlu
         yeSishayamthetho sikaZwelonke;

    (4)    uncoma ukuthi isimo esifana nalesi singaphinde senzeke.
(Translation of isiXhosa Draft Resolution follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: I move without notice:

   That the Council-


        1) expresses disappointment about an unfortunate incident that took
           place in the National Assembly on 25 May;


       2) notes that this unfortunate incident happened next to the leader
          of the Inkatha Freedom Party, where dog faeces was discovered;

       3) notes that this degrades the leader’s and the National Assembly’s
          dignity;

      (4)   recommends that something of this nature should not happen
           again.]
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                        HOSPITALISATION OF MR WATSON


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: I move without notice:


  That this Council-


    1) notes with sadness that one of its hon members, Mr Watson, suffered a
       heart attack on Friday;


  (2) also notes that he is now out of hospital but would
       like to wish him a speedy recovery; and


  (3) keeps him, together with his family, in its thoughts and prayers.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I also agree with the motion. I did speak to
Mr Watson. I can confirm with the House that I spoke to him yesterday. He
is well and good. He is consulting his doctors today and will be joining us
soon. We all wish him well and that he will come back and join us again
soon in the Chamber.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry:

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Just before I call the Minister, I
would like to know if the MEC for agriculture of the Western Cape, Mr
Dowry, is here. Is there another MEC here? On my speakers’ list I see one
MEC. Do we have another MEC here? Mr Mahlahla – oh, MEC for transport. I’m
talking about Water Affairs. You are the only MEC here?

Before the Minister speaks, I just want to say that I am very happy to see
some of the MECs taking a keen interest in the Budget Votes being debated
in the National Council of Provinces; joining the national Ministers. I
think it is very important, when the national Minister presents her or his
Budget Vote in the Council, that the provincial MECs take a keen interest
in being here as well, because the Council would also like to hear the
provincial perspective. So, in short, I want to thank those MECs and the
provinces that are really taking a keen interest in being here when the
national Ministers are with us to debate these issues. [Applause.]

I must encourage all provinces to do that - I am now talking to the
provincial Whips. I’m encouraging you. Please do invite these MECs and make
them aware of how important this is. We need them here in this Chamber. I
wish to thank those who are here today. Thank you very much for making
yourselves available. I’m aware that you have very hectic schedules, but
all of us do as politicians, as you all know.

I now call upon the hon Minister to deliver her Budget Vote. [Applause.]
Hon Minister, they say there is a small watch there. I haven’t seen it, but
I will announce it to everybody once they start debating.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Yes, I see the clock, and it
has not started ticking.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Has it started already?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: No, it can’t. Hon Chairperson
of the National Council of Provinces, hon members and Premiers present, hon
MECs, dignitaries, invited guests; it gives me immense pleasure to have the
honour of addressing the National Council of Provinces today.

In my budget speech to the extended committee of the National Assembly I
dealt with water resources and forestry issues at length. In this address I
will focus particularly on matters of provincial and local government
competency, such as water supply and sanitation services, intergovernmental
challenges and co-operative governance.

I’d like to begin by recounting the words of the late Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces, Mrs Joyce Kgoali, who said in her speech
during the “Taking Parliament to the People” programme on 26 November 2004:


  The National Council of Provinces, provinces and municipalities are at
  the cutting edge of the national programme to build a better life for
  all. Municipalities, in particular, are at the coalface of service
  delivery. They are an important front desk of government and should be
  capacitated in order to assist us in reaching our strategic goal of
  reconstruction and development.

These words remain as relevant today. The urgency of addressing municipal
capacity is a high priority on our agenda. Without institutional capacity
we will not achieve our goals. Water is a life and death matter, and this
is why we have such ambitious targets for addressing our backlogs and for
providing free basic services to the poorest of the poor. We therefore have
to work together to achieve these targets.

The NCOP, as the custodian of intergovernmental relations and co-operative
governance, has the major task of ensuring that we work effectively
together across the different spheres and sectors of government.

We often speak of co-operative governance, but we are less often able
effectively to put it into practice. Co-operative governance between the
different spheres of government and between large departments is not easy
to achieve. It requires commitment; it requires leadership; it requires a
strong drive towards common objectives.

Despite the challenges of co-operative governance, our department has
achieved some very real successes in the water services sector through co-
operative arrangements with the Department of Provincial and Local
Government, the National Treasury and the SA Local Government Association.

Together we are working on our transfer programmes in order to place water
services schemes in municipalities where they rightfully belong. My
department has signed 27 transfer agreements with municipalities; has
transferred 78 schemes with a value of approximately R1 675 million with
717 staff members; and has seconded a further 892 personnel to
municipalities. We are doing all this to try to ensure that the necessary
capacity at that level is available. Despite immense challenges, we still
anticipate that we will be able to execute all transfers by the target date
of March 2006.
Other joint initiatives include support programmes for municipalities in
order to identify the most appropriate water-services-provider
institutional arrangements. This support takes place through the
implementation of the National Institutional Reform Strategy. I hope that
members were able to collect a copy as they were coming in. It is quite an
important strategy with which I want everybody to be conversant. This is
meant to give support to municipalities according to section 78 processes.

Both of these initiatives are driven and guided by task teams comprising
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, the Department of Provincial
and Local Government, the National Treasury and Salga.

A further important initiative, in many ways a pilot for the new budget
process that will see departments working together to ensure the alignment
of their budgets, was the allocation of R1,2 billion to the Department of
Provincial and Local Government’s municipal infrastructure grant for a
targeted bucket eradication programme. Through this injection we can
proudly say that buckets will be eradicated throughout South Africa in the
life of this Parliament.

Whilst these programmes are examples of operationalising co-operative
governance, our entire approach to water services delivery is a sector-wide
collaborative approach, appropriately named Masibambane: Let’s work
together.
Linzima ke ela gama. Andilibizanga kakuhle, kodwa ke niyaliqonda kuba
ndithetha isintu; isilungu esi siyaphuncuka ngamanye amaxesha.
[That word is difficult to pronounce. I did not pronounce it well, but you
should know what it means. I speak a vernacular language and the English
sometimes escapes me.]

The fundamental principle underlying this successful collaborative approach
is that we are working together as a sector to deliver jointly identified
and unanimously agreed sector goals and targets. At the national level we
are working with various sector departments such as Housing, Provincial and
Local Government, Health, Education and Public Works, as well as with
representatives from Salga. The NGOs are part of this, including Setas.
“Masisebenzisana sisonke”. [Let us all work together.]

In the provinces similar structures have been established to ensure that
support is targeted at local government needs. These initiatives illustrate
how our department has championed sector collaboration. Asinandlela,
siyanyanzeleka ukuba sisebenze nabanye abantu. [We do not have another way;
we have to work with other people.]

We now want to embark on a vigorous programme of action to strengthen
collaboration, between our Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,
regional offices and provincial government, across all our functions. This
should be understood in the context of the Intergovernmental Relations
Framework Bill, the IGRF Bill.

There are a number of reasons for this. Firstly, water-resource management
is not simply a sectoral function that the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry and the Department of Provincial and Local Government need to
address. Water is an indispensable national resource, crucial to social and
economic development, and is not indispensable just in terms of the
provision of domestic water supplies. Water is an essential ingredient in
every provincial growth and development strategy. Therefore, we want
provinces to come into the arena of engaging more effectively in water-
related affairs, especially given that South Africa is a water-scarce
country.

Secondly, provincial government is a crucial interface between local
government and national government, and it has a key role to play in
strengthening the capacity of local government to deliver services,
including water and sanitation services. Thirdly, there is no concurrent
function for forestry or for water resources in our provincial sphere of
government. Otherwise, I would have many MECs if we had a concurrent
function. This is an intergovernmental challenge that we need to address.
Although we have our Dwaf regional offices, these offices are accountable
to the national Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and they,
themselves, do not have a provincial mandate.

Various attempts have been made in the past to establish mechanisms to
address water and forestry-related matters at a provincial level, such as
the establishment of the provincial liaison committees, chaired by the MECs
of local government or the MECs of agriculture and nature conservation.

Kuyacaca ukuba yinkedama le, intyontyelwa nangubani na. Ngoko ke kuyafuneka
ukuba ulungiswe lo mba. [It is like a lonely child who has been orphaned
and everybody feels they could influence it in some way. We need to rectify
that.]

However, these initiatives have not always been successful. It is now
imperative that we jointly develop a more holistic and co-ordinated
approach to our co-operation at provincial level. This collaboration must
ensure that provincial growth and development strategies take the relevant
catchment-management strategies into account in terms of the available
water resources, as well as plans for the development of those resources.

Kaloku xa sizisa uphuhliso kumaphondo, sisakha izindlu sisenza nezinye
izinto, ukuba ngaba asazi ukuba angakanani na amanzi akhoyo
sisemngciphekweni wokuba sisuke siphelelwe ngamanzi. UMzantsi Afrika lo
unengxaki yokuba ungabi namanzi oneleyo. Kanti ke thina sililizwe
elisakhulayo ngokubhekisele kuphuhliso, sakha izindlu, sizisa amanzi
ebantwini kwaye sakha izindlu zangasese mihla le. Yonke le nto ibandakanya
amanzi ngalo lonke ixesha. Kubalulekile ke ukuba amaqhinga asetyenziswa
ngamaphondo awujonge loo mba. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[When we launch development programmes, build houses and provide all the
other basic services in the provinces, we should keep constant check on the
water resources that we have available as we may run out of water at any
time. South Africa suffers from water shortages. We must therefore be
careful, because we are a developing country; we are providing housing,
sanitation facilities and bringing water to the people every day. All these
activities involve the use of water all the time. It is important that when
provinces draw up their development programmes, they look carefully at that
matter.]

In provinces such as Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape in
particular, they must also reflect the specific opportunities and
challenges of forestry development and conservation.

Ndiyafuna ukuwugxininisa lo mba ngokubhekisele kumahlathi, kuba la mahlathi
eza nemisebenzi kula maphondo. [I want to emphasise this point, especially
with regard to forestry because forests provide jobs for people in the
various provinces.]

They are the source of employment and they contribute greatly to the rural
economies.

Ngoko, bantakwethu abakwezi ndawo, siyanicela ukuba nisondele ukwenzela
ukuba siwathathe la mahlathi, siqhekezelane phantsi kwenkqubo yokubonelelwa
kwababevinjwe amathuba ngaphambili. Kuya kuthi ukuze kulunge zenzeke ezo
zinto, sisondele, ukuze sazi ukuba kwenzeka ntoni na. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I would like to appeal to people living in these areas to come closer so
that we can reap and share the benefits derived from these forests under
the reconstruction and development programme. Those things can only happen
if and when we educate ourselves about the things surrounding us.]

The potential already identified and mapped out in KwaZulu-Natal can help
to transform the rural economy in many areas. It needs provincial and
municipal governments to seize the opportunities presented for the economic
development of our most deprived communities as growers and independent
contractors.

We are conducting a similar strategic analysis in the Eastern Cape. When we
have identified the possibilities for small growers and independent
contractors, we shall call upon the Eastern Cape provincial government and
the district municipalities concerned to assist their communities in
developing their rural economies. In co-operation, our three tiers of
government can transform the lives of these people, but ...

Mandiphume nje ecaleni nakulo mba, nditsho ukuba enye into ebalulekileyo
endingathi masiyijonge kula mahlathi yindlela abasebenzi abaphatheke
gadalala ngayo.

Singavuya ke ukuba ningamana nisiphathela iindaba ukwenzela ukuba sibe
nokuthabatha amanyathelo, kuba siza kuwathabatha ngoba ukuphatheka gadalala
kwabasebenzi lulwaphulo-mthetho walo rhulumente ukhokelwa nguKhungolozi.
Ngoko ke ayinyamezeleki loo nto. Siyafuna ke ukuba nibe ngooqalazive,
nisizisele iindaba ngobunjalo bazo ukuze size kujamelana nawo lo mkhuba.

Ndithetha nje likhona iphulo eliza kuba kho phakathi kwam noMnumzana
uMdladlana, onguMphathiswa wezaBasebenzi. Siza kuphuma siye kukhangela
ukuba kwenzeka ntoni na ukuze ke siyilungise imicimbi enje ngokuphatheka
gadalala kwabantu. Ungafumana ivenana encinci ikhwelise abantu abangama-
200, ithi yakuwa kufe abantu abantu abali-150, kuba kaloku bekukhweliswe
abantu abangakhathalelekanga. Zisenzeka nanamhlanje ezo zinto, kwaye
sinoxanduva lokuba sizilungise. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[I would also just like to say that one other important thing that we need
to investigate is the bad treatment that some workers who participate in
these projects of deforestation suffer under certain people.

We would appreciate it if you could report such incidents of ill-treatment
so that we could take the necessary steps, and take them we will, because
ill-treatment of workers is against the law under this government. We would
appreciate it if you could report this to us as it would enable us to deal
in the most appropriate manner with those who practise this bad habit.

Hon Mdladlana, who is the Minister of Labour, and I are planning to launch
a campaign. It will include our going around and investigating cases such
as the ill-treatment of workers. It is common to find a small van carrying
200 people, and when an accident occurs and it turns over, 150 passengers
are killed because the passengers were considered less important. Such
things still happen today and it is our responsibility to change them.]

This, of course, is also part ... lo mba wamahlathi ... [... of this matter
about forestry ...] of the broad-based Black Economic Empowerment process
which we launched on 1 April. That process is under way.

Ngokubhekisele kwezi nkqubo zokuxhotyiswa kwababevinjwe amathuba
ngaphambili, masizame ukuba kufumane abona bantu bahlelelekileyo ukuze eli
khwelo lethu lokulwa nendlala libe leliphumelelayo. [We should redouble our
efforts to ensure that the people who were previously disadvantaged benefit
the most from our endeavours to empower them and develop their skills.]

In terms of the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill “...ngulaa
Mthetho usayilwayo ebendibhude igama lawo ekuqaleni ...” [ ... it is the
Bill whose title I mispronounced at the beginning...] ...my department is
strengthening its own structures of intergovernmental relations, and is
also participating in the structures of intergovernmental relations at
provincial level, such as the Premiers, co-ordination forums and mayoral
forums. We are also initiating joint Minmecs with other national
departments, such as Provincial and Local Government, Housing and
Agriculture, because there is a lot of overlapping between these
departments and ourselves.

Sinemali yokubonelela amafama asakhasayo, esinokuthi xa siwabonelele ngayo
aseke amaphulo onkcenkcesho, akwazi ukufumana into kumhlaba anawo. Ke
sifuna ukuba abantu beze ngaphambili ukwenzela ukuba imali ingamane
ibuyiselwa umva ingawenzanga umsebenzi wayo, ube umsebenzi wona ukhona,
nabantu beyidinga imali. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We have funding available for emerging farmers to establish irrigation
schemes to enable them to produce on their land. We are calling on people
to come forward so that we must not have a roll-over of money that was set
aside for a certain purpose, and which people urgently need.]

I have also initiated a series of water summits in the different provinces
at which we will engage with provincial government and other stakeholders
around their provincial growth and development plans. The first of these
summits was held in Limpopo in February, and the second was held in the
Western Cape in March. We hope to have covered all nine provinces by March
next year. These summits are intended to facilitate the sharing of
information and concerns in order to come up with collective and integrated
interventions.

Siyaphawula ke ukuba imicimbi yamanzi le asinto ixhaphake kakhulu ukuba
siyazi. Kanti ke ndidla ngokutsho kuMnu Trevor Manuel ukuba mhla ndaya
kuvala itepu, wonke umntu uya kuze abaleke eze kum xa kungekho manzi apha
eMzantsi. Kufanele ukuba sizikhathaze ke, siyazi into eyimpilo yethu. Kwezi
ngqungquthela ke siza kuncedisana sabelane ngolwazi. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We might notice that water affairs is not an issue that is commonly
familiar with. I sometimes tell hon Trevor Manuel that if he should decide
to shut off the water, people would come running to me for everybody will
be affected, and in every respect. We, therefore, should be curious and
take note of what gives us life. At these conferences we will assist one
another and share information.]

In particular, these summits will provide us with an opportunity to explain
our water-resource management work and that of structures such as catchment-
management agencies and water-user associations.

Ndiyafuna ukuba nezi zinto siziqwalasele ngoba senza uhlengahlengiso. Xa
sithetha nge-Catchment Management Agency umntu endinguye uza koyika ukuza
ngaphambili, kanti yile ndawo kanye ekufuneka kufele kuyo ithole, le
kufuneka siye kuyo. Luhlengahlengiso ke olo. Ngoko kufuneka sazi ukuba
kuqhubeka ntoni na. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I would like it if these other things could be carefully and thoroughly
understood because we are presently restructuring the department. People
like me will feel threatened when the Catchment Management Agency is
mentioned, while it is exactly the place where people need to go to
familiarise themselves with issues. That is restructuring. We must know
what is happening.]
In addition to our immediate support for Project Consolidate, my department
is developing a long-term water services sector-support strategy. As this
is a sector strategy, we will be eliciting the views and inputs of all
stakeholders in the sector, in particular municipalities, Salga, sector
departments and provinces. A key objective of the support strategy is to
ensure that we are better equipped to support local government in
delivering its water services obligations.

A strong and effective local government is fundamental for improved water
service delivery. Over the past few years our department has implemented a
range of institutional support programmes for local government, with the
goal of ensuring sustainable water services institutions.

These programmes are outcomes-based and are designed to assist with
planning, setting tariffs, putting bylaws in place, identifying and
implementing capital projects and establishing effective institutional
arrangements for service provision. The lessons learnt through these
programmes are being documented and shared through the Water Information
Network.

We are also implementing a system to assess water services authority
capacity in order quickly to identify legislative compliance and capacity
gaps in line with the Project Consolidate approach. From our assessments we
will be able to report on the water services capacity and performance of
all municipalities, and to provide a provincial perspective.

In his speech on the occasion of the Budget Vote in the National Assembly,
Minister Mufamadi called on officials of national and provincial service
delivery departments to spend a significant amount of their time dirtying
their hands in the goals of helping to remove service delivery blockages
and bridging the gap between intentions and outcomes. Our supply target is
universal access to a basic water supply by 2008.

Sifuna ukuba wonke umntu abe uvula ze afumane amanzi acocekileyo etepini,
hayi amanzi anezabonkolo. [We want everybody when they open their water
taps, to get clean, drinkable water, not water that is filled with
tadpoles.]

This means that within the next three years we must put in place
infrastructure for basic water services for the 3,6 million people who
currently have no access to safe water and we must improve supplies for the
5,4 million people who are still more than 200 metres from a source of safe
water.

To reach our sanitation target by 2010, we will have to provide
approximately 16 million people with access to a basic level of sanitation
in five years. Most of these people are in rural areas, informal
settlements and on commercial farms.
If we are going to meet these targets we will need excellent planning in
each municipality – through their water services development plans and
IDPs; and excellent implementation plans to turn our municipal
infrastructure grant funds into effective services. We are supporting
municipal planning to ensure that MIG projects are identified and
prioritised, and that they move quickly through the implementation process.
Through our support programmes we aim to identify specific capacity gaps so
that these can be effectively addressed.

Collaboration needs to be operationalised into tasks, outcomes, report-
backs and deadlines. Collaboration in terms of water services needs to
result in concrete action on the ground, so that no person is without
access to a basic water supply and so that no person is left without an
adequate sanitation facility. Collaboration also requires a high level of
direction and accountability. This Chamber has a responsibility to ensure
that the intergovernmental relations system is effective in meeting our
country’s developmental needs, and this means achieving our targets on
time.

Meanwhile, my department will continue to develop its policy regulatory and
information role in our water services. I have spoken at length about our
supportive role, but, in the longer term, our regulatory role is equally
important to protect consumers and public interests in order to ensure that
we do not just provide infrastructure on the ground, but working services
that meet people’s needs. A detailed regulatory strategy for water services
will be unveiled before the end of the year.

I would like to close by emphasising that improved water-resource
management, forestry development and improved water supply and sanitation
have the potential to contribute hugely to both poverty eradication and
economic growth and development. Improved collaboration between my
department and the provinces and local government will help us to ensure
that this potential is realised. It will help to ensure that provincial and
local priorities are addressed and that equitable economic growth and
development is achieved.

Our forests must remain resources for the lives of our people. Sound water-
resource management underpins all our development goals. Water is life;
sanitation is dignity. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister. I now call upon the
hon P Moatshe, Chairperson of the Select Committee on Land and
Environmental Affairs. There is a clock there.

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs, special delegates, hon
members and comrades, departmental officials and people in the gallery, the
ANC stands to support the budget. Water, sanitation and hygiene are
essential for achieving all Millennium Development Goals, and hence
contributing to poverty eradication globally. Our national water and
sanitation programme, which is one of the largest in Africa, aims to fulfil
the human right to water and to achieve full sanitation and water supply
coverage well in advance of the Millennium Development Goals.

The ANC-led government has laid down a clear policy and legislative
framework; an implementation programme which has provided water
infrastructure for over 10 million people in just 10 years; a policy of
free basic water which aims to ensure that affordability is not a barrier
to access to safe water; and the devolution of responsibility from national
to local government.

The whole concept of the national water and sanitation programme derived
from the ANC’s policies and has been based on the promise of a better life
for all our people.

The national rural water supply and sanitation programme thus became not
just a short-term activity of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,
but an integral element of the whole nation’s legislated human rights
programme. We believe that the programme is on course to achieve full
coverage of water supply and sanitation by 2010, well in advance of the
Millennium Development Goals. The main point of concern in moving forward
is the capacity of local government to implement the work and financial
sustainability of the free basic water policy.

The national programme has constructed water supply schemes designed to
serve over 10 million people in just 10 years. This has helped to redress
the social inequality of the past. We can now talk about equal access to
water for all. The majority of poor South Africans suffered from water-
related diseases, and besides losing their lives, they also lost their
dignity as a result of the poor sanitation facilities.

Job creation is an overstated benefit of the national water and sanitation
programme, and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry monitors the
number of jobs created by it. The Working for Water Programme was launched
in 1995 and has become of government’s key poverty relief initiatives. This
programme has created jobs and trained some 20 000 previously disadvantaged
and unemployed people of our country.

This government has put in measures to ensure that the process of service
delivery is not hindered, through a number pieces of legislation and
policies, for example, the National Water Act, Water Services Act, Free
Basic Water Policy and the Strategic Framework for Water Services, which
was previously known as the White Paper on Water Services, give a strategic
framework for the water services sector as a whole. It addresses issues of
inequality, provisions of basic services, the provision of higher levels of
service and the sustainable provisions of service. Through the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant, the department hopes to eradicate the backlogs of
water supply for the remaining 5 million rural people who have no access to
formal infrastructure.

In fighting poverty and creating work, forestry also plays an important
role in the country’s second economy, with the majority of South Africa’s
rural poor making extensive use of forestry products for daily consumption
and small-scale trade. Firewood, building poles, medicinal plants and
edible fruits are all critical to the livelihood of the rural poor.

In April this year different stakeholders gathered to discuss forestry
issues, but specifically broad-based Black Economic Empowerment, BEE, which
later resulted in a proposal for a charter for the forestry sector. It is
essential for the sector to contribute to overcoming deep rural poverty and
economic inequality in our land.

Ownership of commercial plantations by previously disadvantaged groups is
estimated at less than 5%, based on small grower schemes and the Black
Economic Empowerment percentage in privatised Category A plantation
packages. The growth in the small grower industry, supported by major
forestry companies, is encouraging and appreciated but much more will need
to be done to ensure equitable ownership patterns. This will not happen
solely through the small grower sector.

There are still concerns regarding the after-transfer complications like
employee packages, which have delayed transfers in other instances.
Although the ANC supports the process, however, it should not be at the
expense of the poor, struggling workers.

The Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry will be busy amending the
Forestry Act this year. The Bill will amend a number of related pieces of
legislations to bring them in line with current developments. It will amend
legislation such as the National Forestry Act, the National Field and
Forestry Fire Act and the Wattle Bark Industry Act of 1960.

There is a growing recognition that the forestry industry occupies an
important role in terms of the economic, social and environmental
requirements of the country. However, it is imperative within the context
of a developing country that the forestry industry as a whole has a well-
defined, longer-term vision and strategy that will involve all
stakeholders. Forestry, being primarily a rural industry, can make a
significant contribution to the development of rural people.

It is extremely important on the score of sanitation that our people’s
dignity will be restored if sanitation is made a priority. At the level of
sanitation, you have different categories. You have people who go into the
veld to help themselves. Then you have people who are using the bucket
system. I think these two levels have to be given priority, hon Minister,
so that at the end of the day their dignity is able to be restored.

You have those who have toilets to flush, who are much more privileged and
have the privilege and the respect they deserve. Therefore, sanitation has
to receive more in our budget so that we really restore the dignity of our
people in the most rural areas, so that they can also realise a better life
for their future. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF NCOP: There is a little clock there, hon Mack. Look at
it.

Mr N MACK: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members and comrades, MECs - and
especially the MEC from the Western Cape - departmental officials, ladies
and gentlemen, the ANC congratulates the Minister of Water Affairs and
Forestry on a recent announcement that the department provided water to the
10th millionth person in December last year. Let us proudly stand here and
note that this historical event takes place on the eve of South Africans
celebrating the 50th anniversary of that blueprint document, the Freedom
Charter.

This significant announcement by the Minister is in tendum with President
Thabo Mbeki’s important assessment that our country as a united nation has
never in its entire history enjoyed such a confluence of encouraging
possibilities. The Freedom Charter reminds us that there is so much that
binds all progressive people in South Africa who share a common view on the
need for social and economic transformation.

Communities from the first and the second economies have to rally together
with a common vision to revive South Africa, through water and sanitation
projects or forestry projects in rural areas. The Minister said that in
South Africa water is key to winning the battle against poverty, and its
scarcity could be a limiting factor to growth. No meaningful socio-economic
development can take place without water.

Being one of the 30 driest countries on earth, South Africans have a
responsibility to conserve this precious resource. During the water week
the Minister said: “A person can survive for three weeks without food, but
only for three days without water”.

It is therefore our duty to make sure that this scarce resource is
protected, conserved, managed and controlled. Government has come up with
different strategies to conserve water, for example, the National Water
Week and the National Water Conservation and Water Demand Management
Strategy, which aims to challenge users in the agricultural, industrial,
mining and residential sectors to conserve and reduce their demand for
water.

The ANC government introduced the rural development framework, thus
providing a framework within which government, working with rural people,
aimed to address rural poverty and support the developmental efforts of
rural people.

The framework identifies the key issues in rural development as investment
in basic infrastructure and social services, that is the building of rural
infrastructure with the focus on the provision of water and sanitation.
Together with the government CBOs have a significant role to play in rural
water services provision, and can improve the level of service in a cost-
effective way.

In 1994 the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry initiated a Community
Water Supply and Sanitation Programme to ensure that all South Africans
have access to sufficient water and a healthy living environment with the
focus on rural areas. Neglect, nondelivery of service and the sharing of
drinking water with livestock are things of the past for rural communities,
as government is speeding up water supply projects to communities around
the country.

Black farmers never had any hope of ever succeeding due to too many
restrictions of the previous apartheid government. Today we stand here to
celebrate freedom of economic activity as government continues to introduce
safety nets for the previously disadvantaged rural communities.

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, in partnership with the
Department of Agriculture, has developed a strategy to create opportunities
for poor farmers through irrigation schemes, providing them with access to
water for high-value crops. The precise circumstances of South Africa’s
transition from apartheid rule to a nonracial, democratic society were
exceptional. The ANC has provided the people of South Africa with the
political leadership to support and initiate water and sanitation
programmes in order to to serve the people of this country.

Water is available to irrigate 12 000 hectares in the Eastern Cape, Free
State and Northern Cape. The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is
working with the national and provincial departments of agriculture to
implement schemes to utilise these allocations.

Financial assistance is provided to emerging farmers for water
infrastructure, as well as operational and maintenance courses. Some 485
058 farmers received financial support from the Department of Water Affairs
and Forestry in 2003-04; R28 400 million was budgeted in 2004-05 to assist
another 4 500 historically disadvantaged households.

Poor communities have a role to play in water and sanitation issues that
affect them as the department restructures and introduces catchment
management areas to ensure equitable, efficient and sustainable water
resource management. The department will devolve administration down to
local water users in communities, accompanied by vigorous capacity-
building, so that historically excluded communities can participate in
water management.

Before I continue I am watching this clock and it is driving me, because I
always like to speak about something from my constituency. I would like to
share this one important challenge that relates to my constituency in the
Central Karoo. Along the main railway line from Cape Town to Johannesburg,
which passes through the Karoo, we have several of these small towns or
clusters of houses just next to the railway line - in the olden days they
were called sidings. Now TransNet or SpoorNet has stopped servicing these
people, and they have left these people to the municipalities, but because
these clusters of houses are so far away from big towns it is difficult for
the municipalities to service these people with water. I can name them;
they are Prince Albert and Matjiesfontein.

What happens there now is that the white farmers who used to own that land,
and it is unfortunate that I have to mention it, have boreholes. They make
our people pay for the water that they get from these boreholes. I think
this is a challenge, which I want us to address. [Time expired] [Applause.]

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, LUR’e en kollegas, voor ek
begin wil ek net vir u, mnr die Voorsitter, en die Hoofsweep bedank vir die
goeie wense wat u teenoor mnr Watson uitgespreek het. Ek sal dit so gou as
moontlik ook aan hom oordra. Baie dankie daarvoor.

Die bewaring van ons water- en plantebronne is vir al die mense van Suid-
Afrika baie belangrik, maar ongelukkig is daar dekades lank in Suid-Afrika,
en ook in die res van Afrika, te min aandag aan hierdie belangrike bronne
gegee. Dit word algemeen aanvaar dat die toestand van ’n land se water en
plantebronne direk verband hou met die lewenskwaliteit van die bevolking.

In ’n onlangse studie word daar beweer dat armoede in Afrika in ’n groot
mate veroorsaak is deur die vernietiging van Afrika se natuurlike woude en
habitat. Op hierdie oomblik is daar nog buitelandse maatskappye wat
toegelaat word om natuurlike woude te vernietig. Swak en korrupte regerings
laat ongelukkig toe dat hierdie fortuinsoekers een van Afrika se grootste
bates vernietig.

In Suid-Afrika het ons nou nog ’n tekort aan geelhout en stinkhout as
gevolg van die grootskaalse stropery wat in die vorige eeu plaasgevind het,
en ongelukkig is weinig inheemse woude aangeplant. In Suid-Afrika is daar
talle voorbeelde wat onteenseglik bewys dat die bewaring van ons habitat
een van die beste skanse is teen armoede en agteruitgang.

Gebiede wat die meeste deur toeriste besoek word, naamlik die Kaapse
fynbosgebied, die Tuinroete, die Knysna-woude en –mere, die Stormsrivier-
gebied en die Baviaans is ’n bewys dat dit uiters voordelig is om inheemse
woude en plante te bewaar.

Dorpe en stede wat hulle boomerfenis beskerm en uitgebrei het, geniet nou
groot voordeel uit toerisme en beleggings. Stellenbosch, Kaapstad, Graaff-
Reinet en Port Elizabeth, om net enkeles te noem, is sprekende voorbeelde.
Mense besoek en belê baie eerder in mooi stede en dorpe as in
onaantreklike, boomlose gebiede.

Daar is ook dorpe wat nie hul boomryke erfenis beskerm het nie, en hulle
betaal nou die prys daarvoor. Mense wat verplig is om in sulke gebiede te
werk woon liewer in nabygeleë dorpe wat esteties meer aanvaarbaar is en
bestee hulle rande daar.

Wat die waarde en potensiaal van landbougrond betref, is dit duidelik dat
hoe beter die habitat bewaar word, hoe hoër is die opbrengs op die grond en
hoe hoër is die grondprys. Die armoede wat in sommige plattelandse gebiede
ervaar word, is die gevolg van roofbou in die verlede en nog vandag.

Wat die aanplant van bome in stedelike gebiede betref, is dit so dat in die
verlede daar geen aanplantings in ons arm woongebiede plaasgevind het nie.
Daar behoort nou dringend op groot skaal in hierdie gebiede bome gevestig
te word.

In baie lande word straatbome geplant met ’n potensiële ekonomiese waarde
sowel as voedingswaarde.

In Suid-Afrika kan met groot welslae geelhout-, stinkhout-, nieshout-,
pruimbome, ens, aangeplant word, ook met die doel om later te oes. Daar
word beweer dat ’n geelhoutboom ná 30 jaar tot R10 000 werd is. En u kan my
glo, 30 jaar gaan baie vinnig verby! Vrugte- en neutbome behoort ook
aangeplant te word en kan as ekstra voedingsbron benut word.

Wat ons waterbronne betref, is dit so dat ons alreeds watertekortes
ondervind en die probleem word al erger. Dwarsoor die land verloor ons
miljoene liters water net omdat infrastuktuur nie in stand gehou word nie.
Die Minister het verwys na die baie huise wat nou gebou word en ek dink dit
het nou tyd geword dat elke woning wat met behulp van ’n subsidie gebou
word, ook ’n watertenk moet hê. Hierdie water kan baie effektief gebruik
word om groente en vrugte vir die gesin te kweek.

Die bewaring van ons waterbronne behoort baie groter aandag te geniet en
plaaslike rade wat ooglopend toelaat dat pype en krane nie herstel word
nie, behoort gepenaliseer te word.

Wat egter die grootste kommer wek, is die agteruitgang van die kwaliteit
van ons water. Daar is talle skokkende voorbeelde soos die
Hartebeespoortdam, die Bergrivier in die Wes-Kaap en die Swartkopsrivier in
die Oos-Kaap.

In die Bergrivier is nou onlangs besoedelingsvlakke van 34 miljoen E. coli
per 100 ml water gemeet. As ons in aanmerking neem dat 1 000 eenhede E.
coli per 100 ml as gevaarlik beskou word, kan ons net dink watter gevaar
dit vir die mense inhou wat hierdie water daagliks moet gebruik. Die
buitelandse kopers van ons vrugte is reeds bewus van hierdie besoedeling en
die hele vrugtebedryf van hierdie gebied is in gevaar.

Die oorsaak van E. coli-besoedeling is rioolafval wat in die riviere
beland. Die swak plaaslike rade word aanspreeklik gehou en drastiese
optrede deur die regering is nou noodsaaklik. Onbevoegde ANC-rade is
verantwoordelik vir hierdie toedrag van sake in die Bergrivier.

Wat die Swartkopsrivier betref, is die toestand daarvan ook baie sleg.
Vlakke van E. coli-besoedeling van tot 800 000 eenhede per 100 ml water is
al gemeet en dringende aandag is hier ook nodig. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Hon Chairman, hon Minister, MECs and colleagues, before I
begin, I just want to thank you, Mr Chairman, and the Chief Whip for the
good wishes which you expressed to Mr Watson. I shall also convey them to
him as soon as possible. Thank you very much.

The conservation of our water and plant resources is very important to all
the people of South Africa, but unfortunately for decades in South Africa,
and also the rest of Africa, too little attention was paid to these
important resources. It is generally accepted that the condition of a
country’s water and plant resources is directly linked to the quality of
life of the population.

In a recent study it was alleged that poverty in Africa is caused to a
large extent by the destruction of Africa’s natural forests and habitat. At
this moment there are still overseas companies who are being allowed to
destroy natural forests. Bad and corrupt governments unfortunately allow
these fortune hunters to destroy one of Africa’s greatest assets.

In South Africa we still have a shortage of yellow-wood and stinkwood as a
result of the large-scale plundering which took place in the last century,
and unfortunately few indigenous forests were planted. In South Africa
there are many examples that prove conclusively that the conservation of
our habitat is one of the best bulwarks against poverty and decline.

Areas that are most often visited by tourists, namely the Cape fynbos area,
the Garden Route, the Knysna forests and lakes, the Storms River area and
the Baviaans are proof that it is extremely advantageous to conserve
indigenous forests and plants.

Towns and cities that have protected and extended their arboreal heritage
now enjoy a great advantage with regard to tourism and investments.
Stellenbosch, Cape Town, Graaff-Reinet and Port Elizabeth, to name but a
few, are shining examples. People much rather visit and invest in pretty
towns and cities than in unattractive, treeless areas.

There are also towns that have not protected their abundant arboreal
heritage, and they are now paying the price. People who are forced to work
in such areas prefer to live in nearby towns, which are aesthetically more
acceptable, and they spend their rands there.

As regards the value and potential of agricultural land, it is clear that
the better the habitat conservation, the higher the yield and of the price
of the land. The poverty that is being experienced in some rural areas is
the result of overcropping in the past and still today.

With regard to the planting of trees in urban areas, it is true that in the
past no plantings took place in our poor residential areas. There should
now be a large-scale planting of trees in these areas as a matter of
urgency.

In many countries street trees are being planted with potential economic
value as well as nutritional value.

In SA yellow-wood, stinkwood, sneezewood, plum trees, etc, are being
planted with great success, also with the purpose of harvesting later. It
is said that a yellowwood tree is worth up to R10 000 after 30 years. You
can believe me, 30 years pass very quickly! Fruit and nut trees should also
be planted and can be used as an extra source of nutrition.

With regard to our water resources, it is a fact that we are already
experiencing water shortages and the problem is getting worse.
Throughout the country our people are losing millions of litres of water
just because infrastructure is not being maintained. The Minister referred
to the many houses that are now being built and I think the time has come
that every house that is built with the aid of a subsidy must also have a
water tank. This water can be very effectively used to grow vegetables and
fruit for the family.

The conservation of our water resources should receive a lot more attention
and local councils who openly allow pipes and taps to go unrepaired should
be penalised.

However, the greatest cause for concern is the decline in the quality of
our water. There are many shocking examples, such as the Hartebeespoort
Dam, the Berg River in the Western Cape and the Swartkops River in the
Eastern Cape.

In the Berg River pollution levels of 34 million E. coli per 100 ml water
were measured. If we take into consideration the fact that 1 000 units of
E. coli per 100 ml are regarded as dangerous, we can just imagine the
danger it poses for the people who have to use this water daily. The
overseas purchasers of our fruit are already aware of this pollution and
the entire fruit industry of this area is in danger.

The cause of E. coli pollution is sewage that flows into the rivers. The
incompetent local councils are held liable and drastic action by the
government is now essential. Incompetent ANC councils are responsible for
this state of affairs in the Berg River.

With regard to the Swartkops River, its condition is also very poor. Levels
of E. coli pollution of up to 800 000 units per 100 ml of water have
already been measured and urgent attention is also required here.]

The Work for Water Project has been a useful short-term job creation
project and should be extended.

The targets the President has set as far as clean water and sanitation is
concerned will clearly not be met. Two main stumbling blocks are the lack
of funds, and even more important is the fact that local government is not
capable of delivering. The fact that the sale of bottled water is so
popular is further proof that people are losing faith in local councils to
guarantee clean water in our homes. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Agb Voorsitter, ek sien nou met die nuwe horlosie hier het ek
nou meer tyd gekry. Dankie daarvoor!

Elf jaar gelede het ons demokrasie ’n gedaanteverwisseling ondergaan. Die
mense van Suid-Afrika het gepraat en gesê: “Ons het vertroue in die
regering, want ons wil effektiewe dienslewering sien plaasvind.”

Een departement waarin daar effektiewe dienslewering plaasvind, is die
Departement van Waterwese en Bosbou. As ek so kyk, sien ek daar geskied
baie implementering. Baie navorsing word gedoen. Ek dink nou aan wat die
agb kollega hier voor my gesê het van die Bergrivier, maar ek wil hom net
herinner dat die DA tot twee jaar gelede nog die Bergrivier beheer het, en
as ek reg onthou, was hulle teen die bou van die Skuifraamdam in die Wes-
Kaap. Ek wil dus graag vir my geagte kollega sê: Mense wat in glashuise
woon moenie met klippe gooi nie.

Water is ons belangrikste bron, want sonder water kan ons nie lewe nie, en
water is so belangrik dat elkeen van ons ’n belangrike plig het om ons moue
op te rol om te kyk dat water nie gemors word nie. Die departement doen
baie goed, en ons wil die Minister en haar departement bedank vir die dinge
wat hulle in Suid-Afrika doen. Ons bedank ook die Waternavorsingskommissie,
wat teen groot koste navorsing doen.

Ek kyk na Suid-Afrika as ’n ontwikkelende land, en baie van die ander
ontwikkelende lande het Suid-Afrika nou pas genader om hulp. Ek sien in die
jongste Water Wheel staan: “SA expertise recognised in Thailand”. Daar is
baie goed waarop ons verbeter het.

Daar is baie goed wat hierdie regering van die ou regering oorgeërf het,
waarop hulle verbeter het. Ons moet ons dank uitspreek daarvoor. Ons moet
waardering toon daarvoor. Ons kan nie net afkraak en elke keer net wil
afbreek nie; ons moet ook waardering toon aan wie dit toekom. Ons moet
erkenning gee aan wie dit toekom, want hierdie tweede dekade van vryheid
gaan van ons verwag om vir ons mense daar buite beter dienslewering te
bied.

Kritiek in hierdie tweede dekade van vryheid gaan niks help nie, maar om
die moue op te rol en voort te gaan om ’n nuwe Suid-Afrika en beter lewe
vir ons mense daar te stel gaan ons help om van Suid-Afrika ’n beter, meer
bekostigbare en lekkerder land te maak om in te leef; nie ’n land waarin
ons elke ding afkraak wat die regering doen nie, maar ’n land waarin ons
met trots kan staan en sê: “Suid-Afrika, ons land! Ons, die volk van Suid-
Afrika, sal saamstaan om dit verder ’n beter land te maak.” Die NNP steun
hierdie begrotingspos. Ek dank u. [Applous.](Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, I see that now that we have a new clock I
have been given more time. Thank you for that!

Eleven years ago our democracy underwent a metamorphosis. The people of
South Africa spoke and said: “We have confidence in the government, because
we want effective service delivery.”

One department in which there is effective service delivery is the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. When I look at it, I see that
there is a great deal of implementation. Much research is being done. I am
now thinking of what the hon colleague who spoke here before me said about
the Berg River, but I just want to remind him that until two years ago the
DA controlled the Berg River, and if I recall correctly they were opposed
to the building of the Skuifraam Dam in the Western Cape. I would therefore
like to say to my hon colleague: People who live in glasshouses should not
throw stones.

Water is our most important resource, because without water we cannot live,
and water is so important that each one of us has an important duty to roll
up our sleeves to ensure that water is not wasted. The department is doing
a great deal, and we wish to thank the Minister and her department for the
efforts that they are making in South Africa. We also thank the Water
Research Commission, which undertakes research at great cost.

I see South Africa as a developing country, and many of the other
developing countries have recently approached South Africa for assistance.
I see in the latest Water Wheel that it states, “SA expertise recognized in
Thailand”. There are many things which we have improved upon.

There are many things that this government inherited from the old
government upon which they have improved. We must express our appreciation
for that. We must show appreciation for that. We cannot just criticize and
just want to be destructive; we must also show appreciation to those who
deserve it. We must give recognition to those who deserve it, because in
this second decade of freedom it will be expected of us to deliver better
services to the people out there.

Criticism in this second decade of freedom will not help one jot, but
rolling up our sleeves and going ahead with creating a new South Africa and
a better life for all our people will help us to turn South Africa into a
better, more affordable and nicer country to live in; not a country where
we run down everything the government does, but a country in which where we
can stand proud and say: “South Africa, our country! We, the people of
South Africa, will unite to continue to make it a better country.” The NNP
supports this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon member. The hon Mzizi of the
IFP.

Kunewashi-ke lapho mntakababa. Ungalindeli mina ukuthi ngikutshele ukuthi
uhlale phansi. [There is a clock there, my brother. You must not wait for
me to tell you to sit down.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Ngiyathokoza Sihlalo. Ngiyabona ukuthi udokolwane usekhona
lapha ongigadile. Kuhle-ke lokho. KuNngqongqoshe kazwelonke noNgqongqoshe
bezifundazwe nakozakwethu, unwele olude. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Thank you, Chairperson. I am grateful that the clock is still there,
timing me. That is good. To the national Minister, the MECs and my
colleagues, long live!]

Chairperson, it is indeed a pleasure for me to take part in this debate.
May I from the outset single out water? It is a known phenomenon that water
is indispensable in our lives. Without water there will be no life. Without
water in our bodies the result is death. Having said that, it does not mean
forestry is less important.

Mandulo, ithekhnoloji ingakaziwa kuleli lengabade amahlathi ayedlala indima
ebalulekile kubantu ngobubanzi. Namanje amahlathi asayidlala leyo ndima.
Ayagawulwa amahlathi sithole izingodo zokwakha siphinde siwagawule sithole
izinkuni zokubasa, kwande njalo sakhe izihlalo sakhe ngisho namafenisha.
Kuningi esingakubala.

Okunye okubalulekile ukuthi izingodo ziyagawulwa kwenziwe amaphepha.
Kuningi esingakubalula ngalezi zihloko ezimbili. Ngqongqoshe, ngabe kulesi
sabelomali siyokwazi ukuhlinzekela izidingo nezingqinamba ezibhekene
namanzi namahlathi na? (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[In the past, when the technology was not known in this African country,
forests played a vital role in the lives of all citizens. Even now the
forests are still playing that role. Forests are cut down for wood to build
with, firewood and to make furniture. There are many purposes we can
mention.

The other important thing is that wood is also cut down to make paper.
There is a great deal we did not mention about these two topics. Minister,
will we be able to cater for the needs and the impediments facing water and
forests with this budget?]

During rainy seasons, rivers flow down into the sea. During droughts rivers
and dams become dry and this affects even underground water. During the dry
season trees do not grow. During winter we get veld fires more often and
large tracts of forests are destroyed. Trees are not like grass. They take
time to reach the stage of consumption.

In your budget, Minister, can we say: Come what may come, we will face the
music and overcome any difficulties we face? The IFP would wish that a
budget should have more room to meet all challenges ...

... uma kufika lezo zikhathi amanzi esephelile namahlathi esephelile. I-IFP
iyasixhasa isabiwomali. [Ihlombe.] [... when the dry season comes and when
the forests are finished. The IFP supports the budget. [Applause.]]
RULING

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF NCOP (Ms P Hollander): Before I call the next
speaker, I promised this House that I would give my ruling on the debate on
Budget Vote 2 in Parliament on 24 May 2005. The hon Watson made the
following remark: “... the hon Setona’s defamatory lie about the leader of
the DA, Mr Tony Leon”. The hon Kgoshi Mokoena raised it as a point of order
that it was unparliamentary for one hon member to say that another hon
member had lied.
I was the officer presiding at the time, and since I was in agreement with
the point of order raised by hon Kgoshi Makoena I asked the hon Watson to
withdraw his words. The hon Watson replied that he would withdraw the word
“lie” and substitute it with the word “statement”. Since the hon Watson was
continuing to use the word “defamatory” in describing the statement, I
asked the hon Watson once again to withdraw his remarks, because to say
that a statement was defamatory amounted to saying that the person who made
the statement was lying. Despite my asking the hon Watson more than once to
withdraw his words he refused.

Hon members, when the officer presiding has made a ruling, as I had done,
and the member to whom the ruling was directed refuses to abide by the
ruling, that is showing contempt for the officer presiding and contempt for
the proceedings of this honourable House because the officer presiding
represents the authority of the House.

NCOP Rule 37(1)(b) provides that the officer presiding may order a member
to leave the Chamber immediately for the remainder of the day’s sitting if
the officer presiding is of the opinion that the member concerned is in
contempt of or is disregarding the authority of the Chair.

On 24 May 2005 I did not invoke the provisions of Rule 37(1)(b), but
instead indicated that I would provide a ruling at a later stage, which I
am doing now. It is my ruling that on 24 May 2005 the hon Watson
disregarded the authority of the Chair by refusing to withdraw his words
after being asked by the officer presiding to do so.

Where a member has concerns about a ruling which has been made, the member
should raise that matter outside the House with the office bearer who made
the ruling, either orally or in writing. The member should not disregard
the authority of the Chair by failing to abide by the rulings in this
House. I thank you.

Ms B N DLULANE: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, “baphathiswa
bamaphondo” [hon MECs], hon members, ladies and gentlemen, “nawe Mnu
Dlulane omncinci osegalari, nomakazi wakho” [and you Mr Dlulane junior in
the gallery, together with your aunt], addressing Parliament during her
Budget Vote debate on 18 May 2005, the hon Minister of Water Affairs and
Forestry outlined the new role of her department in respect of water supply
and sanitation.

She said that she was breaking with tradition and that her department no
longer manages the investment budget, but focuses on whether services are
provided effectively and sustainably.

Rural sanitation remains a major challenge and the health consequences
thereof were demonstrated by the recent outbreaks of cholera and bilharzia
in Mpumalanga, and the tapeworm infestation in Coza village in the Eastern
Cape, where my constituency is.
Over the past three years the Eastern cape has been attacked by a series of
water-borne diseases, which include cholera and typhoid. More than 80 lives
were lost to cholera and at least two children died from water-borne
diseases, and more than 6 000 people were treated in hospitals throughout
the province.

All these outbreaks can be attributed to a lack of access to clean water in
the former Transkei region. We are amongst the 3,6 million people who have
no access to basic water services, which the Minister alluded to.

I still remember when the late former leader of the ANC and Communist
Party, Comrade Chris Hani, during the unbanning of our organisation, went
to Coza village at Libode. He said, “Look, even today our communities are
still drinking “amanzi anezabonkolo kunye neenkomo neehagu” [unclean water
together with cattle and pigs], and that is the reason we still have these
diseases at Coza.
The water service budget of the department is thus reduced from R2 608
million to R1 334 million. My question, hon Minister, is: Given this huge
backlog that we are faced with, how are you going to cope? I do understand
that some of Dwaf’s responsibilities and other roles have been taken to
municipalities, but I’m wondering whether this budget is enough for you to
complete whatever you thought you would deliver.

In its second decade of democracy our government is prioritising its
capacity to deliver goods and services in an efficient and cost-effective
manner. A renewed emphasis on monitoring linked to delivery is evident, and
on the basis of the programme of action announced by our President in his
state of the nation address, these policy priorities and challenges shape
the 2005 budget.

Water, sanitation and hygiene are vital components of sustainable
development and poverty alleviation. Our country is one of a few in the
world that formally recognise water as a human right. Our national water
and sanitation programme, which is one of the largest national programmes
in Africa, aims to deliver sustainably on that right. Both the recognition
of water as a human right and the development of the national water and
sanitation programme derived from the advent in 1994 of South Africa’s
democratic era.

The dictionary describes water as colourless, tasteless, and odourless, its
most important property being its ability to dissolve other substances.
However, we in South Africa do not look at water from that perspective. For
us, as I have already mentioned, water is also a basic human right. It is
the origin of all things, the giver of life. There is water within us. Let
there be water with us.

Water never rests. We want the water of this country to flow out into a
network, reaching every individual. We want to say: Here is water for you,
take it and cherish it as it affirms your human dignity and nourishes your
humanity.

Water is a powerful symbol throughout the world, carrying with it ideas of
baptism and new life, cleansing and healing, bootat’ umfundisi abalapha
endlwini, [people of the cloth present in the House] and the promise of
growth and prosperity. In contrast, the growing demands on a limited
resource and the increasing scarcity of water could result in devastating
conflicts and catastrophes.

Ukhe watsho ke uMphathiswa ukuba olu asilolwimi lwethu. Ngelinye ixesha
siyaziluma sizama ukuluthetha, kanti olona lwimi lwethu siluncance ebeleni
sisiXhosa. [The Minister has said before that this language is not our
mother tongue. Sometimes we have a slip of the tongue. However, our mother
tongue is isiXhosa.]

Our government has been confronted with a situation in which the majority
of South Africa’s people have not only been excluded from the land, but
have also been denied either direct access to water and sanitation for
productive use or access to the benefits.

Asazi ukuba ngoobani ke abo ababevimba abantu bethu ilungelo lokufumana
amanzi. [We do not know who deprived our people of the right to have
water.]

The development of our society, our growing population, and the legitimate
demands of the disadvantaged majority for access to these most crucial
resources have placed new demands on what is, although renewable, a limited
resource that can easily become polluted or overused. There is only so much
water that falls on our land every year. So we need to engage ourselves in
debates that can help us to come up with feasible strategies to manage this
resource. We must not just throw stones; we must come up with solutions.

This policy debate on the Budget Vote on Water Affairs and Forestry is of
great importance. It is estimated that over one million children a year die
from water-borne diseases. Diarrhoea kills an equivalent of a jumbo jet
full of children every four hours. This makes it the second biggest killer
of children in the world. Lack of adequate sanitation facilities and unsafe
hygiene practices contribute significantly to this situation, and this
requires our urgent attention.

In Africa we are faced with a water and sanitation crisis. It is estimated
that one in three Africans does not have access to adequate water supply
and sanitation facilities, and that almost half of the people on this
continent suffer from water-borne diseases.

None of us has a solution to this crisis. We all have a piece of the
puzzle. This budget debate offers us an opportunity to put together these
pieces of this puzzle so that we can launch a concerted campaign to address
the backlog of water and the need for safer hygiene practices, and not
create havoc by organising marches.

Mphathiswa, siyabulela. Sinqwenela ukuba ubajonge abantu abatya amanzi
amdaka.[Kwaqhwatywa.] [Minister, I thank you. We would like you to give
consideration to those who use unclean water. [Applause.]]

Mr J DOWRY (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister Sonjica, MECs and
members of the NCOP, in the Minister’s budget speech of on 18 May this
year, she referred to our celebration of the Freedom Charter and the
strategic imperatives, which specifically include the eradication of
poverty and underdevelopment.

As the government of the Western Cape we endorse the Minister’s view that
we need to ensure that the way in which we use and manage the water
resources of the country must ensure that we grow and transform the economy
for the benefit of all the people.

The Minister said:

   We cannot have water services without having water resources, which also
   support the needs of a growing economy. We are confronted by the major
   challenges of managing our scarce resources and extending service
   delivery to previously excluded communities. We also have an obligation
   to research and mitigate the vagaries of climate change.

Agriculture and water play a significant role in the Western Cape
government strategies, namely, Ikapa Elihlumayo, a Home for All.
Agriculture in this province cannot be ignored as the total input of the
primary agricultural sector in the Western Cape grew from R10,4 billion in
1999 to R11,8 billion two years later.

The main industries in the primary agricultural sector include fruit R2,4
billion; winter grain R1,8 billion; white meat R1,6 billion; viticulture
R1,6 billion; and vegetables R1,4 billion.

It is clear that this sector has grown consistently since our political
transformation of 1994. Well over half of the country’s agricultural
exports originate from the Western Cape. These industries are still on a
strong growth curve, with especially the wine industry being an unqualified
success. Census data showed that while manufacturing in the Western Cape
shed 30 000 jobs, agriculture gained 32 000.

Drought and the need for water produce a complex web of impacts that spans
many sectors of the economy and reaches well beyond the areas experiencing
physical drought. This complexity exists because water is integral to our
ability to produce goods and provide services.

It is not only the livestock and wheat industries that are impacted upon by
the drought. Studies proved that the deciduous fruit industry would bear
approximately 67% of the burden on the horticultural sector. The reason is
quite simple; viticulture is a desert plant and could still be farmed
successfully under conditions of deficit irrigation. It is also not
uncommon in wine grape production to impose deficit irrigation as a quality
enhancement strategy. Deciduous fruit production cannot cope with drought
conditions to the same extent as wine grapes and would therefore be more
susceptible to negative impacts.

The Deciduous Fruit Producers Trust estimates that current losses already
exceeded R1 billion, if all forward multiplier effects are taken into
account. Such a figure will have significant negative impacts on the 2 500
deciduous fruit producers and socio-economic impacts on more than 100 000
workers and 400 000 dependants.

The moment you have to apply water restrictions it has a negative
multiplying impact on the total agricultural sector. Table grape producers,
for example, are among the biggest losers with water restrictions in the
Olifants River Irrigation District.

Losses in production are high, such as in the Hex River Valley where more
than 1,5 billion export cartons of table grapes and 1 million for the Berg
River area were registered. The production losses for the Hex River Valley
are estimated at R180 million, and R100 million for the Berg River area.

It is conservatively estimated that the wine industry could lose R56, 5
million due to the lack of sufficient water supply. This phenomenon
obviously also impacts negatively on agricultural employees. It has been
calculated that some 2 075 permanent, and 2746 seasonal jobs can be lost in
the wine, table grape and deciduous fruit industries alone, resulting in
some R37,4 million income loss to these households.

As a responsible government we cannot ignore these warning lights and
therefore the Department of Agriculture in the Western Cape attends to
these needs on a continual basis by engaging in research on the process of
multicriteria decision analysis in water resource management. Although not
a new concept, current research applies the process over time and within
regional context; compared to where specific projects with a localised
context were targeted in the past.

Current research challenges conventional beliefs regarding the total cost
of traditional expensive supply options, with the hypothesis, that if it
was possible to quantify the total cost of water management alternatives,
conventional supply alternatives could well be more expensive compared to
seawater desalination or recycling to potable standard.
The quality of water in our rivers plays a major role in the creation of a
home for all in the Western Cape. It is a fact however that the quality of
the water in our rivers varies from excellent to very poor, depending on
the location and the activities taking place adjacent to the rivers or in
the catchments areas of the rivers. In this regard, I have to draw the hon
Minister’s attention to the situation in the Berg River.

The pollution of the Berg River is a topic that has received a lot of media
coverage over the past couple of months and serious concerns have been
expressed regarding the effect that the polluted water can have on the
people using the water. The water is being used by farming communities for
drinking water, as well as for irrigation of export fruits and vineyards.

The agricultural industry and rapid urban growth have taken their toll on
water-scarce South Africa’s river systems, leaving almost three quarters of
them endangered or critically endangered. This is among the findings of a
recently released report containing the first-ever national assessment of
biodiversity across the country’s marine, freshwater, estuarine and
terrestrial environments.

It is in the public interest that Water Affairs consistently apply the Act
that is in place and does the necessary policing and prosecution of
transgressors.

The question follows: Who will act on behalf of the many people who rely on
the water from these polluted areas, as their sole supply of drinking
water, if we as the government do not fulfil our obligation to apply the
National Water Act and prosecute polluters of our scarce water resources?

Municipalities sometimes create the impression that they are addressing the
problem, whilst their efforts, in fact, contribute very little to solve the
problem. Joint and focused efforts by all relevant parties are required to
protect our rivers and thus our scarce water resources and ensure the
safety of all the people using the water.

The Hex River Valley is one of the leading areas in the Western Cape when
it comes to Black Economic Empowerment in agriculture. Emerging projects
that have been embarked upon will need an extra 200 000 cubic metre of
water. To address the shortfall in supply the Hex River Valley Irrigation
Board drafted a master plan in which the Osplaas Dam was identified as the
solution.

The Board submitted an application for the building of the dam to the
Department of Water Affairs two years ago, as well as an application for an
environmental impact permit. No controversial issues were found during the
investigation. I want to make use of this opportunity to request the hon
Minister to give her personal attention to this project as it could unlock
a further potential of the valley for BEE in agriculture.

The loss of water from the Breede River that is annually flowing away into
the ocean is also a big concern to farmers who are willing to look at a
joint venture with government in an effort to use available water to its
maximum, within the permissible limits of conservation.

I want to thank the Minister for being the major driving force behind the
investigations that include the Oudtshoorn Agricultural Water Study and a
similar study for George as well as the preliminary investigations and
feasibility studies. Minister, water will in future become ...
[Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chair, Minister, hon members, officials from the
department, comrades, we have noted that generally land use in South Africa
has been poorly planned with resultant inefficiencies, inequities and
environmental degradation. Although the most glaring consequences arise
from the apartheid policies as applied in the former homelands – the
effects are evident throughout the rest of the country, hon Le Roux - in
the forest sector, some consequences of inadequate land-use planning are
seen in land disputes, the conflicts about water resources, concern over
loss of land suited to crop agriculture and the loss of habitats for native
species. Previous forestry development strategies were formulated in the
context of inadequate or inappropriate overarching policies, without
sufficient consultation.

The combination of acidification and forestation effects have been found to
be comparable to areas mostly affected by acid rain to the worst degree in
the industrialist countries of the Northern hemisphere. The loss of
nutrients is worsened by the increasing acidity of rainfall over much of
the region principally caused by industrial pollution.

About one sixth of the plantations in South Africa are on soils with high
risk of acidification due to shallowness, low buffer capacity or low base
status. In order for plantation forestry to be sustainable in the long term
on the sites, fertilisation or other mitigating matters will be required
and we appreciate what the department is doing in this regard.

As a committee we have noted that forestry has a wide scale of impact; an
example is the impact on river water that flows through protected areas
such as the Kruger National Park. This, together with other factors such as
irrigation, abstraction and the prolonged drought have jeopardised aquatic
ecosystems, and brought about an alteration of the landscape-effect
perceived scenic value. Different observers perceive afforested landscapes
differently; it seems as if many visitors to areas such as Mpumalanga
perceive the afforested landscape as attractive, but many people who
appreciate the South African landscape do not.

The injudicious layout of plantations frequently, of course, offends the
eye. However, the forestry industry has implemented guidelines to prevent
this, for example, forestry companies have cleared and maintained at least
28 000 kilometres of riparian zones on their estates, which would effect a
significant aesthetic improvement.

The principle of managing towards sustainability is being pursued
internationally by developing criteria, according to which forestry may be
judged sustainable or not, and indicators for assessing forestry against
each criterion. Such criteria and indicators need to be applied also at the
level of firms or operating units within the firms, such as plantation
estates. These assessments may be limited to certification of operations or
forest products, so that firms and operations may be accredited and
products may be certified as coming from sustainable forestry, that is, so-
called green labelling of forest products.

The forestry companies in South Africa have responded by subscribing
voluntarily to best practice guidelines for environmental management. The
guidelines for environmental conservation management in commercial forests
in South Africa are widely implemented in the companies. These companies
have developed self-assessment procedures to ensure application of the
guidelines, incorporating them into the guidelines and instituting
monitoring and evaluation procedures.

The SA Timber Growers Association effectively encourages smaller private
growers to use the guidelines. However, it is important to note that the
fact that the system is not legally binding is a serious weakness.
Accreditation through the statute of an independent body with the resources
to provide clear evaluation and certification of environmental management
in forestry could protect the interests of the sector, as well as
protecting the environment.

The growth of the forestry industry in the past two decades has largely
been through expanded exports of wood chips, pulp and paper. Domestic
consumption has grown little. However, we are likely to see a considerable
increased in the domestic consumption in the next two decades. Exports
would be maintained and certainly increased in some cases, such as the
dissolving pulp and other value-added products. This trend is desirable
since it will address domestic needs and the opportunities available in
global trade.

The demand for roundwood has increased considerably. To date the main
response to increase demand yield has been to plant more land rather than
to increase yield efficiency.

As I mentioned above, domestic demand for wood in South Africa will
increase in the foreseeable future, owing to economic growth in per capita
consumption of wood-based products, such as paper, from the current low
base. This rising demand will tend to encourage further expansion of
plantations. However, expansion will be constrained by the competition for
land and water resources, and by environmental and social conditions.

New afforestation has increased the total area of plantation by 17 000 ha
per year recently. New afforestation has slowed down, however, as a result
of very few permits having been issued in the last year. Potential
productivity of these forests is relatively high by world standards,
averaging about 20 m3 per hectare per annum. They currently yield about
18,5 to 19 million m3 of wood per year, which satisfies over 90% of
domestic demand and provides for a surplus for exports, largely as pulp
paper, wood chips and other products. The average released yield of about
13m3 per hectare per annum is lower than the average potential productivity
because many plantations are still young. About 7% to 8% of plantation land
is temporarily unplanted.

Many forest operations are on land where people were displaced in the past.
Claims for restitution of land rights are to be dealt with through the
mechanisms of the Restitution of Land Rights Act. The Act stipulates that
people who lost their land rights because of a racially discriminatory law
shall be entitled to of the land they lost or receive appropriate
compensation. Certain areas of state forest land, state land in Safcol’s
hands, as well as privately-owned land, are likely to become subject to
restitution claims.

Other claims, such as the ownership of security of tenure by labour tenants
where their prior rights have been jeopardised by sale of the land to
forestry companies, for example, in Mpumalanga, or claims of need arising
from land shortages and lack of alternatives, for example, land invasion
and high population density of newcomers or squatters on forestry land, are
not addressed through the restitution process. Prompted by pressure from
labour tenants, various forestry companies have negotiated with these
claimants and the negotiations have led to innovative solutions
accommodating the interests of both parties.

The department recognises the urgency of the labour reform programme and
will therefore facilitate restitution of land rights where possible. Where
land claims are lodged against state land the department will co-operate
with the Minister of Land Affairs, or examine whether restoration is
foreseeable and feasible and will assist in order to achieve speedy
resolution of the claims.
Community forestry is designed and applied to meet local, social and
environmental needs and to favour local economic development. It is
implemented by communities or with the participation of communities. It
includes farm forestry, agriforestry, community or village planting,
woodlots and woodland management by rural people, as well as steep planting
in urban and periurban areas.

I might disadvantage myself of the few seconds left, but I want to take the
opportunity to react to a statement made by Mr Le Roux. He said that now of
late people have opted to buy bottled water and that that is an expression
of showing lack of confidence in our government’s provision of water.
Perhaps the key question that I must put to Mr Le Roux should be: Who buys
this water? Surely not the rural poor, surely not the unemployed and surely
not the destitute, but those who want to create an impression and
perception that the ANC government is failing to provide water to the rural
unemployed, and so forth. As the ANC we support the Budget Vote. [Time
expired.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chair, I want to thank the hon
members for a very interesting debate. I will quickly respond, although not
to everybody. It was really a very interesting debate.

Rev Moatshe, thank you very much for your comments. I just want to say that
sanitation has been prioritised by the department, hence the injection of
R1,2 billion. It is because we have been talking and mobilising funds. I
appreciate the problem that you raised, but I must say that it is one of
those very difficult services to implement. We are trying very hard, and we
are looking at all other options that can help us. We are almost certain
that we will reach the target of 2010, as set by the President. We are
almost certain of that.

Let me take this opportunity to underscore that our policy says that the
sanitation services for densely populated areas in the townships should be
waterborne systems. You can’t take a waterless toilet to KwaZekele, because
KwaZekele is a very densely populated area. This is policy, and I want to
impress this upon municipalities, because in the hastiness of wanting to
reach the target, you find that people look at the easy options of
providing waterless toilets in densely populated areas.

When you discuss this with them, they will say that they will come back and
do an upgrade. I think that is a waste of taxpayers’ money. I think it is
important that we do the right thing for our people, especially if we
attach respect to them, and we want to give them the dignity that they
deserve.

Hon Mack, I will link you up – he’s not in the House. Oh, he is - I will
link you up with the regional office on the matter that you raised about
the houses along the railway line. I think it is a very important matter
that you raised there.

We are already working together with the Department of Housing and the
Department of Local Government on a policy for providing water on private
land, and this would include people who live on the farms and our
farmworkers, because they also are affected by the same problem that you
have raised here. They have to pay for water which is not actually in the
dams on those farms. Again, according to the Constitution, whoever sells
water, especially if that person does not have a licence, that person is
violating our law; we can deal with the person. “Simvalele ngaphaya
kwezitshixo”. [And put him or her behind bars.]

Mr Le Roux, your statement that the targets will not be achieved in terms
of water supply because of lack of cash is one that I do not agree with. It
is not true. Yes, we have challenges of capacity, but we are working on
these with the Department of Provincial and Local Government. Of course, as
already indicated, sanitation is a serious challenge.

I am not going to respond on the issue of bottled water. I think Mr Tau
handled that question even better than I did. I just want to raise an
interesting point about a comment that Mr Le Roux made – the price of a
litre of bottled water can buy 1 000 litres of pure, safe tap water.
However, some people – you’ve said all there is to say – want to show off
that they are wealthy and have a lot of money. Again, the quality of South
Africa’s water is one of the best in the world. We are one of the best in
the world. You can go to any tap and open it and drink. I drink water from
the tap. Everybody from my department, even the engineers, drink water from
the tap. In this House we drink water from the tap.

We should not exaggerate and take things out of proportion, because this is
going to affect us negatively. The tourism industry will be affected. I am
saying we should be very careful about the statements that we make here.

I am tempted to respond to many issues that you raised, Mr Le Roux.
Afforestation and urban greening are programmes under my department. We
deal with leakages and matters like that. There are programmes that are
running, even as we speak, to deal with those problems. I am almost certain
that a lot of the municipalities are almost on top of the issue. Even this
issue of capacity shouldn’t be blown out of proportion. There are
municipalities that have serious capacity problems. That is why local
government has created Project Consolidate that identifies 139
municipalities that are lacking in terms of capacity, whether it’s
technical or financial capacity. We have a strategy already in place to
deal with such capacity problems. We should not exaggerate the issue.

Hon Dlulane, on the point that we do not have enough funds, of course we do
not have enough funds, but as you know, the functions have been transferred
to local government. We actually helped mobilise funds for local
government. For example, there is the R1,2 billion for sanitation that we
recently received from Treasury.

With regarding to the threat of drought and the effect of water shortages
on agriculture, we have been meeting with organised agriculture to ensure
that the new water pricing strategy will not penalise them during a
drought. We are sensitive to all of those things.

I must say that there is a strategy that guides us as to what we should do
when there is a need or a scarcity of water in a particular area. I think
it is a strategy with which people need to familiarise themselves since it
does guide us. What is important when there is a drought is that we try to
ensure that we do not get to a situation where the reserve is threatened.
The reserve is that amount of water that has to remain in the dams for
domestic use. So, when there is a drought, we sacrifice other things so
that you and I are still able to get water from the tap, even if there is a
drought, because this is one commodity that you cannot afford not to supply
to people all the time. We need water all the time as people for our health
and for our domestic use.

So, we always ensure that that reserve is not affected, but I do appreciate
your comments. Again, we are co-operating with the Minister for Land
Affairs and Agriculture to look at technology that will help us save water
and other things that we can do to ensure that agriculture has water
available for it. It is quite an important area, and you are quite right in
saying that it contributes a lot to the second economy because of its
location. Agricultural projects are mainly in rural areas and, for that
reason, our people are mainly involved in agricultural projects.

It looks like I’ve dealt with all the issues, but it looks like I have one
minute left. Let me see what I can say in this minute that is left. We have
a river health programme. This is an important point that was raised. For
the Western Cape, there is a report that is outstanding. All the provinces
embarked on a programme of going to the rivers and testing the water, and
they have to compile a report and present it to the department. The Western
Cape’s report will be the second one that we should be receiving, and I
think there is a sense of urgency on this matter. I don’t think we will
have to wait for all the reports to come through to the department. We
might have to embark on an awareness programme so that we can educate our
people on protecting the rivers because along the banks of these rivers are
informal settlements where our people stay. So, we need to embark on an
awareness programme and help them understand the need for them to preserve
and protect the water in the rivers.

The last thing to do would be to thank everybody for all their inputs, even
those people to whom I did not respond. I appreciate your contributions,
it’s just that the clock is ticking, and I have only a few seconds
remaining. Thank you very much for supporting the budget. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P Hollander): We thank the hon
national Minister for Water Affairs and Forestry. Minister, we thank you
for your informative and consultative debate. We appreciate your presence
here today. We say: Go well, and continue the good work. Thank you.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                             (Review of policy)

Vote No 33 – Transport (Review of policy)

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Chair, hon members, my colleagues - MECs
of transport - and all hon members, the transport portfolio is a complex
and cross-cutting affair. An effective transport system is very essential
to the wellbeing of any country or community, but the effective operation
of that system depends on the interrelationship of a number of factors,
including governance, authority, responsibility and funding.

Schedules 4 and 5 of our Constitution define concurrent and/or exclusive
transport functions that reside with different spheres of government.
Therefore, public transport, road traffic regulation and vehicle licensing
are concurrent functions of the national and provincial spheres. Provincial
roads and traffic is an exclusive provincial function; and municipalities
are responsible, where relevant, for municipal airports, municipal public
transport and roads.
Specialist agencies and authorities, accountable to the national sphere of
government, deliver specific transport services across our country, and
include the Roads Agency, the Commuter Rail Corporation and the Road
Traffic Management Corporation; and they all have a direct impact on all
provinces.

In funding the picture is equally complex. Some concurrent functions depend
on the Department of Transport's Budget Vote, but others rely on
allocations to provinces determined by the equitable share formulae and
outlined in the Division of Revenue Act. The exclusive provincial and
municipal functions depend on own revenue and on conditional grants from
provinces and national government to municipalities. Section 26 of the
Division of Revenue Act outlines specific responsibilities to Ministers of
portfolios that traverse the Constitution's Schedule 4 functions.

An outline of this complex network should focus attention on where the buck
really stops in the provision of certain transport functions and services.
In short, all spheres of government have specific, exclusive and shared
responsibilities that we must all exercise. We must exercise these in the
interests of promoting an integrated, beneficial and targeted transport
policy and strategy.
The key transport concerns of the National Council of Provinces are public
transport and roads.

We met last month in a transport lekgotla as a transport family to map a
transport masterplan to serve as the framework to guide provinces,
municipalities and other state department in their delivery of key
transport infrastructure. Clearly, capacity at all levels, but particularly
at provincial and local level, will be critical if we are to succeed in
this particular regard. I would like this afternoon to focus on provincial
issues that emerged from that very successful engagement of the transport
family.

Many of the local sphere Integrated Development Plans, IDPs, and the
accompanying Integrated Transport Plans, ITPs, emphasise public transport,
and rail in particular, as the backbone of their transport systems. Most
note that success is related, if not totally dependent in some instances,
on the key issues of transport connectivity, greater mobility and access.
For example, the city of Tshwane knows that the development initiatives to
the north of the city require certain critical interventions by the three
spheres of Government if their pro-poor and pro-working vision is to become
reality. There are still many areas where we need to make significant
improvements, despite the many strides we are making as a collective. The
provision of roads is one of these.

It is clear that the construction and/or expansion of roads by
many of our municipalities is not done in accordance with the ITPs and
IDPs. I agree with the Financial and Fiscal Commission that it will only be
possible to determine which sphere is responsible for addressing the
backlog in construction, rehabilitation and carrying out maintenance duties
once we have finalised the new road classification system. Many provinces
have grasped the importance of this issue and are beginning to take
positive advantage of the importance of road maintenance. I can also assure
provinces, like the Northern Cape for example, that I have noted that they
are struggling to balance the need for new projects with the need for
maintenance.

We already have in place a system that allows for the reclassification of
some provincial roads to the national system under the control of the Roads
Agency. This process will continue this financial year with proposals that
affect mainly Mpumalanga and the Free State; and Sanral is also in
discussion with North West province.

However, the Financial and Fiscal Commission also suggests that the current
reclassification may be happening on an ad hoc and arbitrary basis. They
highlight two issues that we cannot resolve now, but we should consider how
to avoid them further down the line. The first relates to the transfer
occurring without a requisite transfer of funds; and secondly, that we must
not forget the equitable share formula, especially when road
reclassification is not taking place in all provinces.

Another element is the suggestion that the strategy on expanding roads has
not strengthened the role of public transport. Rather, a great deal of
roadworks, for want of a better term, seems to promote the interests of
motorists and individual car-users above the requirements for an efficient
and reliable public transport system. Our department has undertaken work to
develop a travel demand management strategy aimed at addressing these
issues, as well as challenges posed by congestion in our metropolitan
centres. This strategy will be finalised by the end of November this year,
and be ready to be piloted in the first half of 2006.

I would like to see some work that correlates the deterioration of roads
from heavy truck transport with congestion on routes mainly by commuter
traffic or private vehicle use, and with the manner in which roads projects
actually fulfil the purposes agreed upon. For example, road safety
enhancement projects dominate in rural areas, but we need to see whether
they are in fact having an impact.

A major subject of discussion at our transport lekgotla that I mentioned
was the issue of effective and integrated planning. The
failure to ensure greater co-ordination between spheres will undermine our
ability as a democratic state to achieve some of our strategic objectives.
Recent problems, including taxi violence in some of our provinces, have
highlighted very strongly the lack of effective planning and co-ordination
between the three spheres of Government.

Last year we promised to introduce significant, short-term improvements in
the public transport system. In the National Assembly last week, we
highlighted the consolidation of passenger rail and the Taxi
Recapitalisation Programme. An element I did not touch on in the National
Assembly, but which is central to the concerns of provinces, is the issue
of bus subsidies.

The public transport subsidy is allocated to the Department of Transport;
but the actual design, day-to-day administration and management of bus
services are delegated to the nine Provinces who are the direct employers
of bus operators rendering services to all the provinces. The agreements we
have with provinces aim to ensure that certain public transport minimum
standards are met, and that the requirements of the law, such as the PFMA
are adhered to at all times.

Ultimately, the Department of Transport is responsible for ensuring that
these services are provided to all commuters in a safe, reliable,
affordable and cost-effective manner. We have seen, and of course we do
accept, that we have constitutional responsibilities in this regard which
we cannot ignore.

A key need is to get rid of the current month-to-month interim contracts
that dominate the bus industry. These interim contracts create uncertainty,
which is not conducive to investment in the bus fleet, skills development
and new equipment. They are difficult to manage and have also been open to
fraud. Most of all, the interim contracts reflect the old, apartheid
funding model, where the bulk of the funding was directed at providing bus
services to enable a reliable supply of cheap, African labour in the major
centres of the so-called white South Africa.

This inequitable allocation of the bus subsidy has robbed many poor South
Africans of access to public transport services. We are working with
provinces, for an example, with the Eastern Cape to correct the distortion
whereby the lion’s share of the bus subsidy is spent on the western side of
that province, while King William’s Town and the border region, as well as
the Transkei, are inadequately funded, and cannot provide reliable bus
services, resulting in a seriously ageing and dangerous bus fleet.

Members, we must transform interim contracts so that they are in line with
our public transport vision and strategy, including regulated competition.
Tendered contracts will be the norm, whilst negotiated contracts will be
approved only as an exception where we seek to achieve certain specified
objectives, which cannot be realised through the tender process.

Provinces wanting to convert the current interim contracts into negotiated
contracts, must apply to the Minister, and provide detailed motivations and
a business plan for this approach. Such applications will be subjected to
serious evaluation and will need to meet the strict criteria that we have
set, and they will be negotiated only once for a period of five years.

I must emphasise to my colleagues in provinces and bus operators that there
cannot be a blanket approval of negotiated contracts.

In summary, therefore, there is no doubt that our subsidy review process
will need to address issues of equity, and the distributional spend of the
subsidy across our country. The department has been involved in detailed
discussion with the bus industry since November of last year, with the view
of finding amicable solutions to all these matters.

Happily, the parties to these discussions do appreciate current realities
and challenges, and recognise the urgent need to move forward together. I
have also made it very clear to the department that they must conclude
these consultations with the industry shortly, so that our next transport
Minmec can make a final determination on these bus contracts.

Let me remind the officials and all concerned that we are not prepared to
delay any further, because the existing situation has only resulted in
uncertainty for the industry as a whole, inability for forward planning, an
ageing bus fleet across the country, bus accidents, and serious loss of
skills by the industry. And, the workers of the industry itself also need
certainty in order to plan their own lives and the future of their
children.

There are many challenges facing us as we try to extend public transport
services to many of our communities, including objective constraints, such
as funding for public transport. But I am inspired by the political
commitment shown by many provinces that try to find additional resources to
extend these services.

I must take this opportunity to commend provinces such as Mpumalanga and
the Eastern Cape for their efforts to generate additional resources within
their own budgets, in order to extend services to our people. These
resources are insignificant in the broader scheme of things, where demand
is so high, but we believe they provide the much needed bus services on new
routes that were previously not covered by this national subsidy.

Hon members, I indicated in the National Assembly the details of a roll-out
plan for the taxi recap would be available after Cabinet’s approval by the
end of June 2005. The taxi recap provides all provinces with an excellent
opportunity to strengthen their all-round capacity. The Department of
Transport will provide support where the lack of capacity affects our
ability to roll-out in a particular province.

However, provinces are still responsible for making provision for the
proper funding and capacity of these institutional mechanisms as part of
implementing key aspect of the NLTTA. Provinces are also required to
undertake at least three specific tasks. They must accelerate the
conversion of permits into operating licences within their provinces.
Secondly, they must focus on the capacity requirements of current
institutions, such as the operating licensing boards and the office of the
Registrar. Thirdly, they should work very closely with Santaco and ensure
that Santaco’s capacity to discharge its responsibilities fully to the
operators on the ground is indeed realised.

Rolling out the taxi recap, in terms of the actual scrapping of the wrecks,
or “skorokoro”, you may say, will have to focus on a combination of
factors. This will include prioritising areas with the highest number of
old vehicles, and those that show a faster rate in the deterioration of
their fleet, and assessing the capacity for effective law enforcement, and
their immediate access to functioning transport institutions.

The scrapping allowance is no longer defined as a deposit for the purchase
of the new taxi vehicles. Those who wish to exit the industry can do so
without having to forfeit the scrapping allowance of R50 000. However, the
distribution of the current ageing taxi fleet in provinces serves as a
reliable indicator of where the
R5,2 billion of the R7,7 billion for the scrapping allowance will be spent
over the next five to seven years.

For example, the approximately 16 000 registered vehicles, that is vehicles
that are linked to permits and operating licences in the Western Cape, will
mean that over R800 million of the scrapping will be spent in the Western
Cape over this period. Vehicle manufacturers and their related service
providers can now plan better and anticipate the demand for new vehicles
that need our safety requirements that are going to be issued next month,
which is starting tomorrow.

The challenge of stimulating transport in the rural areas of our country
remains high on our agenda. The lack of frequent public transport in most
of our rural areas does not make any moral, political, or economic sense. I
have received representations from provinces about the use of light
delivery vans, LDVs, or bakkies, to transport people. Although this
practice is indeed outlawed, we must not forget that the almost total
absence of reliable public transport in rural areas drives people to use
LDVs as an alternative.

Our figures show that if LDVs were taken out of use completely, the poorer
resourced provinces would suffer the most. For example, Limpopo would see
the average number of people to an available vehicle jump by over 70%. We
cannot rely on simplistic solutions to safety problems without
understanding the larger picture.

The rural transport strategy is aimed at addressing this legacy. We have
allocated resources in this regard, though limited. This limited funding
cannot, on its own, deliver transport that is vital to stimulating rural
development. Instead, these limited resources should enable us to co-
ordinate existing efforts and resources in the rural context. The resources
for stimulating rural mobility are there in the SA National Roads Agency,
for the construction of access roads, efforts for the revitalisation of
branch railway lines, allocations for the subsidy I have spoken about, and
the opportunity provided by the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

An effective strategy should enable us to co-ordinate the delivery of
infrastructure, stimulate public transport, and enable the rural masses to
move their produce and have access to markets. The Millennium Development
Goals also provides us with opportunities of addressing some of the major
challenges in respect of rural development.

Let me conclude by extending MEC, Jerry Thibedi’s thoughts when he quoted J
F Kennedy in his North West budget vote:

It is not our good economy that gave the USA its good roads, but it is our
good roads that gave us our good economy.

In our South African situation, perhaps we should say that that sentiment
covers the whole of the transport system itself, as the heartbeat of the
South African economy. Thank you. [Applause.]


                                   RULING


The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, before we proceed, I want to
make a ruling on two points of order that were raised on 24 May, and I
promised this House that I would rule on them at the next sitting. The
first ruling is that during the debate on Budget Vote No 2, Parliament, the
hon Watson made the following remark:

  Robert McBride was a murderer and this House cannot condone him as
  anything else.

Hon Kgoshi Mokoena raised as point of order that the hon Watson should
withdraw the statement, since it was a serious allegation. I was the
presiding officer at the time and since I was in agreement with the point
of order raised by the hon Kgoshi Mokoena, I asked the hon member to
withdraw his words. Hon Watson replied that he would not withdraw his
words. When the officer presiding has made a ruling, as I had done, and the
member to whom the ruling was directed, refuses to abide by the ruling,
that is showing contempt for the officer presiding and contempt for
proceedings of this hon House, because the officer presiding represents the
authority of the House. NCOP Rule 37(1)(b) provides that the officer
presiding may order a member to leave the Chamber immediately for the
remainder of the day’s sitting, if the officer presiding is of the opinion
that the member is in contempt of or is disregarding the authority of the
Chair.

On 24 May 2005 I did not invoke the provision of Rule 37(1)(b) but instead
indicated that I would provide a ruling at a later stage. It is my ruling
that on 24 May 2005 the hon Watson disregarded the authority of the Chair
by refusing to withdraw his words after been passed by the officer
presiding to do so. Where a member has concerns about a ruling that has
been made, the member should raise that matter with the office bearer
outside the House, either orally or in writing. The member should not
disregard the authority of the Chair by failing to abide by the ruling in
the House. That is the first ruling.

The second ruling is that a point of order was raised by the hon A L Moseki
during our sitting on 24 May 2005. The hon Moseki raised a point of order
on whether it is parliamentary for the hon Terreblanche to say to a member
who was on the floor at the time that he was lying. Unfortunately I did not
hear the member as I was listening to the speaker who was at the podium. I
made an undertaking that I would consult the Hansard and make the necessary
ruling. I have requested the Hansard records and I could not pick that up.

However, this may not necessarily mean that a member did not utter the
statement as alleged, but rather it once more demonstrates that as members
we should resist from engaging in private discussions while members are
speaking at the podium, as this makes it difficult for the presiding
officers to hear what the speaker is saying and at the same time, to hear
any member who may be saying something that is unparliamentary.

I therefore rule that since I neither heard the member, nor picked it up
from the Hansard, I cannot make any ruling on the matter. Thank you, hon
members.

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, members, officials from the
department, friends and comrades, allow me to dedicate my input today
during this Budget Vote to my grandmother and many other veterans of our
revolution. In doing so, may I give context to the reason why I want to do
that. Over the weekend at home, my grandmother asked me a question related
to the work we are doing in Parliament, because everyday when Parliament
goes live on television she always watches and listens to the debates in
the House.

Based on the observations that she made, she asked me who these people in
our Parliament are who keep on attacking the Freedom Charter? Who are these
people in our Parliament who keep on referring to our Freedom Charter as a
“freedom cheater”? Who are these people in our Parliament who keep on
referring to our Freedom Charter as a wishful-thinking document?

She asked me to convey her message to all those people who keep on
ridiculing the People’s Charter, that in the first place, it is as a result
of the Freedom Charter that today they are able to enjoy the freedom of
participating in the Budget Votes in a democratic Parliament. Secondly, it
is as a result of the Freedom Charter that today they enjoy a road
infrastructure that is capable of ensuring that our economy grows.

Thirdly, it is as a result of the Freedom Charter that today we have a
department that aims to establish a national transport system that enables
national, provincial and local government to develop an efficient and
affordable, fully integrated infrastructure, and services that best meet
the needs of transport users and promote economic and social development,
while being environmentally and economically sustainable.

It also strives to ensure that there is a sustainable movement of people
and goods, locally in the southern development community region and
internationally. And by so doing, it aids the participation in the socio-
economic activities, because that movement of people and goods is critical
to the growth and development of the economy and broadens access to the
markets.

My grandmother went further to say that as the ANC we must remind these
people that it is as a result of the Freedom Charter that today, after
inheriting an unstructured, unsafe taxi industry, the department is in the
process of ensuring that her grandchildren and great-grandchildren will
enjoy a transformed taxi industry in which our government under the
leadership of the Minister has invested a lot, particularly in passenger
and rail infrastructure, and appropriately targeting public transport
subsidies.
Our department has noted the low rate of investment in the transport
infrastructure, resulting in an unreliable rail network, and also resulting
in reliance by many exporters on more costly road freight and poor
conditions in the South African ports. As a result, a freight logistics
strategy has been drafted to inform the necessary investment in the
infrastructure, and to identify operational improvements to eliminate
bottlenecks in the freight logistics system.

The establishment of an independent Port Regulator is also expected to have
a positive impact on the efficiency of freight logistics. The department,
by continuing to work on integrating and improving the road networks, makes
sure it is well developed, maintained and safe. There is an increase in
funds for national roads infrastructure and road infrastructure co-
ordination.

Representatives of the three spheres of government will develop a road
infrastructure development plan through the co-ordinating body to ensure co-
ordination in the identification of road upgrading projects. The department
in partnership with provinces is revitalising a number of strategic rail
branch lines or lanes. In placing its priority on regulating safety and
security in the transport sector, priorities are safety in road transport
and traffic operations. Similar action has been taken to improve safety in
the rail, airport and maritime transport sectors.

Without losing sight of my grandmother’s advice, she also reminded me and
asked me to remind those who see the Freedom Charter as another wishful-
thinking document, that the department is also engaged in the process of
fighting poverty. The department by so doing is promoting infrastructure
investment in the transport sector in order to contribute towards job
creation and the use of labour-intensive construction methods.

This objective will be co-ordinated through the implementation of the road
infrastructure strategic framework. The national overload control strategy
and the rural development strategy furthermore broadens BEE strategies and
charters for eight of the transport sectors are being developed. Together
these objectives will contribute towards economic growth, job creation,
skills development and poverty alleviation.

Lest we forget, it is important to note some key areas that the department
is engaged in as part of the broad strategy of fighting poverty. There are
various road maintenance programmes in all provinces, and these programmes
are being used to contribute to the Expanded Public Works Programme. For
example, we have the Zenzele Road Maintenance Programme in the Western Cape
and the Zibambele Road Maintenance Programme in KwaZulu-Natal.

The Zenzele Road Maintenance Programme in the Western Cape is based on a
community-centred, public participation approach, and at the same time it
aims to create long-term jobs for community members, decrease unemployment
in the community, develop small businesses and uplift the community by
providing them with infrastructure. It will also improve the conditions of
existing road infrastructure by routine and periodic maintenance. They also
educate community members, transferring skills and providing training for
the community involved in the programme.

Like the Zenzele programme, the Zibambele Road Maintenance Programme in
KwaZulu-Natal also uses labour-intensive methods. While my grandmother was
engaging me on all these issues, I also took the liberty to inform her that
there are also some challenges that the department is faced with in the
process of ensuring that the Freedom Charter is a living document, and
which among other things, includes the filling of vacancies, recruitment
and the retaining of critical skills in the department.

The delays in the operation of the Road Traffic Management Corporation is
as a result of delays in the implementation of the administratively
adjudicated road traffic offences system, parity fines and driver retesting
after serious convictions. The ongoing financial problems facing the Road
Traffic Fund continue to be a problem to the department. There is also a
need to address the infrastructure and the output backlogs at ports and to
improve the management and the efficiency of ports. And lastly, I said to
her that the finalisation and the rolling out of our taxi recapitalisation
project will only be allowed in terms of the details the Minister has
announced.

She also reminded me of how as a young girl she participated together with
other veterans of our movement in the collection of ideas that the people
wanted to be captured in the Freedom Charter, and of the fact that she has
lived to see those views expressed and happening today.

One of the key areas that she identified was the fact that the budget
allocations and expenditures in the Department of Transport reflects a
steadily increasing trend for programmes and priorities placed on the
transport sector by the government. The development of and investment in
the transport infrastructure will further contribute towards economic
growth, skills development and poverty alleviation.

Hon Minister, my grandmother asked me to convey a message to you and your
department. She said that together with other senior citizens and veterans
of our movement they appreciate the sterling work that you are doing
together with your department in the process of restructuring the Road
Accident Fund. They recognise the Road Accident Fund as part of the
comprehensive social security system, as it assist those who are left
destitute by road accidents.

She says they have noted the serious challenges that the fund has
experienced over many years that in essence have the potential of
undermining the objectives that have been set out in the Act governing the
fund, which amongst other things include: high settlement costs, delays in
settlement, fraud and corruption in the fund, and high liabilities that
exceed its assets - which were recorded by the Auditor-General’s report to
be over R18 billion in the 2003-04 financial year. There is also the
operating loss of R3,1 billion for the year 2004. She said they welcomed
the efforts that are currently underway to address some of, if not all,
these challenges and issues facing the fund itself.

Key to these efforts are the appreciation of the setting up of the Road
Accident Fund Commission in 1999, which submitted its report in 2002, and
the other is the tabling in Parliament of the Road Accident Fund Amendment
Bill, which is currently being considered by the National Assembly’s
Portfolio Committee.

She asked me not to conclude my input without mentioning to our detractors
that South Africa is better than yesterday. She says I must say to the DA
that gone are the days when it was a nightmare to travel by train, harassed
by young, racist security guards or ticket inspectors that would not
respect a peaceful journey and where she was subjected to only travelling
in third-class coaches, because first and second-class were only meant for
white people.

She says that while they acknowledge the challenges that the country faces,
they note the progress made thus far, and particularly in transport,
because very soon she will be able to wake up in the morning to catch a
taxi, and not have to worry about carrying an extra blouse, because the
taxi that she will board will in actual fact tear the one that she has on.

Noting that I was driving back to work, she wished me a safe journey back
to Cape Town, and reminded me to do the following: to be responsible and
obey the rules of the road; and specifically to avoid drinking and driving,
speeding, illegal and unsafe overtaking across barrier lanes, and to ensure
that my vehicle was roadworthy.

Lastly, Chair, she was pleased when I called her this morning to inform her
that in actual fact the Select Committee on Public Services supports the
Budget Vote. Thank you very much. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and MECs present, a great
challenge facing the Minister and the department is the whole aspect of
road safety, and the unacceptably high incidence of road deaths. The
Department of Transport recently stated that half of South Africa’s 6
million drivers’ licences were fraudulent. This, in effect, means that 3
million persons are driving vehicles illegally on South Africa’s roads, or
that every second driver out there is not legitimate. This includes an
unknown number of people in charge of extremely dangerous, heavy vehicles.
No wonder there are so many accidents with their accompanying horrific
consequences, ranging from death and disability to financial hardship.

It was announced with great fanfare in 1998 that the new credit card
licence system was supposed to be foolproof and would eliminate most, if
not all, fraudulent licences. However, the exact opposite has happened, and
it would appear that most of the fraudulent licences have been issued by
traffic officials, or personnel employed by the department, who have been
bribed. The department has now had to raise some R50 million to investigate
every single licence through the Special Investigation Unit. This
corruption is indicative of the poor moral and ethical standards being
upheld by some in our country.

With this as a starting point, it is then not difficult to understand why
there are so many unroadworthy vehicles on our roads today. It is a figment
of the imagination to think that a motorist with a fake licence will bother
to maintain his vehicle in a roadworthy condition, let alone worry about
drinking and driving.

With so many corrupt officials, it just depends on which document has the
greatest value, a false ID, a passport or drivers’ licence – they are all
available at the right price.

South Africa has an unacceptably high accident rate and a culture of safe
driving must be entrenched through a combination of education, zero
tolerance and higher driver testing and enforcement standards. The false
drivers’ licences, of course, will also have an influence on banks and
insurance companies that could lay charges of fraud against such drivers
because of past claims paid out based on false licences.

The Road Accident Fund, RAF, which was racked with corruption itself to the
tune of R500 million a year, must also be adversely affected with a claims
backlog of some 347 000 cases - and continues to receive 160 000 new claims
every year. The fund also needs to be restructured and transformed, and the
DA trusts that the proposed overhaul by the Minister will have the desired
effect. A reduction in accidents will mean a reduction in claims and better
road safety.

Our national road network is also deteriorating fast. Some 745 million tons
of goods were imported or exported last year. The mining, manufacturing and
agricultural sectors accounted for the bulk of this. Total transport costs
were R135 billion. The biggest portion was spent on road haulage and only a
minimal amount was spent on rail transport.

The Free State, my home province, because of its central situation has all
the heavy vehicles passing through and the budget statement for 2005-06
states:
  The average condition of the road network in the Free State is
  deteriorating rapidly, and without drastic financial investment it will
  be difficult to reverse this trend. The percentage of poor and very poor
  paved roads has increased dramatically since 1991, from 25% to 67% in
  2001. The percentage decreased slightly to 63% in 2002. The main reason
  for this decrease is due to the 815 kilometres of road taken over by
  Sanral. The programme only receives approximately R366 million per annum,
  whilst the minimum needed to address the backlog over a period of 10
  years, is R2 billion per year.

Whilst the SA National Roads Agency Ltd, Sanral, with its limited resources
are doing a fantastic job on our national road network, its resources are
diminishing. Deferred maintenance on roads, due to budget constraints,
pushes the rehabilitation costs up, some say to 16 times higher than
routine maintenance.

The DA has always advocated, as the Minister would probably have heard in
the National Assembly, a dedicated road fund which would be funded from a
portion of the fuel levy, and this money should then be allocated to the
provinces on a proportional basis to be used solely for road maintenance; a
user-pay system.

The challenge is to bring down the cost of transporting goods by rail. The
transport infrastructure is critical to South Africa’s competitiveness. The
consequences for economic development, exports and job creation are
significant. Only by having a cost-effective, efficient and timely rail
service will the damage to our road infrastructure be reduced in the long
term, and have a significant impact on the accident rate. I thank you.

Mr M SKWATSHA (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, comrades, it
is a pleasure to be standing here today on 31 May, a day, very many years
ago, on which some tiny, racist minority in our country decided to declare
it a republic. Of course that was before the people had spoken and chosen
which days would be holidays. Today 31 May is a normal day, and we are
happy to be addressing this House and coming in support of the budget of
our national Minister today.

The national Minister in his budget speech announced that his department
would be focusing on seven priority areas, which include public transport,
freight, logistics, rural development and integration and safety and
security. I want to briefly address how my department has responded and
will continue to respond to each of these priorities in public transport.

In order to face the broader challenges within public transport on a
national level, two major projects stand out, namely, passenger rail
consolidation and the taxi recap programme. Rail transport in the Western
Cape and in the city of Cape Town has been experiencing a relative decline
in patronage over the last few years. Our department is working with
various stakeholders to ensure that rail infrastructure is improved to
allow for universal accessibility and increased levels of safety.

In the month that starts tomorrow, we will launch our public transport
implementation programme, which is a bold series of interdependent and
mutually reinforcing strategies and plans aimed at making public transport
more affordable to users; ensuring that public transport contributes to
iKapa Elihlumayo by reducing the cost of doing business; building social
capital and supporting sustainable development; paving the way for the
transition from the interim bus contract with Golden Arrow Bus Services to
tendered and/or negotiated contracts and preparing for holding World Cup
2010.

The different elements making up the public transport improvement programme
include the following: The restructuring of bus contracts to introduce
other operators into the subsidised system, which the Minister has so
eloquently spoken about and referred to here. Those others will include
minibus taxis and small bus operators. The reform of the subsidy system
will target the elderly, learners, persons with disabilities and the
unemployed; and allow for subsidisation of rural services; the integration
of all modes of transport are to provide a similar service, the reduction
of costs to be passed on users and improved efficiency.

The establishment of a transport authority to plan for and manage the
public transport system has a province-wide responsibility and must be
governed with representation from the department of transport, the
province, the city of Cape Town, other municipalities, organised labour,
civil society and business. Public transport infrastructure along key
mobility corridors must be upgraded, with increased attention to
nonmotorised transport and public transport facilities to promote service
integration.

The Public Transport Improvement Programme, PTIP, builds on work already
being undertaken in our department. Mobility strategies for the Klipfontein
corridor, for the Central Karoo corridor and the George mobility strategy
have already been launched. Mobility strategies for Mossel Bay and the West
Coast are to follow soon. The designs for dignified urban spaces and
nonmotorised transport infrastructure for the Klipfontein road mobility
strategy have been completed and are in the implementation phase.

The design of the road infrastructure and operation system will be
finalised and a phased implementation will take place. An amount of R40
million has been allocated for this project in this current financial year.
Public transport services for Klipfontein will be put out to tender before
the end of this calendar year.

I am pleased that the national department is going to present the rural
transport strategy framework for comment and implementation next month.
This will certainly assist in developing our mobility strategies outside
the Cape Town metropole. The Central Karoo strategy was launched in
February this year, and R3 million is being spent on pedestrian and cycle
paths along both sides of Mandlenkosi Road in Beaufort West.

The viability of multipurpose brokerage services, as well as the
infrastructure to support this initiative, is being investigated. A
preliminary design and costing of a scheduled subsidised public transport
system will be included in this strategy. This will support accessibility
and mobility for the outlying communities of Merweville and Murraysburg,
which are far removed from all the basic amenities.

The George mobility strategy was launched in August last year by the Deputy
President, and involves the upgrading of public transport corridors between
the communities of Thembalethu and Pacaltsdorp with downtown George, which
will also help in integrating our communities.

The detailed design of this project has been completed. An amount of R7
million has been allocated for the project in this financial year. Our
department has allocated a total of R58,7 million for mobility strategies
and nonmotorised transport infrastructure and R40,9 million for public
transport facilities within municipalities. The projects will be
implemented through the Expanded Public Works Programme in order to promote
skills development and job creation. Further funding has been made
available to assist the six district municipalities and the City of Cape
Town in the development of their public transport and integrated transport
plans.

Technical support and guidance is also provided when needed. The extreme
lack of resources in these municipalities is cause for concern and the
partnership with our sister department of local government and housing is
beginning to assist in addressing this situation.

As the taxi recap project has become a reality and the safety requirements
for the new vehicles are to be published as regulations next month, our
department has responded by taking the following actions: In October last
year, a special team was appointed to deal with the backlog of applications
for operating licences with the intention that by August 2005 the backlog
would have been cleared. Eighty per cent of existing permits have already
been converted to operating licences, and we intend to meet the national
deadline at the end of August in preparation for recap.

The Soccer World Cup 2010 is an important event, and we will require an
efficient public transport system. Upgraded minibus taxis, buses and rail
services will form the backbone of the Soccer World Cup spectator transport
and will create a lasting legacy of significant public transport
improvements.
The department will be partnering with the city of Cape Town to ensure that
such upgrades are undertaken to affect an integrated and efficient system.
One such element is the need to provide a link between the Cape Town CBD
and the airport. In furtherance of this, our department will be working
with the Department of Economic Development, the Airports Company of SA,
the SA Rail Commuter Corporation and the City of Cape Town to undertake a
complete feasibility study, which will include market research of the
customer base and their needs. The provision of a reliable and efficient
public transport service, especially for tourists, will help in ensuring
that Cape Town and the Western Cape is the lead tourist destination in
South Africa - we want to beat Gauteng and KZN in this regard! [Laughter.]

Once again I want to agree with the Minister when he quotes both MEC
Thibedi and JFK: “The economy does not build roads, but roads built the
economy”. This is very true and evident in the Western Cape. I can say with
pride that my department’s roads and infrastructure branch has spent its
budget in full, which means that R780 million was virtually pumped into our
economy. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N MACK: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs, hon members of the NCOP,
distinguished guests, comrades and friends, the late Dullah Omar, our
comrade upon whom the Order of Luthuli was bestowed when presenting his
Department of Transport business plan for the financial year 2002-03 said:

  Transport is a basic necessity in addressing poverty and development
  needs, particularly in the rural areas and the department will continue
  to be faced with the challenges of improving the quality of life of
  individuals and to contribute to sustainable growth of the economy.

The Minister of Transport, Minister Jeff Radebe, in his address to the
International Transport Convention 2005 in Limpopo province correctly and
without doubt said:

  Africa’s transport infrastructure is diverse and uneven in its spread and
  it is clear that there is some overlap in the manner in which transport
  infrastructure is dispersed and the manner in which electricity,
  sanitation, education and health facilities impact on our daily lives.

During November 2004 at the UITP Conference in Benoni the Director-General
of Transport also correctly and without doubt highlighted very important
aspects that we as the leaders of this country should be aware of and find
ways and means to address. He emphasised that the inequalities and
settlement patterns that apartheid policies brought about still loom large
and we are still paying for them and that the transport legacy of apartheid
is one of spatial dislocation.

The DA’s entire policies and thinking said to the entire world at the
recent Presidency Budget Vote debate that the Freedom Charter is not the
nation’s document. I therefore assume that the ideal that, “There shall be
houses, security and comfort” is not on the DA’s agenda. [Interjections.]
These unbelievable and inhumane statements of the DA are definitely not
welcome in the homes of the poorest of the poor who are the ones who should
be the priority sector of a community.

President Thabo Mbeki, in his reply to the Budget Vote debate, challenges
us as leaders of this country on the issue of unity in diversity. This
issue is in fact an issue that is not limited to race or culture, but an
issue that also reflects on our entire way of living, such as
transportation, housing, the economy, etc.

Let me say to the DA, and whoever does not believe in the Freedom Charter,
that there will never and never again be a first class, so-called whites
only, and a third class, so-called nonwhites only. Let me furthermore say
to the DA, and whoever does not accept the Freedom Charter, that there will
never again be a railway line that separates the so-called whites and the
so-called nonwhites.

With regard to road maintenance, approximately 1 350 km of national roads
are being upgraded and maintained. The Road Infrastructure Strategic
Framework is being developed by the Department of Transport and will give
effect to the national vision of road transport in South Africa.

In line with the resolution of the Growth and Development Summit held in
2003, government has embarked on a new initiative to integrate labour-
intensive road construction programmes. It is hoped that road maintenance
will contribute to government’s objectives of job creation and poverty
alleviation through the Expanded Public Works Programme.

Road traffic law enforcement on South Africa’s roads is not effective in
curbing the continuing, generally high level of lawlessness and increasing
number of road traffic crises resulting in fatalities and injuries. Road
accidents claim nearly 10 000 lives every year. These road accidents are
costly, not only in terms of lives, but also economically and socially.
There are a number of factors that contribute to an increase in the high
fatalities on the roads, these include drinking and driving, speeding,
illegal and unsafe overtaking and unroadworthy vehicles.

As a result government has adopted a number of measures aimed at improving
road safety. Road safety forms part of government’s objective to improve
safety on all modes of transport. The number of institutional mechanisms
that government has instituted to deal with road safety are: The
constitutional obligations in terms of schedules 4 and 5 of the
Constitution of South Africa that provides for national, provincial and
local government legislative competencies around functional area that
include road traffic management, the Arrive Alive Campaign and much more.

What does transport mean to the deep rural farmworkers in the deep rural
Karoo where white farmers take their Land Rovers and drive to town with the
farmworkers on the back of that bakkie? They take them to a certain shop
that they prefer, refusing us access to them.  When we attempt to talk to
these farmworkers they are herded off and you cannot speak them. Now farm
owners do not bring these people into town any more. They buy the
foodstuffs and take them to their farms where they have their own little
shops from which they sell the goods to these people at increased prices.

They don’t allow you on that farm, and they are not willing to bring our
people in for registration, ID documents and for births. But when elections
come they bring in the farmworkers, but they are herded like goats to vote
for a certain party. [Interjections.]

Surely this is a contravention of our Constitution, because this restricts
free movement and I think we need to challenge this. This is why we in the
Central Karoo thank our MEC because he has already started and has put much
of his energy into these matters. We need the national department and
Minister to support us, especially with this problem. I thank you.
[Applause]

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues and MECs . . .

. . .  openbare vervoer gaan nie net oor busse, treine en taxi’s nie.
Openbare vervoer word gedryf deur die nood van mense om na hul werk, skool,
’n hospitaal, kliniek, of êrens heen te gaan; en hulle is afhanklik
daarvan.

Weens die beleid van die vorige regering is die mense ver van hul werkplek,
sosiale plek of skool verwyder. Daarom is dit partykeer vir baie mense
onmoontlik, weens die hoë vervoerkoste in dorpe en in stede, om by hul
plekke uit te kom.

Op ’n ligter noot wil ek net vir die agb Tau sê, hy praat van sy ouma - ek
hoop as sy ouma ry kyk sy uit vir die DA-“spietkops”, want hulle is maar
baie “foolish”.

Dit is verblywend om te sien dat die departement, die Minister en die
provinsiale ministers alles in hul vermoë doen om ons vervoerstelsel op
datum te bring. Omdat Suid-Afrika nie net in Afrika kompeteer nie, maar
omdat Suid-Afrika ook internasionaal in die wêreld kompeteer, kry ons baie
meer mededing van die wêreld. Daarom is dié departement een van die
sleuteldepartemente in ons land, weens, soos ander sprekers gesê het,
werkskepping, armoede verligting en baie ander dinge.

Daarom wil ons ons dank en waardering uitspreek teenoor die Minister, sy
amptenary, en spesifiek vir mnr Lucky Montana wat altyd so vir hierdie
komitee, Minister, op ’n gereelde grondslag, kom verduidelik, én saam met
ons die pad stap om alles vir ons duidelik te maak.

Ook vir u en u departement wil ons sterkte toewens. Dis ’n harde pad,
Minister; Rome is nie in een dag gebou nie. Die DA dink dat Rome wel gebou
in een dag is. Ek wil hê hulle moet teruggaan na die geskiedenis en gaan
kyk. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[ ... public transport is not only about buses, trains and taxis. Public
transport is driven by the need of people to go to work, school, a
hospital, clinic or somewhere, and they are dependent on it.

Because of the policy of the previous government people are far from their
places of work, social places or schools. For this reason it is often
impossible for many people to reach their places because of the high cost
of transport in towns and cities.

In a lighter vein, I just want to say to the hon Tau, he talks about his
grandmother - I hope that when his grandmother is driving, she is on the
lookout for the DA “speedcops”, because they really are quite foolish.

It is heartening to see that the department, the Minister and the
provincial ministers are doing everything in their power to bring our
transport system up to date. Because South Africa does not compete in
Africa only, but also internationally, we get much more competition from
the outside world. For this reason this department is one of the key
departments in our country, because of job creation, poverty relief and
many other things, as other speakers have said.

For this reason we want to convey our thanks and appreciation to the
Minister, his officials, and in particular Mr Lucky Montana, who always
comes to explain things to this committee on a regular basis, Minister, and
travels the road with us to make everything clear to us.

We also want to wish you and your department everything of the best. It is
a hard road, Minister; Rome was not built in a day. The DA thinks that Rome
was in fact built in a day. I want them to go back and look at history.]

Rome wasn’t built in one day.

Jy kry nie ’n kitsbaba nie. Ek weet nie in watter wêreld hulle leef waar jy
kitsbabas kry nie. ’n Baba moet gebore word; hy moet leer kruip; hy moet
groei; hy moet leer loop, en dit is wat ons jong demokrasie besig is om te
doen. Ons jong demokrasie is in ’n baie ver gevorderde stadium. Ons jong
demokrasie is die toonaangewende demokrasie vir Afrika. En ek weet nie in
watter land ons agb Thetjeng bly nie, maar ek wil vir hom sê: Welkom in
Suid-Afrika waar dinge aan die gebeur is; welkom in Suid-Afrika waar die
regering werklik ’n verskil aan mense se lewens maak; waar die regering
werklik armoede wil beveg; waar die regering werklik vir ons mense wat
sonder werk sit, wil werk gee, kos op die tafel sit, en, soos die
slagspreuk lui, vir almal ’n beter lewe wil gee.

Daar’s ’n kontrak gesluit met die mense van Suid-Afrika; 70% van die
stemgeregtiges van Suid-Afrika het ’n kontrak met die regering gesluit, en
gesê: Ons soek ’n beter lewe, nie ’n alternatiewe regering soos die DA nie,
maar ’n beter lewe onder die huidige regering. Die NNP steun dié
Begrotingspos. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[One does not get an instant baby. I do not know in which world they are
living where one gets instant babies. A baby must be born; he must learn to
crawl; he must grow; he must learn to walk, and this is what our young
democracy is busy doing. Our young democracy is in a very advanced stage.
Our young democracy is the leading democracy for Africa. And I do not know
in which country our hon Thetjeng lives, but I want to say to him: Welcome
to South Africa where things are happening; welcome to South Africa where
the government actually makes a difference to people’s lives; where the
government really wants to fight poverty; where the government really wants
to give jobs to our people who are unemployed; wants to put food on the
table, and, as the saying goes, wants to give everyone a better life.

A contract has been concluded with the people of South Africa; 70% of those
who are enfranchised have concluded a contract with the government and
said: We are looking for a better life, not an alternative government like
the DA, but a better life under the present government. The NNP supports
this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Ngqongqoshe kazwelonke nongqongqoshe abakhona phakathi
kweNdlu, bozakwethu, ngisaphinda ngithi: unwele olude. [Mr M A MZIZI:
Minister and MECs present in this House as well as my colleagues, I want to
repeat: Long live!]

Chairperson, transport is a necessity for every person, which takes one
from point A to point B. Transport should conform to the requirements. It
is a known fact that a lot has been done regarding transport in the
country.

Ngeke sikuphikise lokho, kuningi kakhulu. Kodwa singasho singananazi ukuthi
izithuthi uhulumeni azinakile ngezihamba ngamasondo namafutha – nakhona
ezindaweni ezingamadolobha kuphela, nalapho kukhona imigwaqo khona.

Ngqongqoshe, ngakube lesi sabiwomali sizokwazi yini ukuhlinzekela nezindawo
lapho kungekho khona imigwaqo nezithuthi ezihamba ngamafutha? Ukuze wonke
umuntu ahlomule kulo mnotho waleli lizwe, bekungakuhle ukuba izinjomane
zisetshenziswe ukudonsa izinqola kulezo zindawo lapho kungekho khona
imigwaqo yetiyela.

Uma sibuka isabiwomali salo nyaka nonyaka ozayo, ukhona umbuzo othi,
“Ngakube sizokwazi ukuhlangabezana nezimo zonke ezibhekene nezokuthutha,
ngisho phela uhlelo lwe-recapitalisation”? Lolu hlelo lwe-recapitalisation
ngenye yemikhakha okungahle kusetshenziswe kuyo imali eningi uma wonke
umuntu onesithuthi esidala enikela ngaso. Ngqongqoshe, ngakube umnyango
wakho uzokwazi yini ukukufeza lokho na?

Lo mthombo wogobhoza njalo ukuze kwenele wonke umuntu waleli na? Ngisho
phela maqondana naleyo mali eyi-R50 000 ezonikezwa labo abazobe benikele
ngezithuthi. Ngakube isabiwomali sizokwazi yini ukubhekana naleso simo
ngoba wonke umuntu uzoletha isigodongonyana sakhe afike asilahle laphaya
bese ecosha lokho akucoshayo? I-IFP iyokushayela ihlombe uma uhulumeni
engake alubuyekeze lolu daba lwe-recapitalisation ukuze wonke umuntu
wakuleli abe sethubeni elilingana nelabanye. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[We cannot dispute that there are many issues. We can say without
hesitation that the government is concerned about vehicles using petrol and
oil in towns where there are roads.

Will the budget presented by the Minister be able to provide even places
without roads and transport? All people have to benefit from the economy of
this country. It will be advisable to use horse-drawn carts in places
without tarred roads.

The question might arise, when one looks at the budget for this year and
next year, whether it will be able to meet transportation needs. I am
referring to the recapitalisation programme. The recapitalisation programme
would require more money if everyone owning an old vehicle surrendered it.
Will your department, Minister, be in a position to pay that?

Would this amount remain available to everyone in this country? I am
referring to the R50 000 that would be given to those surrendering their
vehicles. Will this budget be able to meet these demands because everyone
would want to surrender their old vehicles and get something for them? The
IFP would welcome the government revisiting the recapitalisation process so
that everyone is on the same level as others.]

This issue is characterised by too many protests and violence in the taxi
industry in some provinces.

Akungabazeki lokho Ngqongqoshe ngoba uma sikhuluma nabantu emazingeni
aphansi, yima kungathi kuyantwela kubo. Yikhona bezwa ukuthi, hhayi bo,
udaba lwe-recapitalisation alusahlehli, seluyinkunzi ayihlehli, luya
phambili. Yilowo nalowo muntu useyaxhamazela ngoba sekuyabonakala ukuthi
isikhathi siyemuka, abantu abezukuba nazo izimoto.

Okunye futhi ukuthi namhlanje amasela antshontsha imoto manje ayifake ngale
kwamakhelwane, iphume seyingenye into, bakulayishe ngayo. Bantshontsha
ngisho ubisi etiyeni lomuntu, ujike ungaboni ukuthi itiye alisenalo ubisi.
[Uhleko.] I-IFP iyasixhasa nokho lesi sabiwomali. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[It is now dawning on many people at the lower levels, Minister, that when
we talk to them, they realise that the recapitalisation programme is here
to stay; there is no turning back. Everyone is in a hurry now as they
realise that time is against them. They will be without vehicles.

Theft of vehicles is another issue. Car thieves steal your car and take it
to your neighbour. When it comes out it is a completely new car and you
would get into it without noticing. They could steal milk from one’s tea
without one noticing that the tea is now without milk. [Laughter.] The IFP,
however, supports this budget.]

Mr S J MOHAI (Free State): Chairperson, hon Minister of Transport, Mr Jeff
Radebe, colleagues from other provinces, hon members and comrades, until
the vision of liberation of the Freedom Charter is fully attained, the work
of the freedom loving South Africans will continue unabated. We must
urgently and resolutely discharge our responsibilities in building a full-
fledged, nonracial, nonsexist, democratic, prosperous and egalitarian South
Africa as envisioned in the Freedom Charter.

The celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Freedom Charter this year is
therefore a momentous occasion. We therefore accordingly recommit ourselves
to the people’s contract to create work and fight poverty. The practical
steps that are being implemented in this first five years of the second
decade of freedom include growing the economy, sustainable livelihoods,
access to basic services, comprehensive social security and fighting crime
and corruption. The transport system we are building in South Africa has an
important role in growing and developing our economy in a manner that will
benefit the vast majority of our people. This noble exercise of building a
public transport system that is effective, accessible, and affordable
should therefore be located within the broad, national effort of realising
the vision of the Freedom Charter.

In welcoming and endorsing the transport Budget Vote as tabled by Minister
Radebe, we will take advantage of this platform and reflect on the work we
pursue and the challenges that confront us on this front in the Free State
province.

The development of an integrated and sustainable transport system and a
well-maintained road network is critical for our province, given its
geographic location at the centre of our country.

Three of the country’s national highways, that is, the N1, N2 and N3, which
pass through the Free State provide for strong spatial linkages with the
rest of South Africa. Some of the main railway lines linking the Eastern
and Western Cape and Gauteng provinces run through the Free State.

Given the rural set up of our province, we are paying strategic attention
to the whole question of rural transport. In this regard, a pre-study on
rural mobility will soon be completed. The study will give direction for
more intensified investigations and eventually implementation of measures
to improve mobility of rural areas that are currently not well served by
transport services.

We have completed planning and a conceptual design of a multimodal facility
to be situated in Bloemfontein. This project is planned to integrate the
buses, minibus taxis and long distance rail by means of a modern,
convenient interchange facility.

This facility will have a significant impact on the quality of public
transport services, and would assist with urban renewal of the area of
Bloemfontein. The estimated cost of the facility will be R50 million, and
various initiatives have been launched to endeavour to obtain the required
funding for the project to proceed.

A high-standard, intermodal facility is essential if passenger transport
services are to be improved. And it is also important to ensure that the
Free State province is able effectively to participate in the 2010 Soccer
World Cup.

Undoubtedly, the taxi recapitalisation process will be one of the major
activities for the department and the taxi industry. We must be steadfast
in working to realise the overall goal of the taxi recapitalisation process
as stated by the Minister, which is the replacement of the current ageing
fleet that constitutes the bulk of the taxi industry, with new vehicles
that are safe and reliable.

Through this process, we also must build the sustainability of the industry
both as a public service provider and a business, as well as ensuring its
formalisation and effective regulation.

The department in the province has started earnestly with the preparations
for the implementation plan for the recap process. Our starting point in
this resort was consultative meetings that were held with the provincial
taxi council, municipalities and other relevant stakeholders.

Unity and peace in the industry are the key principles. In pursuit of these
principles we have since embarked on a programme of amalgamating local
associations along the principle of one town, one association, one taxi
rank. We have also initiated a process of converting the taxi permits to
operator licences. The implementation of the route-based operator licences
will ensure that we accelerate service delivery even to the most remote
areas.

We are working very hard to conclude, in this financial year no later than
the coming December, the transformation of two main subsidised bus
companies in the province. These are the Maluti Bus Service based in the
Thabo Mufutsanyana District and the Interstate Bus Line based in the Motheo
District. This transformation will make provision for broad-based economic
inclusion in the contracts in order to encourage economic growth in the
transport industry.

With regard to traffic management, work has begun in earnest, to strengthen
education, communication and law enforcement both as independent and
interdependent components of our traffic management programme. We have
therefore started to implement a comprehensive plan that clearly
articulates the Arrive Alive Campaign as a constant, year-long campaign.

We are in the process of recruiting 180 traffic officers as part of
building our capacity and presence on our roads, so as to reduce accidents.
The backlogs of long waiting periods in our testing centres are going to be
drastically reduced by the end of July this year.

It is also pleasing to note that during the past festive season we
succeeded in reducing fatal accidents on our roads by 2,2% compared to the
previous year; notwithstanding the fact that the number of registered
vehicles increased by approximately 6%.

The state of the road networks in the province is generally in poor
condition and has deteriorated so much that many disadvantaged communities
lack the provision of adequate access to roads and internal connector
streets. We have huge backlogs with regards to maintenance and construction
of roads.

In this regard the department is currently developing a comprehensive
maintenance plan so that we can make more convincing and credible arguments
for increased funding for road maintenance and construction in the
forthcoming fiscal year.

Despite this situation, our own province has provided R289 million and R340
million from Sanral in our roads infrastructure, which should be seen as
useful strategic interventions in tackling the backlog and should always be
utilised optimally.

In this financial year, we will attempt to substantially increase our BEE
investment in roadworks and construction, broadly. A number of road
infrastructure projects will be designed for future construction, and some
road projects will be executed in this financial year and overlap into the
next one.

The initiatives of construction and maintenance of roads have begun to
embrace the Expanded Public Works Programme philosophy of labour-intensive,
SMME development and skills development. This is the trajectory we will
intensify in this financial year and beyond.

As a department, we are going to lead the promotion and, implementation of
the principle of corridor development and, where possible, we will ensure
the development of our main transport corridors in support of economic
growth. This we will do as part of implementing the recently launched
provincial growth and development strategy. We will work tirelessly to put
transport planning at the centre of our development programme. I thank you,
Chair.

Ms F H MATLANYANE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, comrades and
compatriots, allow me to inform you that we in the ANC support the
Minister’s Budget Vote.

The people of South Africa, when asked which party they would like to
govern the country, overwhelmingly said the ANC, because since 1994 the
department has been engaged in the difficult task of transforming and
trying to improve the living conditions of the people who are living in the
rural areas in our country.

Since its formation the ANC has been the champion of fighting for all the
people of South Africa to be equal. In South Africa transport is affected
by disparities arising from the previous patterns of spatial development;
where the poor, the unemployed and the vulnerable could not access it as
they travelled long distances in order to access service delivery, and to
participate in economic activities. This led to them having to dip deeply
into their pockets.

One of the national Department of Transport’s strategic objectives is to
restructure public transport subsidies to better target poorer communities,
and to align subsidised transport services to support municipal integrated
transport plans. This is in line with government’s commitment that
transport infrastructure is a critical need between the first and the
second economies. This will lead to the mobility of the poor and ensure
that they access opportunities created in the wider economy.

The department is currently involved in discussions with the bus industry,
organised labour and the provinces with the view to optimise the subsidy
allocated to the bus industry, to promote efficiency and facilitate the
implementation of broad-based Black Economic Empowerment.

The current bus contracts will be transformed into public transport
contracts in order to allow access by taxi industries to the funds
allocated for the provision of public transport. This process will see
subsidies being shifted towards the poorer households and regions of our
country.

A review and redesign of existing services provided by the bus industry
will take place. Bus services will be extended to some of the new areas of
our country for improved service delivery and integration of our public
transport modes. This will enable mobility for the poor so that they can
access opportunities created in the wider economy.

Public transport subsidy management receives the largest portion from the
allocation under Programme 6, with an increase of 12,6%. The bus industry
receives the largest portion of public transport subsidies, whereas the
taxi industry is the dominant mode of transport used by 68% of commuters.
This says that the current subsidy system is not aligned with the usage of
public transport by the majority of South Africans.

The government recognises that the taxi industry plays a strategic role in
the economy and in society. Until now, the taxi industry has remained self-
regulating. There are a number of reasons why government needs to formalise
and regulate the taxi industry in South Africa. Primary among these is the
need for safety and reliability in the industry.

The majority of commuters use taxis as their preferred mode of transport.
It is apparent that something has to be done to address the skewed
allocation of subsidies targeted at public transportation systems in South
Africa. This shows that there is a need to restructure the public transport
subsidies system, hon Minister.

The Taxi Recapitalisation Programme forms part of an initiative by the
government to formalise the minibus taxi industry. This project needs to be
seen within the context of an integrated, intermodal transport system that
would enhance customer’s convenience, service credibility and safety.

The government has committed itself to putting in place the necessary
infrastructure and proceeds with the roll-out of the taxi recapitalisation
programme in the second half of the 2005, as the Minister has indicated.
The department has also focused on developing the necessary mechanisms for
the scrapping of all old vehicles. It intends to put in place mechanisms
for physical scrapping allowances to operators in July 2005.

The implementation of the programme will be phased in over seven years, at
a total cost R7,7 billion. The 2005 budget allocation towards this is R250
million for 2005-06, and is expected to increase to R290 million in 2007-
08. The aim is to use a portion of funds allocated for 2005-06 towards the
final planning and systems development, whilst the rest will be used for a
scrapping allocation to taxi owners who scrap their own vehicles. The
recapitalisation is to be finalised by the country’s leading banks through
an initiative negotiated by Santaco, involving Absa, Nedbank, Standard Bank
and Wesbank.

The key objectives of the Taxi Recapitalisation Programme are: The
replacement of the current ageing fleet with new vehicles that are safe and
reliable, in the form of a once-off payment of R50 000 per scrapped vehicle
to a legal operator or registered minibus taxi. This is going to be rolled
out over five years to ensure affordability to the national fiscus. To
ensure sustainability of the taxi industry as a business, government is
going to introduce thresholds for seating capacities, which will be
informed by the needs of a particular route.

To formalise and effectively regulate the taxi industry, as opposed to the
current self-regulation by the industry, government will sustain the
formalisation and registration of the taxi industry across the province.
This indicates that as the ANC-led government we will do all in our power
to ensure that “all shall be free to travel without restrictions” - that is
a quote taken from the Freedom Charter; and that “all privately owned
passenger transport must be effectively regulated and controlled” – that is
a quote taken from the RDP document - to ensure that the lives of all the
people of South Africa are better. We, as the ANC, support the Budget Vote.
[Applause.]

Mr T MHLAHLO.(Eastern Cape): Hon Chair, Minister and members, I also stand
to report to this House that after the strategic session of the department,
we have been able to reposition ourselves in the Eastern Cape. The
department of transport in the province has been positioned as a central
force in the strategy to develop our growth and development for the
province.

Through its “Moving Back to Rail” concept, which has potential to ease our
public transport in this province, we have today been in a position to put
in place clear strategies for the realisation of rail, as well as public
transport. The executive council in the province has endorsed the Kei Rail
Development Corridor, which is viewed as a major contributor to the
realisation our economic strategy especially for the region of the former
Transkei. Kei Rail is an anchor project in this corridor. The project is
currently in Phase 3, which involves refurbishment of the existing railway
line and associated facilities.

Secondly, the construction of appropriate communication and train control
systems, as well as conducting surveys relating to travel demands,
estimation and preference of commuters is envisaged. The construction of a
shorter link road between Ugie and Langeni Forest near Mthatha to improve
accessibility of people, and products such as timber and agricultural
products, to markets for which this rail is going to be crucial in moving
these kinds of products is in the pipeline. These are some of the concrete
interventions we have actually made in our strategy concerning the Moving
Back to Rail policy.

An amount of R102 million has been spent on this project since its
inception. The department of transport in the province has budgeted R48
million for this financial year so that we can further propel our efforts
for the quicker realisation of this line.

The provincial government has awarded a tender to Arcus Gibb Consortium to
prepare an economic indaba to be held this year or early next year. This
indaba is going to be a platform where a number of investors will be able
to stand, because the rail corridor has become a strategic centre in both
our economic development plan.

To further enhance our strategy for restructuring the bus industry, as it
was indicated by the Minster, another critical element of our public
transport system is that we are in a process of establishing a single,
legal entity for all small bus operators in the area of Transkei in the
Eastern Cape. This is in line with the review of the entire public
transport subsidy policy which government is currently pursuing.

The process is on track and it is enjoying support from role-players, in
particular the bus operators. Some bus operators have already joined 120
candidates in our training programme which started recently, aimed at
empowering bus taxi owners with skills in business planning, financial
planning, as well as procedures and health and safety systems.

About 166 routes have already been identified in the former Transkei region
to be serviced by this single legal entity. A tender has been awarded to
Price Waterhouse Coopers to assist in the establishment and actual
consolidation of this entity. Soon we will sign a contract with a mentor
management agent and monitoring firm, because we want this new approach to
work and to be highly monitored in the province.
On Thursday this week the department of transport in the province will be
hosting a consultative meeting with about 300 bus operators to explain the
role of this new legal entity, so that we can all operate with the same
understanding, as we are getting ready to launch this new organisation.

With regard to the recapitalisation of the taxi industry, we will continue
with our capacity building programme for taxi drivers. More than 200
minibus taxi drivers, as well as owners and rank marshals have received
training on generic business administration, customer care and defensive
driving. The department is currently engaging all those who stand to gain
by the taxi recapitalisation project to assist in building the industry’s
capacity through training.

We have established the Operating Licence Board and it is presently
focusing on the whole conversion of permits as required by the taxi
recapitalisation project. We have made great strides with regard to the
improvement of usage of Bisho, as well as in particular the Mthatha
Airport.
Today the Mthatha Airport is fully functional and it is now complying with
Civil Aviation Authority safety standards. It has since actually seen a 24%
increase in its passenger flow. Plans are also in place to look into the
possibility of broadening the Mthatha Airport runway so that we can receive
bigger aircraft in the future.
The department is also in the process of restructuring the two airports in
terms of private-public partnership concepts, including the appointment of
a transactional advisor and a private operator or manager. All these
endeavours seek to make further, visible advances towards the
transformation of the transport sector in the province, the realisation of
the Reconstruction and Development Programme and meeting the targets of
Eastern Cape Growth and Development Plan.

In closing, I also want to say to hon Tau that the instructions that came
from his grandmother will be understood in the Eastern Cape, because those
instructions are emerging from the instructive policies of the Freedom
Charter. The Department of Transport, Cabinet has resolved, must become a
central point in our growth and development strategy. And currently, we are
preparing for an indaba conference, which is a wonderful opportunity, so
that those who could benefit from opportunities, which we have unlocked
through the Kei Corridor node, will then be able to come together and
actually start to realise that rail as an asset in that province. It is the
only available resource that we could use to generate and reposition
government’s growth and development strategy.
I therefore hope that the present members of this House - when the time
comes, we will invite them - can also participate in this conference,
because if we cannot innovative in using the inherited assets from the
previous government, then we shall have failed to fulfil the mandates which
the hon Tau’s grandmother articulated this morning.

So, with those few words I really want to say that the leadership that we
have been provided with and the repositioning of transport in this country,
has opened up great opportunities for us, and space to be creative in
putting together dreams so that those dreams can be realised in our
lifetime. With those few words, thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, Minister, colleagues and other guests that
are here today, let me just remind members that I have been talking about
the Freedom Charter. Perhaps they don’t know what it is. The Freedom
Charter is a manifesto of the ANC. South Africans will never celebrate it,
but they will celebrate the Constitution of this country. You have got full
rights to talk about your own manifestos, but Parliament and other
structures will celebrate the Constitution of this country. I just want to
make it very clear.

The 2010 Soccer World Cup provides the South Africans with big challenges
for ... [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on a point of order: It is not
allowed to mislead the House. If I remember well, at some point the
Minister in the Presidency the hon Essop Pahad was here. He offered through
Mr Freddy Adams, that Mr Thetjeng be given a copy of the document of the
Congress of the People, the Freedom Charter. So, that means that he is
still ignorant of the fact that that is not a document of the ANC, but that
it comes from the Congress of the People.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chair, the 2010 World Cup provides South Africans with big
challenges for our roads and transport system in general. Already there is
massive congestion on our roads, particularly in the metropolitan cities
such as Cape Town, Johannesburg, eThekwini, Port Elizabeth and many others.
You can see for yourselves how difficult it is to travel on the roads of
Cape Town during peak hours. Actually, the need for a place like Cape Town
to urgently consider its transport system to ferry commuters, particularly
workers, to their place of employment and their homes is more urgent than
ever before.

Our major commuter transport system is mainly limited to buses, rail, and
taxis; there are others, of course. There is a great need to diversify the
transport system to encompass new developments to relieve our already
overused roads. Our transport system is disjointed and needs to be
integrated. It should be made possible and easy for a commuter to purchase
a ticket for a train, and then be allowed to proceed to the bus and taxi
mode of transport using the same ticket.

This will cut down on time that the commuters have to spend on the road
doing absolutely nothing. This will put South Africa on a higher level in
terms of world competitiveness, and we will compare better with the rest of
the developing and developed world. We should not be caught napping in 2010
and beyond.

Thanks for bringing the Taxi Recapitalisation Programme back from the brink
of collapse, Minister. I hope and believe that profitable routes will be
encouraged for bigger vehicles, while struggling ones will be given as an
option for smaller but efficient vehicles. This will perhaps allow better
vehicles on our roads in some instances.

One wonders whether the criteria used to determine the roadworthiness of a
taxi is the same throughout the country. In most rural areas the state of
the taxis that transport commuters between places leaves much to be
desired. The worst ones are those that normally travel the bad gravel roads
of our rural areas. Owners sometimes argue that they cannot buy the best
cars to use on the worst roads. Maybe there is a need to ensure that the
state of the gravel roads is improved and developed on a continuous basis
to encourage operators and owners to purchase good vehicles. Some of these
vehicles are such that, on rainy days, commuters get wet; it is as if you
are outside, not inside a vehicle.

The rail system has collapsed and needs urgent revitalisation. I have just
heard that the department is in a process to put that in place. This has
meant that major transportation of goods has to be done via the road
network. Tracks and locomotives that are ageing need replacement to ensure
safety to avoid disasters such as those that happened previously in KwaZulu-
Natal and elsewhere.

Massive funding and investment is needed from Treasury to realise some of
the massive projects that are underway at present. History can be talked
about, but can never provide us with the solutions that we need presently.
Developmental plans that are achievable and safety conscious need to be put
in place; history can never give us the better things we need.

There are various modes of vehicles that transport food and other
commodities from one point to another within the borders of this country
and across our borders. The Department of Minerals and Energy is the one
that needs to ensure stabilisation of fuel prices. It has a direct link to
this department because fuel is used by various means of transport and,
yet, this department determines the prices. Food prices tend to go up when
fuel prices increase, but never go down when fuel prices decrease.

I hope that these two departments are in the same cluster so that the
Ministers can discuss this kind of problem. If not, they should find a way
to address this kind of situation. I am aware that the dollar price per
barrel normally determines the price, but I believe we can work out
something workable for our country.

Safety on the road is my great concern. Taxis are competing with us for a
120km/h speed limit on our roads, and it seems they continue unpunished.
Some deterrent should be put in place for those who continuously violate
the road users’ laws and regulations. Day in and day out, one hears of
horrible accidents involving taxis and buses. Bicycles and motorcycles need
to be considered as light modes of transport that do not have a negative
impact on our roads. Lift clubs should be encouraged to ensure that more
and more people club together for the purpose of travelling. Those that use
lift clubs, bicycles and motorcycles should be provided with incentives as
a form of encouragement.

South African Airways has been running at a loss and we hope that the newly
appointed CEO will come with the magic touch that will turn the entity
around. Provincial departments should be assisted to reduce the number of
gravel roads as they deter investors. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev E ADOLPH: Hon Chairperson and hon Minister, I believe that one of the
greatest challenges in your department is to provide affordable, efficient
and reliable public transport, especially to the poorest of the poor and
the vulnerable in the community. Here I am referring to our elderly people
in rural areas, school-going children and people with disabilities.

It is not merely a desire to have a smooth public transport system but it
is a desperate need for everyone who lives in South Africa, to quote the
Freedom Charter. There are major challenges. I travel for about one and
half hours from Goodwood to Cape Town, and I see single motorists
travelling to Cape Town on a daily basis. This is unacceptable; we need to
replace these single motorists with lift clubs and an efficient public
transport system.

We want to commend the department for the many achievements since 1994.
However, we are also mindful of problems, and challenge the department to
deal with the inadequate budget that they received to implement the mandate
set out by the President in his 2005 state of the nation address.

It is sad to know that the general transport infrastructure is not up to
standard. In the most rural areas, particularly, it is not accessible to
motorists and nonmotorised transport. The conditions and quality of our
major roads leave much to be desired. We actually need a traffic miracle to
change our transport system in South Africa. We need massive action
especially from the public and private sector to invest in our roads to
make the economy grow in our country.

One of the other challenges that we welcome is in the taxi industry, which
will be regulated very soon. We hope that that will decrease the
unnecessary deaths of people on the roads which cost the taxpayers millions
of rands. One death is one too many on our roads. We are also mindful and
concerned about the many bus accidents. We need to review our public
subsidy system and see how efficiently we can transport our people.

The maintenance of our deteriorating public roads is a priority, and we
will have to ensure the safety of our public by reducing accidents and
death on our roads.

We also welcome your integrated approach for the local transportation
boards and integrated transport plans to work as a collective effort. We
need the public and private sector to assist government to work together as
a team; otherwise, government cannot do it alone. We support your budget
speech and we want to assure you that alone you can’t do it; we need every
South African to invest to make public transport efficient and affordable.

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs, hon members, as
we celebrated Africa Day this past week, it is only fitting that we put our
dreams into action and really do what is necessary to heal this continent.

What better place to start than right here in our own country and, in
particular, with the transport system. The legacy of apartheid left this
country with a dual transport infrastructure network.

The first system is characterised by its first-world standards and consists
of a well-developed network of surface roads, rail and air links, mainly
serving the previously white urban areas and apartheid system. This system
is currently driven by the first economy.

The second system is characterised by its inferior, Bantustan standards and
consists mainly of an undeveloped transport network of low quality service,
gravel roads and rail links, with very few or no air links. This system is
concentrated mostly around the previous homelands and in the townships.
This is still evident today, and was experienced first-hand by members of
this House during the recent “taking Parliament to the People Programme in
KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga.

For some of the DA members, however, these trips were obviously the first
excursions into the remote rural areas and townships of this country. They
probably have only the programme to thank for this experience, since one
doubts whether they ever would’ve travelled in these areas by choice.
[Interjections.] One wonders further how they hope ever to understand the
fundamental issues of our people if they are not in touch with the real
South Africa. [Interjections.]
The question is therefore, where does the DA hope to derive its political
wisdom, guidance and leadership from as they do not have a history to fall
back on, nor do they have a mandate from the majority of the people of this
country, and they are totally out of touch with the realities of this
country. The only conclusion one could come to is that it is true that the
DA is a party without political direction and relevance. This was again
displayed today by the hon Worth and Thetjeng’s participation in this
debate.

As a member of the ANC I have the privilege and honour to have the Freedom
Charter as my manifesto and the legacy of great leaders from whom I can tap
wisdom, political understanding and even hon Tau’s grandmother!
[Interjections.]

At this point it is only proper to spend a few moments on honouring one of
the greatest names, namely, Chief Albert Luthuli. He was a profound
thinker, a man of powerful logic and a keen sense of justice, a man of
lofty principles, a bold and courageous fighter, a statesman, and a true
African nationalist. As a practising Christian, Chief Luthuli generally and
sincerely believed in the wellbeing, happiness and dignity of all human
beings.

Transport’s role in socio-economic development cannot be underestimated.
Therefore, transport policies must be geared towards the eradication of
structural, economic and socioeconomic imbalances, which have caused the
dual transport network, as well underdevelopment within our country.

We therefore support the department’s strategy and policies, which are
aimed at contributing towards the eradication of poverty and improving the
standards of life of all its citizens. It is therefore pleasing to see the
focus this year’s budget has placed on the public transport sector.
However, a matter of concern is the maintenance of the gravel road network
in the Free State and other provinces, which consists of about 22 100 km of
gravel secondary and about 22 000 km of tertiary gravel roads.

Due to a lack of funds, however, no maintenance work is currently conducted
on tertiary roads, except where the road users are willing to bear the
costs. This has created a situation where transport companies are unwilling
to collect crops from farms, or alternatively are charging additional
levies to cover maintenance costs on their fleets. This places an
additional cost burden on the already beleaguered agricultural sector.

Taking into consideration that agriculture is still a major source of the
Free State provincial gross regional product, GRP, and that most of these
roads service the agricultural sector, including the rural areas, I would
like to request National Treasury to consider providing more funds for
maintenance of tertiary roads.

For the 2002-03 financial year nearly 38 000 trucks were weighed, as a
result of which 12 681 freight operators were prosecuted for being
overloaded. This represents a staggering 33% of all vehicles weighed in the
Free State. This irresponsible behaviour by heavy truck owners is
unacceptable, and government should consider additional measures to
penalise repeat offenders while withdrawing or suspending licences.

A further measure could be regulations that will prohibit the transport of
some hazardous cargoes per road, which will result in a increase in rail
traffic. Accidents involving trucks with hazardous cargo have become a
regular occurrence on our national roads. The cost of these accidents are
not only counted by the lives lost unnecessarily, but also millions of
rands of damage to infrastructure.

The current budget will significantly boost the public transport sector
with increased investment in public transport infrastructure. The two major
projects are the passenger-rail consolidation and the taxi recap
programmes. Other key strategic transport areas that will receive attention
are compliance with international conventions and the freight-corridor
programme, which will improve South Africa’s link with the rest of Africa.

South Africa is inextricably linked to Africa and the sub-Sahara region and
has therefore an important role to play in the economic rebirth of Africa,
as well as the promotion of intra-African trade investment. Therefore,
South Africa’s integration into Africa and the global economy necessitates
the development of a freight-logistics system that can offer the same or
better levels of service at a lower cost. The recent bilateral air service
agreement between South Africa and Libya is but one example. I thank you.
[Laughter.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOKUTHUTHA: Sihlalo, angithathe leli thuba ukuthi ngibonge
wonke amalunga aleli Phalamende elihloniphekile ngezinkulumo azenzile
namhlanje nokuthi asisekele lesi sabiwomali soMnyango wezokuthutha.

Mangithathe leli thuba futhi ukuthi ngibonge zonke izikhulu zasePhalamende
ikakhulukazi lezo ezikuleli komidi okuyilona eliphethe lezi zindaba
zokuthutha, ikakhulukazi uSihlalo uMnu uTau nabo bonke asebenza nabo
ngokuzwana nangendlela abasebenzisana ngayo nezikhulu zoMnyango wami
wezokuThutha. Mangibonge futhi kakhulu amazwi akhayo kagogo wakhe. Kodwa
ngesikhathi ekhuluma ngike ngacabanga ukuthi mhlawumbe lo gogo wakhe
sengathi uwuyena futhi. Ngiyethemba-ke ukuthi nathi la ePhalamende sizoba
nogogo abaningi abakhuluma njengogogo kaTau.

Mangibonge kakhulu futhi izikhulu zoMnyango wezokuThutha, usigaxamabhande
woMnyango uNkk Mpumi Mpofu kanye nabo bonke abasebenzisana kakhulu
nePhalamende. Mangibonge futhi nomsebenzi abawenzayo owenza ukuthi umbutho
wethu lona wezothutho uhambe kahle la eNingizimu Afrika.

Kunamazwi amaningi ashiwo lana. Ngizothanda nje ukuthi ngithi qaphu qaphu
ngoba okuningi sengingabe ngiphinda okushiwo ngamaqabane nazo zonke
izinhlangano ezikhona la ePhalamende.

Okubalulekile wudaba lwemigwaqo. Le ndaba le ibaluleke kakhulu nathi
sikwezothutho uma sibheka nje isabelo sezimali salo Mnyango siyabona ukuthi
siyakhula yonke iminyaka. Uma ubheka nje kulolu hlaka lwamaphakathi
nesikhathi lwezimali ezisetshenziswe, i-Medium Term Expenditure Framework,
uzothola ukuthi kule minyaka emithathu ezayo isabelo sezimali esikhishelwa
imigwaqo sizokwanda kakhulu kube ngamaphesenti afika kwi-11, okukhombisa
ngokusobala ukuthi uhulumeni nawo usuyabona ukuthi le ndaba yemigwaqo
ibalulekile ngoba uma imigwaqo ingekho kahle umnotho wezwe ngeke ukwazi
ukuthi usisebenzise kahle.

Njengoba abaningi sebechazile kuleli Phalamende ukuthi umgwaqo phela yiyona
nkosi yaseNingizimu Afrika uma uqhathaniswa nojantshi wezitimela. Uma
ubheka nje ukuthuthwa kwezimpahla, amaphesenti angaphezulu kwama-80 alezo
zimpahla zithuthwa ngemigwaqo kanti u-20% uhamba ngololiwe kaSpoornet. Leyo
nto ichaza ukuthi  kufanele kube khona imikhankaso eminingi esizoyenza
ukuthi kube khona inguquko,  ukuthi ezinye izimpahla zisuke emgwaqeni ziye
kujantshi kaloliwe. Njengoba amanye amaqabane esechazile, imigwaqo
iyonakala uma sithutha mhlawumbe nje amalahle noma sithutha izinto
ezikwaziyo ukuthi zibulale.

Kuyasijabulisa thina ukuthi kuhulumeni ikakhulukazi ngakwezokwaba,
iNational Treasury iyachaza ukuthi le ndaba izoyeseka uma kuyiwa phambili.

Abanye bachazile bathi bafuna kube khona isizumbulu semali nje okuzoba
yisabelo semigwaqo. Ngiyathanda ukuthi babheke ikakhulukazi ikhomishani
yezimali, iFinancial and Fiscal Commission ngoba iyaluchaza lolu daba
kabanzana uma amalungu ePhalamende engalifunda leli bhuku, angakwazi ukuthi
achazeleke kahle ukuthi le nto ihamba kanjani ngoba ayilula njengoba
siyibeka. Kodwa-ke nathi siyathanda ukuthi isabelo sethu sezimali siqhubeke
ikakhulukazi kwezemigwaqo ngoba siyazi ukuthi leyo ngqalasizinda yemigwaqo
ibaluleke kangakanani kwezomnotho eNingizimu Afrika.

Elinye iphuzu elibekwe yizikhulumi yile ndaba yokuthi kukhona amalayisense
okushayela okuthiwa awumshoshaphansi, abanye abathi umkokotelo. Hhayi
bakwethu, asichaze phela ningabe senethuka kakhulu ukuthi ngisho
namalayisense enu la ePhalamende nawo ayimikokotelo.

Into ekade ichazwa, kuthiwa kukhona amaphutha enzekayo uma abantu
beyohlolwa mhlawumbe uma uyohlolwa amehlo ukuthi umuntu usakwazi yini
ukubona uma eshayela ikakhulukazi ebusuku, kwenzeke ngesinye isikhathi
ukuthi kungabi umuntu oqeqeshiwe ukuthi ahlole amehlo. Yizinto ezifana
nalezo-ke esizichazayo. Yikho-ke uMnyango wami wahamba wayolanda bona
ofezela ukuthi ke balubhekisise kahle lolu daba ukuze sikwazi ukuthi sibe
neqiniso ukuthi wonke la malayisense ahamba ngendlela ekahle na.

Kukhona abanye abachaze ngale ndaba esiyibiza ngokuthi yi-LDV, ngamanye
amazwi lawa mabhaki okuthuthwa ngawo abantu ezindaweni zasemakhaya. Leyo
nto yinto engeyinhle kodwa kufuneka sazi ukuthi ezindaweni zasemakhaya
izimoto azikho kahle.

Kuzofuneka ukuthi siyichaze kahle le ndaba ukuthi sike saba komunye
umhlangano e-Addis Abbaba lapho kwakuhlangene khona ongqongqoshe
bezokuthutha bayo yonke i-Afrika AU lapho esavumelana khona ukuthi le nto
esiyibiza ngesilungu ngokuthi yi-Millenium Development Goals kuzofanele
nathi sihambe phezu kwayo kwezokuthutha. Lolo hlelo luchaza izinto eziningi
okuyizinqumo ezathathwa lapho. Lezo zinqumo zizonikezwa abaphathi bethu,
abaholi, omongameli bonke base-Afrika ngenyanga ezayo ukuze uma sebeya lena
eNhlanganweni yeziZwe ngoSeptemba kube khona into ebambekayo esisho ngayo
thina base Afrika ukuthi sihamba kanjani. Okunye kwako kuchaza ukuthi wonke
amaphandle noma amavileji, kuzofanele ukuthi abe nemigwaqo engu-2km lapho
abantu behlala khona.

Okunye okudinga ngikubeke ukuze abantu bazi, ukuthi kukhona imikhankaso
esiyenzayo njengohulumeni sihlangene nabanye ohulumeni base-Afrika ukuze
ezokuthutha nazo zibe wungqoshishilizi ekuzabalazeleni ukuthi kube khona
impilo engcono e-Afrika.

Ozakwethu basezifundazweni, ondunankulu, bachazile konke ukuthi izinto
zihamba kanjani nangemikhanakaso. Angifuni ukuthi ngiphinde amazwi abo
ngaphandle kokuthi ngichaze nokuthi ngibonge umfowethu uMhlahlwa le eKoloni
ngithi hhayi nathi singuMnyango kazwelonke sihamba naye kule-Economic
Indaba akhuluma ngayo, ngoba indaba yojantshi ibalulekile eNingizimu
Afrika. Kodwa-ke mfowethu wazi ukuthi njengoba usuke wazimisela nokuthi
isikhumulo sezindiza eMtata sengathi sesimi kahle, sizokwazi ukuthi
silandele sibone ukuthi simi kahle ngempela na ukuze nayo ibe kahle ibe
ngaphansi kwalolu hlelo esilubiza nge-National Aviation Safety and Security
Plan.

Okokugcina okufanele ngikuchaze ukuthi okukade kushiwo umfowethu lona
uThetjeng, angazi ukuthi sibizwa kanjani ngesiZulu isibongo salo mfowethu,
kodwa kufanele azi kahle ukuthi le nhlangano yabantu eyayingo-1955
kwakungeyona inhlangano ka-ANC yize noma u-ANC wayengungqaphambili
eshushumbisa abantu ukuthi beze lapha eKliptown, kwakungusomqulu wesizwe
lowo, i-Freedom Charter. U-ANC waze wayivuma leyo-Freedom Charter ngo-1956
emuva konyaka kube khona i-Congress of the people. Ngiyathanda ukuthi
ngimnikeze ithuba umfowethu ukuthi uma usuphelile lo mhlangano ngingambiza
ngimchazele kabanzi ngoSomqulu weNkululeko. [Ihlombe.] Uma ethanda futhi
ngingamnikeza namadokodo esizobe siwaxoxa singuKhongolose kwi-National
General Council kule nyanga ezoqala ukuze uma ekhuluma ngoJulayi noma ngo-
Agasti akhulume ngento ayaziyo ezokwazi ukuthi yakhe. [Uhleko.]

Kodwa-ke ngiyabonga Mphathisihlalo ukuthi ninginikeze ithuba ukuthi lo
mhlangano uhambe kahle. Nami ngithi halala ngevoti yezokuthutha. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, let me take this opportunity to
thank members of this august House for the speeches they made here today
and also for saying, “Let’s support this Budget Vote of the Department of
Transport”.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank all those members in this House
who are on the transport committee, more especially the Chairperson, Mr
Tau, and all those he works with in such an understanding way. I also
convey thanks for the way they interact with the officials of my
department, the Department of Transport. Let me also thank his granny for
her constructive words. But for a minute there, when he spoke I thought he
himself was the granny that he was talking about! I therefore trust that we
will have many grannies who talk like Tau’s.

Let me also thank the officials from the Department of Transport, the
Director-General of the department, Ms Mpumi Mpofu, and all those who work
closely with Parliament. Let me also thank them for a job well done, which
ensures the smooth running of the transport industry here in South Africa.

A lot has been said here. I would just like to highlight a few points,
because if I say too much it would be tantamount to repeating what the
comrades and other political parties present here in Parliament have
already said.

Of importance is the issue of roads. This issue is important to such an
extent that even we in the Department of Transport, when we look at the
budget allocation of this department, notice that it is growing every year.
If you look at the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, you will see that in
the next three years the allocation for road improvement will increase by
11%, which indicates clearly that the government realises the question of
roads is very important; because if there are no roads the economy of the
country cannot thrive.

It is as members have explained in this House - roads lead the pack in
South Africa when compared to railway lines. If you look at the
transportation of goods, more than 80% of goods are freighted by road and
only 20% by railway line, or Spoornet. This means that there is a need for
many campaigns to be held to facilitate change, as most goods should move
away from the roads to the railway lines. As many comrades have explained,
the roads are damaged if we transport things like coal, or things capable
of damaging the road.
It makes us happy that the government, especially the National Treasury,
says that it will support this initiative if it goes forward.

Some members have said here that they wished that an allocation could be
made mainly for the construction of roads. I would like to ask those
members to read the Financial and Fiscal Commission’s booklet, because it
talks about this and it will be easy for members to understand how these
things are done, because it is not as simple as it sounds. But on the other
hand we would also like to have a better share of the budget allocation for
the construction of roads, because we all know that the road infrastructure
is very important in the economy of South Africa.

Another point touched on by the speakers was the issue of fraudulent
driving licenses, which some call “sham”. Dear people, do not despair and
even think that even your licences, as you are sitting here in Parliament,
are also bogus.

This has always been explained as being typical human errors, just like
when someone is to be examined to determine whether he or she can see when
he or she is driving at night, and at times it happens that the person who
tests the eyes is not trained to do that. It is a typical thing like this
that we are explaining. It was against this background that my department
asked the Scorpions to look into this matter so as to be sure that every
thing that has to do with licences is legal.

There are those here who spoke about the LDVs, in other words, the bakkies
that are used in rural areas to transport the community. This is not a good
thing at all, but we also should realise that there are no cars in the
rural areas.

We need to explain this by saying that we had a meeting at Addis Ababa,
where all the Ministers of transport of the whole African Union, AU, agreed
that the Millennium Development Goals should also be followed by the
transport industry. This project clarifies many things, which arise from
the decisions that were made there. These decisions will be passed on to
our bosses, leaders, and all African presidents next month so that when
they go to the United Nations in September they have something tangible in
their possession that stipulates our position as Africa. One of the
decisions was that people from rural areas or villages should have a road
at least 2km from where they reside.

The other thing that I need to say so that people can know, is that there
are campaigns that we as the government, in conjunction with other African
governments, are undertaking so that the transport industry can also play a
leading role in making better the lives of the people in Africa.

My colleagues from the provinces, the Premiers, have explained how things
are going as far as the campaigns are concerned. I do not want to repeat
what has already been said, except to thank Mr Mhlahlwa in the Cape and say
that we as department are with him in the economic indaba that he has
spoken about, because the question of railway lines is important in South
Africa. But, my brother, you should know that as you have already
spearheaded that and even seen to it that the Mthatha Airport is up to
standard. We will then follow suit and see to it that the airport is
incorporated under the National Aviation Safety and Security Plan.

The last thing that I have to explain is what was said by my brother
Thetjeng, I don’t know how his surname is pronounced in isiZulu, but he
should, however, know that the Congress of the People, which was held in
1955, was not a meeting of the ANC, even though the ANC was the leading
organisation pushing people to go to Kliptown, but what emanated from it
was a people’s document, the Freedom Charter. The ANC only accepted the
Freedom Charter in 1956, a year after the Congress of the People. I would
like to give my brother a chance after the adjournment; I can call him and
explain the Freedom Charter to him in detail. [Applause.] If he likes, I
can also give him the agenda of what we, as the ANC, will be discussing at
the national General Council next month so that when he speaks of July and
August, he speaks constructively about something that he knows. [Laughter.]

However, I thank you, Chairperson, for giving me this chance to experience
the smooth running of this meeting. I also say want to give a thumbs up to
the Transport Budget Vote. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, on your behalf I would like to
take this opportunity to thank the Minister for presenting the Transport
Budget Policy Vote before this House this afternoon. I also wish to extend
a word of thanks to the MECs who deemed it fit to participate in this
important debate.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:00.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                            THURSDAY, 26 MAY 2005





TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of senior
         magistrate Mr. S E Tebe.

      (b)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of magistrate
         Mr. L D Monageng.


                             FRIDAY, 27 MAY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Withdrawal of Bills

      On 26 May 2005 the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
    withdrew the following Bill:
      (i)   Marine Living Resources Amendment Bill [B 16 – 2005] (National
Assembly – sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      Government Notice No 365 published in Government Gazette No 27487
    dated 14 April 2005: Framework for Conditional Grants to Provinces in
    terms of Division of Revenue Act, 2005 (Act No 1 of 2005).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Government Notice No R.1342 published in Government Gazette No
         26994 dated 12 November 2004: National Gambling Regulations in
         terms of section 87 read with Item 8 of the Schedule to the
         National Gambling Act, 2004 (Act No 7 of 2004).

      (b)   Government Notice No R.1311 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Standards Matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      (c)   Government Notice No R.1315 published in Government Gazette No
         26962 dated 12 November 2004: Standards Matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      (d)   Government Notice No R.1397 published in Government Gazette No
         27038 dated 3 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (e)   Government Notice No R.1398 published in Government Gazette No
         27038 dated 3 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (f)   Government Notice No R.1399 published in Government Gazette No
         27038 dated 3 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (g)   Government Notice No R.1441 published in Government Gazette No
         27097 dated 17 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (h)   Government Notice No R.1442 published in Government Gazette No
         27097 dated 17 December 2004: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP):
         Notice in terms of section 12G(16) d of the Income Tax Act, 1962
         (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (i)   Proclamation No R.2 published in Government Gazette No 27157
         dated 14 January 2005: Transfer of the administration of the Co-
         operatives Act, 1981 (Act No 91 of 1981), from the Minister of
         Agriculture to the Minister of Trade and Industry in terms of the
         Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of
         1996).

      (j)   Government Notice No R.133 published in Government Gazette No
         27269 dated 18 February 2005: National Measuring Standards in terms
         of the Measuring Units and National Measuring Standards Act, 1973
         (Act No 76 of 1973).

      (k)   Government Notice No R.134 published in Government Gazette No
         27269 dated 18 February 2005: Regulations relating to the payment
         of levy and the issues of sales permits with regard to compulsory
         specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act
         No 29 of 1993).

      (l)   Government Notice No R.140 published in Government Gazette No
         27269 dated 18 February 2005: Regulations relating to the payment
         of levy and the issues of sales permits with regard to compulsory
         specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act
         No 29 of 1993).

       m) Government Notice No R.168 published in Government Gazette No
          27269 dated 4 March 2005: Standards Matters in terms of the
          Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the National
     Ports Bill [B 5D-2003] (National Assembly– sec 75), dated 25 May 2005:

      The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
        subject of the National Ports Bill [B5D-2003] (National Assembly-
        sec 75), referred to it, reports the Bill with a proposed
        amendment, as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 78

      1. On page 30, line 21, to omit “of the nature of the intended
        action”.


                             MONDAY, 30 MAY 2005


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 30 May 2005 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


            (i)   Prevention of Illegal Eviction from and Unlawful
              Occupation of Land Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2005] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)


            (ii)  Re-determination of the Boundaries of Cross-Boundary
              Municipalities Bill [B 12 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
              75)



            (iii)South African Sports Commission Act Repeal Bill [B 13 –
               2005] (National Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted

     (1)    The Minister of Finance


            i) uMthetho woKwabiwa kweziMali zoMbuso [UM 8 – 2005] (National
               Assembly – sec 76)


         This is the official translation into isiZulu of the Division of
         Revenue Bill [B 8 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 76).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

      Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Restitution of
     Land Rights for 2004-2005 [RP 49-2005].


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Public Hearings on
     the Division of Revenue Bill from 2-7 March 2005:

      The Select Committee on Finance, having held public hearings on the
     Division of Revenue Bill [B8B – 2005] from 02 to 07 March 2005, reports
     as follows:

1.    Executive Summary

      The report details the hearings convened by the Select Committee on
     Finance on the Division of Revenue Bill [B8B-2005] from 2-7 March 2005.

      The Committee commenced the hearings with a briefing by the National
     Treasury, the Finance and Fiscal Commission (FFC) and the South African
     Local Government Association (SALGA). Sessions were subsequently held
     with various national Departments. The presentations of both the
     National Treasury and the FFC followed a similar sequence, dealing with
     the Provincial Equitable Share System, the Local Government Equitable
     Share System, and then the intergovernmental fiscal system.

2.    Introduction

      The Division of Revenue Bill was tabled simultaneously with the
     Budget speech and other key budget documents on 23 February 2005.  This
     was in accordance with Section 214 of the Constitution, which requires
     that Government ensure a transparent and equitable system to divide
     nationally raised revenue between the three spheres of Government. In
     addition, Section 10(5) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act
     gives effect to the Constitution with regard to consultation processes.
     The Division of Revenue Bill enables Provinces and Municipalities to
     budget for their allocations, determining how their share of nationally
     raised revenue will be used to give expression to their priorities.

      The total national budget for 2005-06 amounts to R417,8 billion, from
     which National Government is allocated R273,5 billion, provinces R134,7
     billion and local government R9,6 billion.  Furthermore, in the 2005-6
     financial year the equitable share allocated to provinces and
     Municipalities are R134,7 billion and R10,6 billion respectively.

      The Bill allocates R10,6 billion to provinces and R5,4 billion to
     Municipalities in 2005-06 to fund infrastructure and hospital services.
     The provincial and municipal infrastructure grants also support
     expanded public works programmes. Other grants include specific purpose
     conditional and other grants to provinces and local government, for
     example, the three conditional grants for HIV and AIDS programmes, in
     health, education and social development.

3.    Layout of the Division of Revenue Bill

3.1   Provinces

     There have been significant changes in the provincial fiscal framework,
     which inform the 2005 MTEF. These are:


    • The conditional grant framework has been revised to take into account
      the social security grant function that moved to the national sphere
      of Government from 1 April 2005.

    • A new conditional grant has been introduced to fund the
      recapitalisation of further education and training colleges.

    • The housing conditional grant has been adjusted to take into account
      the new housing policy.

    • A broad overview of the Provincial budget framework over the 2005 MTEF
      indicates the following facts:

    • R22,3 billion is added over the baseline for social security grants
      over the next three years.

    • R6,9 billion is set aside over the next three years to implement pay
      progression in education in line with Government’s strategy to improve
      remuneration packages of educators, attract and retain management
      skills in schools and accelerate the delivery of quality mathematics
      and science education.
    • R2 billion is added to the housing subsidy programme over the next
      three years to support the implementation of the new housing delivery
      strategy.

    • R1 billion is invested in the recapitalisation programme for Further
      Education and Training (FET), specifically targeting the
      rehabilitation of infrastructure, improved governance and
      administration, and greater curriculum flexibility.

    • R1 billion is added to the provincial infrastructure grant over the
      MTEF to speed up delivery of social and economic infrastructure.  This
      addition brings results in total allocations for the provincial
      infrastructure grant of R13,2 billion over the next three years.

    • R540 million is added to the National Tertiary Services grant
      administered by the national Department of Health. Health conditional
      grants are currently being reviewed to increase their efficacy and the
      results of this review will inform their configuration from the 2006
      Budget.

FFC’s inputs on the Provincial Framework

    • The FFC reiterated its previous recommendation that the provinces need
      to augment provincially raised revenues through the implementation of
      Section 228 of the Constitution and take advantage of the provisions
      of the Provincial Tax Regulation Process Act, which government seems
      to agree with.  The reduction of economic activity weighting may
      represent an indirect incentive for provinces to increase own revenue.

    • The FFC agrees with the removal of the backlogs component in favour of
      a conditional Provincial Infrastructure Grant.

    • The FFC views the issue of poverty targeting in a holistic manner and
      therefore suggests that further work, including a detailed assessment
      of all transfers in the system is required in order to determine the
      appropriate trade-off between poverty and economic activity. This
      would be in line with the criteria in S 214 (2) (a)-(j) of the
      Constitution.

    • The FFC supports the expansion of the PES formula to incorporate (ECD)
      Grade R and the equal weighting of school age population and actual
      enrolment.

    • The FFC agrees with Government’s concerns with data constraints with
      respect to the health care component, but also emphasises the need for
      the Department of Health to prioritise the collection of the relevant
      data.

    • The FFC highlighted that it is important for government to provide
      clarity on the basket of services that provinces are expected to
      provide and the appropriate funding mechanism.

    • The FFC proposed that Government utilise the FFC capital grant scheme
      model for the equitable allocation of infrastructure grants to
      provinces. Provinces will qualify based on the state of their capital
      stock for a backlog and a maintenance pool of funds. While the
      backlogs component is conditional, provinces have the flexibility to
      choose their priority sectors.

    • The FFC will engage with government in assessing the availability of
      sector specific data so as to target sectoral infrastructure backlogs.

3.2   Local Government

    • Municipalities will receive an additional R5,4 billion over the MTEF,
      which will mainly be targeted towards the provision and expansion of
      free basic services, as well as job creation through investment in
      labour based infrastructure programmes. In total, R31,5 billion over
      the 2005 MTEF is made available for water, electricity, refuse removal
      and sanitation though the unconditional local government equitable
      share.

    • Funding for free basic services is directed through the local
      government equitable share, which increases from R9,6 billion in 2005-
      06 to R11,4 billion in 2007-08. This unconditional equitable share
      component grows to 56 per cent of national transfers to local
      government in 2005-06.

      The Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) is the key instrument to
     support the infrastructure budgets of municipalities, to support the
     extension of services to poor households, maintain and upgrade
     municipal infrastructure, and promote urban renewal and rural
     development.  The MIG total R21,6 billion over the next three years,
     reflecting an additional R1,7 billion. This includes a ring-fenced
     allocation of R1,2 billion for the eradication of the bucket system.

FFC’s view on the Local Government framework

    • The FFC supports the Government’s endorsement of a components-based
      approach rather than the ad hoc use of funding windows, which has
      characterised the development of the LES formula.

    • The FFC supports Government’s inclusion of more direct revenue raising
      capacity component in the revised LES formula. The Commission has
      noted the problems associated with measurement and accepts the interim
      proxy measure introduced by National Treasury. The Commission will
      continue with its work on the identification of appropriate measures
      for revenue raising capacity.

    • The Commission will also continue with its ongoing work of researching
      the costs of a basket of municipal services. This exercise would be
      enriched if government can define the list of the basic services that
      all municipalities are expected to deliver.

      Review of Intergovernmental Fiscal System

      The 2005 Division of Revenue Bill introduces new provisions to
     improve intergovernmental co-ordination and performance, by:

    (a)     Enabling Ministers with concurrent functions to make
        recommendations on improving service delivery.4


    (b)     Improving governance over the administration of social grants.5


    (c)     Strengthening the provisions on withholding, stopping and re-
        allocation of funds.6


       d) Ensuring that conditional grants are spent in line with their
          purpose, and preventing fiscal dumping when there is underspending
          on such grants.7


    (e)     Improving planning and monitoring of infrastructure grants.8


All the above provisions were approved and supported by the FFC.

4.    National Treasury Briefing

      National Treasury addressed the Committee on the Division of Revenue
     Bill and the new formula that was being used to determine the equitable
     share for provinces.

      The Treasury indicated that while the Budget Council considered
     provincial proposals, the Budget Forum considered the local government
     proposals.  The Treasury detailed the consultation process to the
     Committee.

      The Treasury started its presentation by indicating that the Division
     of Revenue Bill was a legal document arising from Section 214 of the
     Constitution, and that a new formula has now been introduced to
     determine the division of revenue. The new formula arose from the
     recommendations of the FFC, which had been necessitated by changes in
     the socioeconomic demographics of the country over the last few years.
     The FFC advocated changes to the weightings of the formula.

The following FFC recommendations were implemented:

    • The Early Childhood Development grant is now being included in the
      equitable share formula. The FFC also advocates a regular revision of
      weights in order to ensure that they take into account the shift of
      the social security grant function and all other components that have
      shifted.

    • The school age cohort component has been eliminated to determine the
      equitable share. Enrolment data obtained from schools was not reliable
      and therefore the enrolment and school age cohort was given an equal
      weighting.


    • Considerable reduction of the economic activity component due to the
      fact that it tends to offset the redistributive element in the current
      poverty formula.

    • Although Treasury concurs that it would be ideal for cost disabilities
      to be taken into account to ensure equity and efficiency, this is
      difficult to implement as cost disabilities differ in each province.
      The approach has the same challenges related to the costed-norms
      approach.

    • Treasury also provided the structure of the review of the conditional
      grants transfer system. The presentation focused specifically on the
      supplementary January 2005 proposals on the social grant shift to
      National Government and the Capital Grants model.

      Concerns raised by the Committee

      The Committee raised the following concerns:

    • Whether the removal of certain components of the formula, such as the
      school age cohort component, would impact on service delivery, and
      whether these will be replaced.


    • Whether the transfer of allocations meant that funds would be taken
      away from a province that might be in dire need but could not utilise
      the funds to a better-off province that could utilise them.

    • Capacity concerns around the transfer of the housing function from
      provinces to local government.

    • With respect to the revenue raising capacity component in the formula
      the Committee enquired how the potential revenue would be determined
      and by whom.

    • The Committee requested clarity on the RSC levies that Municipalities
      raised, as well as the question of research around the devolution of
      powers with respect to housing. The Committee enquired how the poverty
      component was determined since some provinces such as Gauteng, was
      regarded as a rich province, yet it had the most informal settlements.

    • The transfer of funds from one region to another has to be a
      transparent one, and the guidelines for these transfers have to be
      clear.

    • Municipalities have raised several concerns regarding the transfer of
      the water function to them, particularly around the lack of capacity
      and a dilapidated water system.

    • The Committee had reservations around the fact that national
      departments determine conditional grants. A recommendation was made
      for the FFC to assist national departments to determine a better
      formula for disbursing these funds.

    • The Committee was concerned that if some Municipalities were to
      receive housing accreditation, there would be a migration of people
      from those who did not have accreditation to those who did. This also
      put the burden on Municipalities, whereas the issue that must be dealt
      with is the lack of capacity and underspending of provinces.

      To the above concerns raised by the Committee, Treasury responded as
     follows:

      The National Treasury pointed out that it has been standard practice
     to shift allocations in cases of underspending. In order to prevent
     underspending it is now common practice, particularly with donor funds,
     that a project management team is sent to assist the province that was
     underperforming. In addition, provincial departments are also required
     to provide monthly and quarterly reports. In some cases there was no
     other choice but to re-allocate funds.

      Both the Committee and the Treasury noted the possibility that this
     could potentially create the situation where “reports are glorified in
     order to avoid losing funds”. Treasury relies on managers to act
     responsibly as the system would foster possibilities for improvement.
     However, there needs to be tangible information that can be compared
     with the financial information. Furthermore, in order to ensure
     transparency, a short memorandum detailing the purpose of the transfer
     would be provided. Treasury indicated that this would be difficult to
     implement.

      The FFC agreed with the National Treasury in this regard, and pointed
     out that any imbalance which occurred should be corrected in the
     following financial year.

      SALGA indicated that there was a need for a turnaround strategy to
     assist provinces that were struggling so that they could provide the
     resources needed in a shorter time.

      Treasury indicated that the concern that provinces were getting less
     because of the new formula was unfounded, and that there had actually
     been a steady increase in the percentage that provinces were getting.

      The accreditation of Municipalities arose from the Housing Act and
     the Division of Revenue Bill only seeks to accelerate the process. The
     service was transferred to Municipalities because they provide the
     services as well. However, capacity is a major concern.

      The poverty component is difficult to measure and if the number of
     informal settlements was used, it would not be accurate. Income per
     household was used as a measure and this is more accurate. Even though
     Gauteng has more informal settlements, income is higher than in other
     provinces. Referring to the money allocated per household, Treasury
     indicated that the money was given to supply infrastructure and not
     services. There was no sense in giving money for services when the
     infrastructure was not present. Having the FFC assist the departments
     is a possibility that is still being considered.

      Treasury indicated that it had conducted the revenue raising
     correction for Municipalities. Treasury had decided on a non-arbitrary
     approach, which ensures that the parameters and weights could not be
     imposed on an ad hoc basis and would therefore not be open to
     manipulation by Municipalities.

      Treasury indicated that it was working at finding alternate ways to
     deal with RSC levies, which would include either a tax or grant.

      Regarding the water-operating subsidy, Treasury indicated that this
     was a Cabinet decision and was also a bilateral contract process that
     had to be followed. Municipalities had to enter into a contract and
     national government would abide by its responsibilities until the grant
     was phased out in 2011 or 2012.

      The Treasury indicated that the allocation for the removal of the
     bucket system was not based on a formula, but rather in response to a
     need. There are capacity problems in this area as well.

      Treasury referred to the fluctuations in the figures in the Bill and
     indicated that these are due to a new model coming into force in 2007-
     08. The aim of the new model is to serve as an incentive to
     Municipalities to provide services to the poor so that their share
     could increase.

5.    Briefing by Financial and Fiscal Commission

      FFC’s submission was based on the annual commentary it has made on
     the Division of Revenue Bill, which in turn derived from its
     constitutional and legislative mandate (section 214(1) of the
     Constitution) and is given effect in the Intergovernmental Fiscal
     Relations Act of 1998. The FFC requires consultation between the
     Commission and the Minister of Finance 14 days prior to the
     introduction of the Bill.

      The FFC evaluates its criteria against Section 214 (a)-(j) of the
     Constitution and the progressive realisation of constitutionally
     mandated basic services. Until 2005, the constitutionally mandated
     basic social services (CMBS) of social assistance and welfare,
     education, health care and food adequacy have been the functional
     responsibilities of provincial governments, with the exception of food
     programmes, that have been funded through the unconditional Provincial
     Equitable Share grant. Social assistance grants are due to be
     transferred to a National Agency. A conditional grant, which is ring-
     fenced for this function, will be used as an interim funding mechanism
     until this National Social Security Agency is established.



Social Development


      The financing of welfare services was highlighted with a view that
     there is a need to respond more directly on defining a basket of
     services.


Education


      The main change to the education component is the adjustment of the
     learner to school going age children, and the inclusion of early
     childhood development (ECD).


Health Care


      Spending on primary (clinics) and secondary (hospitals) health care
     averaged 2% between 1996 and 2001 and has accelerated to an average 4%
     per annum since then. Spending on hospitals has lagged behind that of
     primary health care provision in clinics.


Food Adequacy


      The Child Nutrition Grant has identified a target population of 4,58
     million poor children. Less than 1% of provincial budgets are set aside
     for food adequacy programs. However, 4% real growth in these programmes
     was projected for the 2004 medium-term budget cycle. The impact of this
     programme on the nutritional status of children has not been measured
     yet.

Performance in the Provision of Basic Infrastructure Services

      Household infrastructure services that may be constitutionally
     mandated as basic include housing, land and water. Sanitation, waste
     disposal and electricity might be implied through the environmental
     health mandate. Transport services enable access to other basic
     services and hence serve a complementary role in the provision of other
     services. Municipalities are the primary delivery agents and several
     cross-municipal public entities are involved. Most capital funding is
     through special purpose conditional grants or utility fees.


Housing


      The delivery rate of housing over the past decade has exceeded the
     rate of household formation. On average, approximately 161 400 housing
     opportunities have been delivered annually with a peak in financial
     year (FY) 1997 of 296 000. The national housing department has set a
     delivery goal of 338 000 houses per annum.

      The value of the housing capital subsidy did not keep pace with
     inflation until FY 2001 and household income brackets have not changed
     since 1995. The housing spend has decelerated since FY 2001 and is
     projected to continue declining over the 2004 medium-term. The
     operational implications of the housing capital expenditure are passed
     onto municipalities


Water


      Between 1996 and 2001, the proportion of households with reticulated
     access to water increased from 60% to 62%. The current norm is 50
     litres per person per day within 200 metres of the dwelling. Full
     access to water services is targeted for 2008.

      Since FY 2001, Municipalities have increased their capital spending
     but reduced their operational spending whilst the regional Water Boards
     have reduced their capital spending and increased their operational
     spending in real terms on the provision of water.


Sanitation and Waste Disposal


      The proportion of households with water-borne sewerage or VIP toilets
     increased from 50% to 55% between 1996 and 2001, whilst the proportion
     receiving municipal waste disposal services increased from 53% to 57%.
     Coverage improvement in the metropolitan areas was less substantial.
     This could be as a result of rapid urban migration of the poor. Full
     access to adequate sanitation is targeted for 2010.


Electricity


      Coverage rates for connections to the national or municipal grid
     increased from 57% of households to 70% between 1996 and 2001.
     Government has targeted full coverage by 2012.

      Regional Electricity Distributors (REDs) are being operationalised
     from 2005. The distribution of electricity surpluses and the
     implications of that for municipal billing systems are being addressed.


Transport


      In FY 2003, provincial governments undertook 57%, Municipalities 30%
     and national government 13% of road construction and maintenance
     spending. Between FY 2000 and FY 2004, provincial spending on roads
     increased by 11% per annum in real terms whilst spending on bus, taxi
     and train subsidies increased by 6,5%.

Components of the Formula

      Components of the Formula were reviewed against:

      1.    Set policy objectives, norms and standards.
      2.    Improvement of equity in access to basic services.
      3.    Efficiency in utilising public resources.

The Economic Activity Component

With regard to the economic activity component, the FFC highlighted that:

    • Public infrastructure tends to be pressurised in areas of high
      economic activity.
    • The FFC needs more clarity on the choice of the weight  used, as it is
      not clear how the weight was arrived at.
    • In addition, there is a trade-off between this component and the
      poverty component.

The Poverty Component and Targeting

      The new formula includes an introduction of a 3% poverty component.
     A proper definition of what the poverty component seeks to achieve is
     needed, as well as an empirically tested method used to determine
     relative weight.

The Services Components

      This component considers the socio-economic status for different
     beneficiary groupings.  The FFC aims to conduct a review of all
     transfers aimed at targeting poverty.  Political imperatives and
     government priorities have to be considered in this regard.

Removal of the Backlogs Component

      The FFC proposed the creation of a separate conditional grant to deal
     with infrastructure. The Government has addressed this and has
     introduced the grant.

The Local Equitable Share

Cost Disabilities

      The Government and the FFC agree that different types of delivery
     methods for basic services should depend on the appropriateness and
     cost of technology. Geographic and population density considerations
     require different technologies for the delivery of similar basic
     services.

Revenue Raising Capacity and Spill-over Components

      Government supports the FFC proposal for the need to incorporate a
     revenue-raising component. In addition, further work will be carried
     out with respect to design and definition of the spill over component.


Measuring Basic Municipal Service Expenditure Needs


      The Government should define a basket of basic municipal services. It
     is also important to protect the Local Equitable Share from being ceded
     by Municipalities.
      All in all the Government agrees with the FFC regarding the structure
     of the formula and the components that should either be deleted or
     reviewed in the formula.

6.    South African Local Government Association (SALGA) Briefing

SALGA's briefing focused on three key points:

   1. Predictability.
   2. Simplicity and transparency.
   3. Cost of service.

SALGA noted that the eradication of multiple grants has led to the
introduction of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG), but
contended that the Bill would reintroduce multiple grants.

Furthermore, SALGA is of the view that easily collected forms of
revenue should replace Regional Services Council (RSC) levies.

      SALGA proposed that in future, when new information that affected the
     allocation of the equitable share was obtained, the same year
     allocation should be guaranteed. The amount by which the local
     government equitable share increased would be distributed only to those
     Municipalities negatively affected by the new information.

      The objective of establishing the MIG was to drop all the different
     grants targeting local government. The Division of Revenue Bill would
     see the reintroduction of the different grants. SALGA requested
     National Treasury to create conditions that would promote simplicity
     and transparency for eligible Municipalities to access the MIG.

      The revised average cost of service for serviced areas had been
     acknowledged and that of nonserviced areas had the full support of
     SALGA. It was noted that the "one size fits all" approach did not work,
     and the government should consider the introduction of different
     average service costs for Municipalities with relatively comparable
     cost of services to different categories of costs would be a more
     flexible option. The transfer of equitable municipal costs should be
     done timeously to complement basic cash management requirements in
     Municipalities. This would eliminate the problems emanating from late
     payments of service providers such as penalties.

      Finally, SALGA suggested a new source of revenue or tax should be
     introduced as a substitute for the Regional Services Council levies
     (RSC), but it should be easily collectable.

Discussions

      The Committee observed that National Treasury was entitled to
     withhold funds to truant Municipalities. Oversight visits had revealed
     that some provincial officials would sometimes urge the NCOP to
     intervene in troubled Municipalities. On closer inspection, the NCOP
     Members would discover that it was actually provinces that had not been
     playing their role. They had been supporting the Municipalities while
     those problems were being encountered. He therefore urged the NCOP to
     play the role of a regulator when dealing with such matters. The
     Committee also suggested that the Committee should call an “Indaba”,
     which would involve the Department of Provincial and Local Government
     (DPLG).

      All stakeholders should participate in the process of the division of
     revenue. The Committee asked to what extent SALGA had been involved in
     drafting the Division of Revenue Bill.

      It noted that DPLG and SALGA should capacitate Municipalities. In
     addition, there should be a consistent manner of engaging all the
     stakeholders

Responses

      SALGA replied that RSC levies had been going to Metropolitan Councils
     only. Therefore SALGA was in favour of the abolition of these levies.

      SALGA's involvement in the drafting of the budget was in the Budget
     Forum, in which it raised everything that related to revenue. Another
     forum at which SALGA had been participating was the extended Cabinet
     meeting. At both of those forums submissions were made, but the
     outcomes were totally different.

      The current Act provided for the withholding of the equitable share,
     and the withholding was supposed to happen in three phases. That would
     mean a gradual tightening of the screws in relation to which steps the
     Municipalities had to take before the transfers could be made. For an
     example, when Municipalities had not submitted the required financial
     statements. The Constitution provided for funds to be withheld when
     there was a consistent failure to account. In instances where
     Municipalities had explained why they had not met Treasury standards,
     they received funding immediately. Regarding conditional grants, it was
     the transferring official who withheld the funds because those
     conditions had not been met.

7.    Inputs of Departments/Sectors on the Division of Revenue Bill

7.1   Department of Public Works (DPW) briefing

      The Department reported that the Provinces operate the Expanded
     Public Works Programme (EPWP) with funding provided by National
     Treasury, through the equitable share, on fulfilment of certain
     conditions. The role of the DPW is to ensure that EPWP tender and
     design guidelines are used on all relevant projects. Special emphasis
     is placed on projects utilising labour intensive methods. It was
     emphasised that quality and cost effectiveness are important aspects of
     all EPWP projects.

      The total targeted expenditure on EPWP projects is R15 billion, which
     is to be divided between Provinces and Municipalities. The number of
     jobs created is expected to reach 750 000. To date 130 000 jobs have
     been created and with further acceleration, a target of 300 000 jobs
     per year is expected.

      The labour intensive (LI) contractor learnership programme

      These two-year learnerships aim to develop 500 sustainable
     contractors and 1 000 site supervisors with the participation of
     Municipalities and 30 Provincial Departments. As part of the
     learnership 1 500 projects to a value of R1,5 billion will be
     implemented, employing 100 000 people.  The Department of Labour has
     committed to providing opportunities for those who had completed the LI
     programmes.

      The duration of employment differed from project to project,
     depending on the nature of the project. The length of training would
     also differ but all courses were integrated with the National
     Qualifications Framework (NQF), all qualifications were transferable
     and links would be developed with a variety of other programmes. The
     building industry had undertaken to try to recruit learners from the
     programmes and would also provide information on how to access
     opportunities.

      The DPW was aware of the possibility of job displacement when
     designing the EPWP. However, the infrastructure sector had been
     identified as a growing area over the next ten years and therefore a
     conscious decision had been taken to target that sector. In this way
     fewer machine-intensive contractors were likely to be displaced.

      Committee Concerns

      The Committee was concerned about how effective the DPW’s monitoring
     system was as there were reports of delays in the roll out of projects.
     In particular, the capacity to do effective monitoring was probed.

      The Committee enquired whether there is sufficient integration and
     interaction between National and Provincial Departments.

      The Department acknowledged that it was aware of delays and problems
     around quality. The service delivery programme aimed to improve all
     systems by April 2005. It was also acknowledged that DPW does not have
     the capacity to monitor every project. However, it was DPW’s role to
     monitor the total programme, and the role of the Provinces to monitor
     and report on the individual projects. It was emphasised that DPW
     monitored whether the projects were labour-intensive, but the hands-on
     monitoring of the project remained with the province. Accounting
     Officers in the provinces would retain their accountability on the
     individual projects. Selected projects would be evaluated by DPW on an
     annual basis. The EPWP does not allocate funds to specific projects but
     rather tries to influence Municipal and provincial spending so that it
     resulted in job creation and training. The Accounting Officers of
     provinces are responsible for the actual allocation and spending of
     funds.

      It was noted that a decision had been taken that Municipalities
     should report on their infrastructure grants only to the Department of
     Provincial and Local Government and copies of such reports would be
     made available to DPW.

      The Department of Health reported that the previous day’s hearings
     had revealed problems with DPW’s progress on hospital building. In
     KwaZulu-Natal contract management problems had created delays of ten
     months, and in Limpopo there were a tender that had closed in August
     2004 but no contracts had yet been awarded.

      The Department pointed out that provincial infrastructure projects
     would not necessarily fall under DPW if they were outside the EPWP.
     Provincial DPWs were independent of the national Department because
     they were the responsibility of provinces. However, DPW had been
     working with Treasury to develop infrastructure programmes to address
     problems that had arisen through planning and budgetary constraints.
     The Infrastructure Delivery Improvement Projects, piloted in thirteen
     provincial departments, aims to improve systems and develop capacity to
     plan and develop infrastructure projects.

      In addition, the national Department was participating in an
     infrastructure improvement programme that was attempting to address
     these problems.

      The Department noted that the national Department was not tasked with
     delivery on education, roads, health and agriculture, and that
     allocations were only given to it in respect of buildings or works for
     the SAPS, Defence Force, Correctional Services and Justice. All others
     were the responsibility of provinces, because of the functional
     divisions set out in the Constitution.

      In response to questions about the responsibility for the provision
     of roads, the Department responded that the national DPW had no control
     over roads, but in some Provinces, roads were grouped together with the
     Provincial DPW. In these cases, the roads function would fall under the
     national Department of Transport.

      The Department of Transport reported that problems with respect to
     the provision of roads had been identified. A road co-ordination body,
     comprising the national Department of Transport, all nine provinces,
     and Metros had been established. This would consider road development
     and planning, including the road classification system, with a view to
     integrating the roads network and establishing which body was
     responsible for maintenance of every stretch of road. Overloading was a
     major challenge and the plans hoped to achieve sustainability in
     construction and maintenance of all roads. Mechanisms are also now in
     place at provincial level to ensure better co-ordination and
     integration.

      The Committee questioned how compliance with EPWP Guidelines was
     enforced.

      The Department responded that there had been a lack of understanding
     as to how the EPWP should be implemented as it differed substantially
     from former projects that used normal budgets to carry out programmes.
     However, DPW had put together a team to make presentations, attend
     meetings and assist Provinces and Municipalities to understand the
     programme, and targeted municipal officials to receive training.

      The tender guidelines contained an explanation of how the guidelines
     should be implemented, how training should be accessed and what
     Municipalities should do to implement the projects. There was ongoing
     discussion with provincial Departments and Municipalities, and the
     Government Communications and Information Service and the Business
     Trust would also be involved in media briefings to increase awareness.

      It was noted that previous presentations had pointed to capacity
     problems within Municipalities and the Committee therefore asked
     whether the national DPW had budgeted for sufficient capacity at a
     local government level to ensure delivery.

      The Department reported that the national DPW were ready to deliver
     on the projects and that training programmes had trained municipal
     officials in proper development and implementation.

7.2   Department of Water Affairs and Forestry briefing

      The vision of the Department is "to work together, ensuring some
     (water), for all, forever". The Department was of the view that DORA is
     a challenge for co-operative government and service delivery.

      An amount of R138,7 million had been budgeted for implementation of
     water services projects, which would complete efforts started under the
     Water Supply and Sanitation Programme. The Water Services Operating and
     Transfer Subsidy had been budgeted at R934,4 million. DWAF schemes were
     to be transferred to Municipalities. The current budget was intended
     for operation and refurbishment. The hand-over had been extended to 31
     March 2005; 84 schemes, with a total value of R1 225 million, had been
     transferred to date. The receiving institution, in order to receive
     transfer, should have the necessary capacity for implementation of the
     conditional grant.

      The Department noted that special arrangements were necessary for
     Municipalities with weak administrative and technical capacity. From
     2008/09 grants would be incorporated into the equitable share.

      Drought relief had received an allocation of R202,5 million, of which
     R149,8 million had been expended. Hence, there would be a rollover.

Free basic water

      The provision of free basic water is made possible through the
     Equitable Share in rural areas, and cross-subsidies in Metro
     Municipalities. The equitable share provides incentives for more
     funding if Municipalities have provided better access.

      The Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) replaced the DWAF capital
     programme, and water and sanitation accounted for 72% of this grant in
     2005, and 53% in the future. R200 million had been earmarked for bucket
     eradication in 2005, increasing in future years, and DWAF would support
     Municipalities in planning, implementation and monitoring.

      The grant would be managed through the Department of Provincial and
     Local Government (DPLG), but DWAF would continue to monitor and support
     service provision, and assist with standards.

      The Department gave details of the bucket eradication programme, and
     the Special Municipal Infrastructure Fund (SMIF), which is currently
     capped at 2,3% instead of the required 4%. DWAF will still engage with
     National Treasury and DPLG regarding allocations.

      The Department focused specifically on Clause 9 of Dora, which
     regulates the funding of public entities, such as water boards. Clarity
     is still required on the roles of sector departments.

      Treasury clarified that the intention of Clause 9 was to force
     Municipalities and public entities to reach agreement since public
     entities provided retail services and Municipalities could not control
     tariffs and service levels.

      Committee Concerns

      The Committee was concerned that the rollover of funds for drought
     was extended over two financial years, instead of being applied
     directly to community efforts. In addition, it was questioned why the
     rollover could not be used to address drought problems in the Northern
     Cape and to assist farmers in that area.

      DWAF stated that the Northern Cape farmers fell under the
     jurisdiction of the Department of Agriculture but that this issue could
     probably be raised at MinMEC.

      On the question of rollovers, DWAF noted that the financial years in
     National and Provincial sectors differed, and that Municipalities’
     financial years ended in July. Funds had been transferred only in
     December, and although there would be a rollover the proportional level
     of spending, by month, was correct. Emergency funding is reactive in
     nature and may only be finalised long after the event.

      The Committee asked how DWAF planned to eradicate the bucket system
     in areas where there is little water.

      The Department noted that the eradication of the bucket system would
     be undertaken wherever possible and where water-borne sewerage could be
     introduced, and would be a priority in urban areas.

      The Committee expressed concern about sanitation in schools, which in
     some cases posed serious health risks.

      The Department noted that sanitation in schools fell under the
     Department of Education, and that DWAF had already advised schools that
     it would be able to provide expertise and fix systems. He undertook to
     investigate the position.

      In addition, in many areas the infrastructure was badly managed and
     better emphasis must be placed on metering and billing.

      The Committee asked whether it was really viable to effect a hand-
     over of the water services function to Municipalities at this stage. A
     question was raised about the transfer of staff to Municipalities, and
     particularly for details on any agreements between the Department and
     the Municipality in regard to performance.

      The Department responded that funding followed functions. Since water
     management falls under the equitable share, all water-related functions
     did indeed need to be transferred to Municipalities. There were
     challenges with relation to seconded staff, but these were being
     addressed, and it was hoped that the process would be completed
     quickly. DWAF noted that all staff should be transferred with the
     function but some Municipalities had tried to reduce the staff
     component, and in such cases DWAF would negotiate for proper assurances
     and a prohibition on the appointment of additional staff until the
     lapse of a reasonable time.

      DWAF believed that the handover could be successfully completed by
     March 2006. DWAF would remain part of the process after transfer by
     assisting with takeover and giving support, and Municipalities would
     still be answerable to DWAF.

      The Department of Provincial and Local Government (DPLG) noted that
     two years ago DPLG had discussed the readiness and capacity of
     Municipalities, and issued authorisations leading to the distribution
     of functions and powers. It had also undertaken an analysis of levels
     of capacity, and where this was insufficient, DWAF and DPLG had a
     rollout initiative aimed at support. DPLG therefore agreed that this
     was an appropriate time to effect the takeover, but recognised that
     appropriate and concrete support would be given. Proper consideration
     had been given to the assignment process, by provision of necessary
     legislation, allocation of resources and continuous improvement of
     infrastructures.

      The Committee questioned whether it was really appropriate to "name
     and shame" Municipalities who did not comply with norms and standards.
     It was also asked what would be done about Municipalities who did not
     use funding for the purpose intended.

      The Department noted that it is aware of the dangers of adverse
     publicity, but felt that if water supplies were unsafe, residents
     should be notified.

      There is an improved process to ensure compliance, which involved a
     series of steps, and a number of stakeholders would be notified of
     problems in the hope that this would result in increased pressure, co-
     operation from the municipalities, and a quicker resolution of
     problems.

      The Committee asked what Municipalities could do in cases where
     municipal water charges had not been paid or illegal connections had
     been made, as it seemed that some Municipalities were cutting
     connections altogether.

      The Department explained that each Municipality has its own policy on
     payment and connections, but that it was not acceptable for a
     Municipality to stop water supplies to an entire community. In some
     areas there had been lack of communication between water boards and
     Municipalities as to who was responsible for setting tariffs. He
     conceded that there were areas where pipes had been provided but no
     water connected. Municipalities who installed meters and therefore were
     able to monitor use would receive preferential connections.

      The Committee asked whether the budget made special provision for
     areas with poor rainfall, or poor access to rivers and dams.

      The Department explained that Municipalities in these areas were
     supported by DWAF in their planning, and helped to decide if other
     interventions, such as diverting water or building dams, were needed.

      The Committee was concerned about whether anything was being done
     about rising water levels where mining had been abandoned.

      The Department explained that there was a problem in settling
     liability, for pollution in particular, between the Departments of
     Minerals and Energy and DWAF and the mining companies.

      The Committee asked how people could be assured of benefiting from
     the free basic water supply.

      The Department explained that Municipalities were encouraged to
     install monitoring so that water supply could be assured.

7.3   Department of Provincial and Local Government briefing

      An amount of R48,8 billion had been added to the baseline allocations
     of provinces and Municipalities. National transfers to Provinces would
     grow at 10,2% per year over the MTEF period and local government
     allocations would increase by 13,3%.

      The Local Government Equitable Share (LGES) requires consideration of
     basic services, development needs, institution support, the ability of
     Municipalities to raise revenue and a guarantee of allocations
     published in 2004 (a stabilisation component). This would be phased in
     over three years, and work on it would be ongoing. It was noted that
     District Municipalities, who do not provide basic services, would
     receive lower allocations.

      The Municipal Systems Improvement Grant (MSIG) is a conditional grant
     aimed at assisting Municipalities in developing in-house capacity to
     build integrated systems to perform their functions. A district-wide
     capacity building development plan would need to be prepared in
     consultation with Local Municipalities.

      The total grant allocation over the period 2005-2008 is R600 million
     and the grant would be reviewed in 2007. This grant had been challenged
     by late submission of business plans, poor spending, rollovers, and non-
     compliance with DORA and poor consultation between Districts and
     Municipalities. However, a programme of support had been developed and
     was being implemented through Project Consolidate.

      The Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) was a conditional grant
     established through the merger of a number of programmes across sectors
     and intended to eradicate municipal service backlogs and provide basic
     services. An amount of R21.19 billion had been allocated over the 2005-
     2008 period. Key conditions, and roles and responsibilities were
     highlighted. DPLG administered the MIG and convened Municipal
     Infrastructure Task Team meetings, involving several other Departments,
     who retained their policy making and regulatory functions while
     providing oversight and monitoring.

      Challenges faced were similar to those of MSIG, but various
     interventions had been made to address these challenges.

      DPLG pointed out that Dora would assist it in consolidating its
     success in local government transformation. DPLG was confident that
     some of the key challenges would be addressed through Project
     Consolidate, which would assist government to provide dedicated and
     appropriate support to Municipalities.

      Committee Concerns

      The Committee asked whether the public entities referred to in Clause
     9 of the Bill could be identified, and whether they were self-
     sufficient.

      DWAF explained that the "public entities" for water were the water
     boards, which were self-sufficient and thus would not receive funding.
     DPLG was engaging SALGA in a process of institutional reform and in
     future it may be that the Boards would be dissolved. Other public
     entities would include bodies such as Eskom and Telkom.

      The Committee asked the DPLG to clarify the amount of R3 billion set
     aside for "community investment programmes" and what it would comprise.

      DPLG explained that the amounts allocated had resulted from
     successful collections by the South African Revenue Service (SARS), and
     the funding would essentially be used for infrastructure development
     through the MIG.

      The Committee asked the DPLG to clarify whether Dora addressed the
     problem of capacity, and whether Clause 42 of the Bill would assist in
     cases where there were disputes. The Committee asked what would happen
     in the case of wasteful or irregular expenditure, which had been the
     responsibility of provinces to date.

      DPLG stated that the Bill did make provision for capacity building in
     Clause 18. DPLG and Treasury would settle conditions. In the current
     financial year R182 million had been set aside to assist Municipalities
     in a range of different areas, listed in the report. It was too early
     to provide a comprehensive report in respect of the current year, but
     90% of the funds had been allocated and transferred. Addition support
     was required in 136 identified Municipalities and 37% of Municipalities
     currently had capacity to prepare and implement the IDP. Tangible and
     measurable targets were set over the next two years, covering all key
     performance areas. This was not solely an initiative of DPLG but a
     government-wide attempt to harness all resources.

      On the question of wasteful expenditure, DPLG stated that financial
     conduct was dealt with in the Municipal Finance Management Act, which
     provided for disciplinary proceedings.

      The Committee asked for clarity on the formula used for LGES. There
     was concern about under-spending and the process put in place to assist
     implementation.

      DPLG explained that MIG was only nine months old and although the
     transfers had taken place, the Municipalities were only obliged to
     complete their spending in July. So far the Municipalities were on
     track in their spending although the difference in financial year-ends
     had distorted the percentages.

      The new formula took into account cross subsidisation, and added in a
     stabilisation component. The old formula had disregarded a number of
     Municipalities intended to benefit, whereas the new formula
     incorporated incentives based on revenue raising.

      The Committee noted that in some provinces the indigency policy was
     not being implemented properly.

      DPLG explained that Municipalities were administering these policies
     differently. Some state that there would be free access to services to
     all while DPLG had inherited a list of households who do not have
     access to basic services.

      In 2004, DPLG had submitted a national standards policy to the social
     cluster, comprising Education, Health and Water, and had developed
     guidelines to assist Municipalities in implementation. Different
     provinces had decided to administer either according to a register of
     indigent people, or through a broader "service to all" which could
     account for the differences. The means test was largely used as a
     basis.

      The Committee asked how DPLG would view the stopping of allocations
     provided for in Clause 35 of the Bill.

      Treasury reported that the Minister would proceed in terms of the
     Municipal Finance Management Act and that DPLG would be consulted.
     Opportunities would be given to the province to explain itself before a
     decision to withhold payment was made.

      DPLG added that this clause had been discussed with Treasury; it was
     felt to be necessary so that funding could be reallocated. DWAF argued
     that in the past they had found DORA to be inflexible because it had
     not made provision for cases of persistent and material non-compliance.
     While Project Consolidate would be used to attempt to avoid the
     situation, this clause could be invoked as a last resort.

      The Committee enquired what formula was used for the MIG and how it
     would be disbursed. Reference was made to decreases in allocations set
     out in Schedule 3 and in Schedule 6 and whether Departments were
     consulted when allocations were made.

      DPLG replied that the formula had a number of components, including
     provision of basic services. Municipalities providing basic services
     and additional resources would gain from the equitable share. Treasury
     determined allocations, and the administration of the grant was handled
     by DPLG.

      They pointed out that funds would be disbursed in different ways
     according to the size of the scheme. Although it appeared that funding
     for DWAF had decreased, there had been a concomitant increase in the
     municipal allocation, as funding would in future fall within the
     equitable share and not the conditional grant. This was similar to the
     effect of Schedule 6.

      The Committee questioned whether the formula for MIG did not
     disadvantage the weaker or poorer Municipalities, and whether this
     might not result in migration of residents to Municipalities that could
     provide better services. It was suggested that DPLG should arrange a
     workshop on the formula for the information of the Committee.

7.4   The National Department of Health

      The Department of Health administers 6 conditional grants-

   1. The National Tertiary Services Grant

   2. Health Professions Training and Development Grant

   3. Comprehensive HIV and AIDS Grant

   4. Hospital Revitalisation Grant

   5. Integrated Nutrition Programme Grant

   6. Hospital Management and Quality Improvement Grant

      Each grant has its purpose and the conditional expenditure criteria
     are according to that purpose.

Spending patterns in 2004-05 and the Committee’s concerns

1.    The National Tertiary Services Grant.

      The Committee notes that the spending pattern was generally good.
     Only three departments are lagging; the Eastern Cape (7,7%), the Free
     State (75,7%), Limpopo, (79,6%), and North West (62, 5%).

The MTEF allocation is as follows:

|Provinces            |2005/06|2006/07|2007/8 |
|Eastern Cape         |353022 |374203 |392913 |
|Free State           |432116 |458043 |480945 |
|Gauteng              |1760465|1866094|1959399|
|Kwazulu Natal        |691451 |732167 |768078 |
|Limpopo              |71182  |71580  |71649  |
|Mpumalanga           |42224  |44757  |46995  |
|Northern Cape        |76353  |92286  |107975 |
|North West           |67889  |69380  | 70509 |
|Western Cape         |1214684|1272640|1322744|
|Total                |4709386|4981150|5221207|
|Total nominal %      |       |5,77068|4,81930|
|Growth               |       |9      |9      |


     The total nominal growth over the MTEF period is at 6%, with the slight
     decline over the end of the period.

2.    Health Professions Training and Development Grant
      The Committee notes the spending pattern (2004-05) as generally good.
     Only three departments are lagging (Eastern Cape, 61, 5%), (Free State,
     54,4%), and (Limpopo 64%).

      In terms of the future vision of the grant, hospital grants will be
     reviewed, with the view to restructuring all the conditional grants as
     well as the role of conditional grants in Health Funding.

The MTEF allocation is as follows:

|Provinces            |2005/06|2006/07|2007/8 |
|Eastern Cape         |127566 |127566 |133944 |
|Free State           |92517  |92517  |97143  |
| Gauteng             |554039 |554039 |581741 |
|Kwazulu Natal        |192373 |192373 |201992 |
|Limpopo              |72411  |72411  |76032  |
|Mpumalanga           |54363  |54363  |57081  |
|Northern Cape        |41069  |41069  |43122  |
| North West          |62564  |62564  |65692  |
|Western Cape         |323278 |323278 |339442 |
|Total                |1520180|1520180|1596189|
|Total nominal %      |       |0      |5      |
|Growth               |       |       |       |


The total growth only increased by 5% at the end of the period.

3.    Comprehensive HIV and AIDS Grant

      The purpose is to enable the health sector to develop an effective
     response to the HIV and AIDS epidemic. The future of the Grant
     indicates that portions of the grant drop into the equitable share as
     the functions have become entrenched as activities in the Provincial
     Health Departments.

      The Committee notes that the spending pattern (2004-05), has been
     particularly slow in the Eastern Cape (64,4%), (Free State, 53, 91%),
     (Limpopo, 32, 7%), (Mpumalanga, 50%), (North West, 60%). Transfers have
     been delayed to the following provinces; Free State, Limpopo,
     Mpumalanga, Northern Cape and North West Province.

The MTEF allocation is as follows:

|Provinces         |2005/06|2006/07|2007/8 |
|Eastern Cape      |171808 |227916 |242018 |
|Free State        | 82928 |111104 |117648 |
| Gauteng          |207078 |308674 |317474 |
|Kwazulu Natal     |263267 |377559 |392336 |
|Limpopo           |116357 |147198 |158478 |
|Mpumalanga        |86333  |119935 |125718 |
|Northern Cape     |28258  |33818  |37024  |
|North West        |109306 |148286 | 156467|
|Western Cape      |69773  | 92724 |98412  |
|Total             |1135108|1567214|1645575|
|Total nominal %   |       |38,0673|5,00001|
|Growth            |       |9      |9      |


     The nominal growth is 38% in 2006/7. However, it declines by
     -33% over the medium term.

4.    Hospital Revitalisation Grant

      The purpose of the grant is to modernise infrastructure and equipment
     within the context of national policy.  The Grant, however, will be
     reviewed in future in the context of the national health funding
     system.

      The Committee notes slow spending patterns in Kwazulu Natal (17, 1%).
     The Province has decided to fund the total of the amounts transferred
     to date and requested that the 2004-05 amount be rolled over at
     national level into 2005/06 and 2006-07.

The MTEF allocation is as follows:

|Provinces            |2005/06|2006/07|2007/8 |
|1Eastern Cape        |157732 |71666  |102552 |
|Free State           |113082 |128853 |104360 |
|Gauteng              |17955  |148664 |133093 |
|Kwazulu Natal        |128977 |60940  |81090  |
|Limpopo              |212918 |123698 |160690 |
|Mpumalanga           |57018  |101032 |117071 |
|Northern Cape        |69651  |217464 |234960 |
|North West           |98056  |125493 |106495 |
|Western Cape         |172038 |202474 |198987 |
|Total                |1027427|1180284|1239298|
|Total nominal %      |       |14.8776|4.99998|
|Growth               |       |5      |3      |


      The total nominal percentage increase in the short term is 15%.
     However, it declines by -9% at the end of the term.

5.    Integrated Nutrition Programme Grant

      The purpose is to implement integrated nutrition activities aimed at
     improving the nutritional status of all South Africans. After 2005/06
     the Grant will be moved to Equitable Share.

      The Committee notes that the spending pattern (2004/05), is slow
     especially in the (Eastern Cape, 35,5%), (Kwazulu Natal 55%), (Limpopo,
     20%), (Mpumalanga 38,4%),  (North West, 26,3%), (Western Cape, 46,9%).

The MTEF allocation is as follows:
|Provinces         |2005/06|2006/07|2007/8 |
|Eastern Cape      |26,316 |       |       |
|Free State        |7296   |       |       |
|Gauteng           |11333  |       |       |
|Kwazulu Natal     |26954  |       |       |
|Limpopo           |22344  |       |       |
|Mpumalanga        |9581   |       |       |
|Northern Cape     |3299   |       |       |
|North West        |10981  |       |       |
|Western Cape      |5288   |       |       |
|Total             |123,392|       |       |


      The Grant is being discontinued over the medium term. However, the
     Committee noted that general poor performance in the use of the Grant
     amongst provinces and the implementation over the final year should be
     effectively monitored.

6.    Hospital Management and Quality Improvement Grant

      The purpose is to transform hospital management and improve quality
     of care in line with national policy. In future the Grant is to be
     reviewed within the context of the National Health Funding Policy. The
     Grant is meant to fund the organisational development part of the
     revitalisation of hospitals.

      The Committee noted that the transfers of funds were delayed with the
     exception of Northern Cape, Gauteng and Mpumalanga provinces.

The MTEF allocation is as follows:

|Provinces         |2005/06|2006/07|2007/8  |
|Eastern Cape      |24,531 |26003  |27303   |
|Free State        |13393  |14197  |14907   |
|Gauteng           |18510  |19621  |20602   |
|Kwazulu Natal     |23778  |25204  |26464   |
|Limpopo           |17457  |18505  |19430   |
|Mpumalanga        |12340  |13081  |13735   |
|Northern Cape     |10083  |10688  |11222   |
|North West        |12642  |13400  |14070   |
|Western Cape      | 17608 |18664  |19597   |
|Total             |150,342|159363 |167330  |
|Total nominal %   |       |6,00031|4,999278|
|Growth            |       |9      |38      |


      The nominal total allocation increases by 6% in the short term
     (2006/07). However, it declines by -1% over the medium term.

Committee concerns

      The Committee expressed concern on the perception that Conditional
     Grant’s requirements are continuously being administratively burdensome
     and costly. It recommends that this issue be attended to as urgently as
     possible, within the context of the Division of Revenue 2005/06
     requirements.

      The Committee acknowledged and recognised that with the monitoring
     measures suggested for each grant, the Department is ready for the
     financial year 2005/06, grants allocations.

      The Committee recommended that monitoring mechanisms under each
     conditional grant should consistently be followed through in the
     oversight process.

7.5   The National Department of Housing briefing

      The Committee acknowledged and recognised that with the monitoring
     measures suggested for each grant, the Department is ready for the
     financial year 2005/06, grants allocations.

Committee Concerns

      The new housing policy shifts responsibility for housing to
     accredited Municipalities, particularly Metropolitan and major urban
     category B Municipalities.

    • The Committee is concerned about the capacity of certain
      Municipalities to deliver this task. Oversight visits will be made to
      areas where Municipalities are already carrying out this task such as
      the Sol Plaatjie Municipality in the Northern Cape.

    • The Committee noted that the cost of doing government business should
      continuously form part of programmes implementation. This includes
      reducing time delays in the building and allocation of the
      Reconstruction and Development Houses (RDP).

Report to be considered.


                            TUESDAY, 31 MAY 2005



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council

      (1)   Bill passed by National Assembly on 31 May 2005 and transmitted
         for concurrence:

         (i)     Appropriation Bill [B 7 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec
              77)

       The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of the
         National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled


      The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
    relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration:


       Report on the Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for
         2005/06 [RP 38 of 2005].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:


            (a)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Turkey regarding
              Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


            (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Turkey regarding Mutual Assistance between
              their Customs Administrations.


            (c)   Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the
              Republic of Turkey for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
              the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
              Income, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


            (d)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
              Republic of South Africa and the Republic of Turkey for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.


            (e)   Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Gabon for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of
              section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


            (f)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Convention between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Gabon for the Avoidance of Double Taxation
              and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
              Income.


            (g)   Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Ghana for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital Gains,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


            (h)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Ghana for the Avoidance of Double Taxation
              and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
              Income and on Capital Gains.


            (i)   Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo
              for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
              Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in
              terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).


            (j)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Double Taxation Convention
              between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
              the Democratic Republic of the Congo.


            (k)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway regarding
              Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996
              (Act No 108 of 1996).


            (l)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Customs Agreement between
              the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of Norway.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation for consideration:


            (a)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2005 to
              2010.


            (b)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Arts and Culture for
              2005 to 2010.


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Social Services:


       A list of approved early naturalisation applications in terms of
         section 5(9) of the South African Citizenship Act, 1995 (Act No 88
         of 1995).


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


            (a)   Proclamation No R.13 published in Government Gazette No
              27406 dated 22 March 2005: Commencement of the Judicial
              Matters Second Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 55 of 2003).


            (b)   Government Notice No R.250 published in Government gazette
              No 27406 dated 22 March 2005: Amendment of Regulation in
              terms of the Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment
              Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of 2001).


            (c)   Government Notice No R.251 published in Government Gazette
              No 27406 dated 22 March 2005: Amendment of Mediation in
              Divorce Matters Regulation in terms of the Mediation in
              Certain Divorce Matters Act, 1987 (Act No 24 of 1987).


            (d)   White Paper on Corrections in South Africa – February
              2005.


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


            (a)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of senior
              magistrate Mr M J S Nhleko.


            (b)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              magistrate Mr R Ameer.


            (c)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              magistrate Mr M K Chauke.


            (d)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              magistrate Mr M S Makamu.


            (e)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              magistrate Mr L D Monageng.


            (f)   Report on the provisional suspension from office of
              magistrate Mr S E Tebe.


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration and the Select Committee on Finance:


       General Report of the Auditor-General on Provincial Audit Outcomes
         for 2003-2004 [RP 42-2005].


     (8)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services for consideration and report:


            (a)   Accession to the Convention for the Suppression of
              Unlawful Acts against the Safety Maritime Navigation and to
              the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
              Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996
              (Act No 108 of 1996).


            (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Accession to the Convention
              for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
              Maritime Navigation and to the Protocol for the Safety of
              Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located
              on the Continental Shelf.


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services:


       Bilateral Air service Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Great Socialist People’s Libyan
         Arab Jamahiriya for Scheduled Air Services Between their
         Territories and Beyond, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      Government Notice No 868 published in Government Gazette No 27636
     dated 30 May 2005: Municipal Supply Chain Management Regulations in
     terms of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003
     (Act No 56 of 2003).

2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

      Strategic Plan of the Department of Provincial and Local Government
     for 2005 to 2010.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
     on the African Union Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
     Corruption, dated 31 May 2005:

      The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration having
        considered the request for approval by Parliament of the African
        Union Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Corruption,
        referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of Section
        231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Protocol.

      Report to be considered.


4 Section 26 of the Bill

5 Sections 15 and 30 of the Bill

6 Sections 33, 34 and 35 of the Bill

7 Section 31 of the Bill

8 Sections 13, 14 and 37 of the Bill




