---
title: 'National Assembly - 23 February 2005'
layout: debate
year: 2005
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2005/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2005-02-23
---

WEDNESDAY, 23 FEBRUARY 2005
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL




                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Deputy President, my
Cabinet colleagues, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, MECs, hon members,
ambassadors and high commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, our friends at
work and at home, I remind you of these words:

      We assert that our country, as a united nation, has never in its
      entire history enjoyed such a confluence of encouraging
      possibilities. On behalf of our government, we commend our
      programme to the country, confident that its implementation will help
      to place us on the high road towards ensuring that we
      become a winning nation and that we play our role towards the
      renewal of Africa and the creation of a better world.

      Acting together, we do have the capacity to realise these
      objectives. And sparing neither effort nor strength, we can and
      shall build a South Africa that truly belongs to all who live in it,
      united in our diversity!

Those were the words that President Mbeki used to place his state of the
nation address before us on 11 February.

We have recently celebrated the international success of Ladysmith Black
Mambazo’s new album Lift Your Spirits Higher. I had hoped to lift the
spirits of Madam Speaker by getting some music in the hall here today.
[Laughter.] I failed. But this past weekend the world-
acclaimed version of the popular opera Carmen, U-Carmen eKhayelitsha, sung
in isiXhosa and filmed right here in Khayelitsha, won the Golden Bear award
as the best film at the Berlin Film Festival. [Applause.]

Hon members will find a prerelease copy of the CD on their desks.
[Applause.] We need to listen to that music and be inspired by it, because
it is entirely fitting that this new season of hope and
rising confidence of our nation, in this second decade of democracy, should
be proclaimed in this way, in music and in theatre.

We also celebrate this year the pledge of the Congress of the People 50
years ago, namely that we would strive together, side by side, to win equal
rights and opportunities for all South Africans, black and white. Even as
we enjoy the fruits of the progress made in our first decade, we know that
our work is not complete until all our people have achieved freedom from
want, freedom from fear, freedom from prejudice and freedom from injustice.

In order to complete this liberation, the most vulnerable among us must see
their rights to development being realised with each passing year, through
progressive advances in access to land, education, training, health care
and economic opportunity. This is achieved, as President Mbeki has reminded
us, through the Programme of Action of a government that cares for its
people, that makes socially just choices and that is committed to service
delivery in the spirit of Batho Pele.

In this context, and with the President’s permission, I would like to
convey the best wishes of our government and all South Africans to the
delegates who are now convening at the United Nations in New York to
undertake a 10-year review of the Beijing commitments, relating to the
critically important issue of the emancipation of the women of the world.
[Applause.] What we will say today is also focused on ensuring that we
achieve further advances in our own pursuit of this central aspect of the
society we are working to create.

We have noted with concern the recent violent demonstrations in some areas,
including in a few local communities in the Free State and at a number of
our institutions of higher learning. As our President has said, the
government must act firmly against those who break the law and destroy
public property or attack the police. Nonetheless, we understand the
impatience that motivates some of those who are drawn into these
demonstrations.

Part of our task as public representatives, regardless of where in this
House we sit, is to continue to explain, even as we celebrate our progress,
that just as Rome was not built in a day, neither will the new South Africa
be liberated from its painful past in a day.

Thokola themba, amathunzi ayewukela. [Ihlombe.][Relax, the dream is about
to come true.[Applause]]

The 2005 Budget seeks to contribute to the season of hope of which we have
spoken, through reinforcing the momentum of our social and economic
progress. In framing the Budget, it is this vision that has been our
practical guide – a vision rooted in the actual, lived experience and
struggles of ordinary people.

Thousands of South Africans have again taken the time and trouble to
provide me with advice in the form of “Tips for Trevor”. As always, it has
been both a humbling and an inspiring experience to share in some of the
many ways in which the public finances impact on people’s daily lives.

Education and skills development, quite rightly, feature strongly.
Tshepiso Mathabatha writes:

      We should invest more in education, because people need the
      skill and knowledge to be able to compete in a job market with
      relevant experience.

Then there were interesting proposals on financing new priorities. Anesce
Stapelberg of the Hoërskool Wonderboom suggested a special bond issue to
finance infrastructure for the 2010 World Cup. She writes:

      With the money brought in, we can build stadiums, roads or
      whatever is needed. Then use the profit made from the soccer
      games to pay the bondholders back, and that way the whole of
      South Africa can be a part of the journey towards building a better
      future.

And from a remote rural village, Lutendo Nethononda captures the feelings
of many South Africans when she writes:

      It has become necessary that we shift our priorities to
      infrastructural development. This is important, because even the old
      lady of Maliboho requires a taxi or bus to move from the mountains to
      the nearest shop to buy mealie meal … Infrastructural development will
      create jobs, improve the rural economy, improve accessibility, and
      alleviate poverty …

Lutendo goes on to remind us of the social dimensions of our tax policies:

      Sin taxes should be increased. Alcohol and smoking are major
      causes of trouble in our country.

[Applause.] I don’t know why Lutendo gets such a small round of applause in
this House, but perhaps it’s because not everyone agrees with that.

Mthetheleli Baqwa has a different view. He writes:

      We cannot live without entertainment, and if you always increase the
      price of beer and brandy then the culture of entertainment will die,
      which will be unfair for human nature …

[Laughter.] [Applause.] I now understand why Lutendo got such a small round
of applause. [Laughter.]

There was also the advice from someone whose name I should perhaps not
disclose, but I will need to ask you, baba uShenge, for some advice on
this, because this individual writes that lobola money should be a tax-
deductible expense. [Laughter.] [Applause.] In his words, he says “as it is
a social responsibility put on one’s shoulder unwillingly”. [Laughter.] Now
I don’t know how frequently or how heavily this social responsibility has
been put on his shoulder, but there you have it.

All of this illustrates that you simply can’t keep everybody happy all of
the time. But the messages I have received, and the voices we have heard at
our izimbizo, convince me that South Africans, black and white, urban and
rural, are overwhelmingly in agreement on the key values that should
underpin our budgetary policies.

We agree that we need more rapid growth of our economy. We agree on a
development strategy that is broad-based and invests in our
people. We agree on the need to reduce inequality and fight poverty.

Agb lede, as ons hande vat en saamspan, is dit natuurlik in ons vermoë om
die wa deur die drif te trek, en ons mikpunte te bereik. [Hon members, if
we join hands and unite, it is naturally within our means to get the job
done and achieve our goals.]

As the President said, acting together we have the capacity to realise
these objectives.

Over the past decade we have laid the macroeconomic and fiscal foundations
on which increased investment and a stable business
environment rest. In the years ahead we must see more rapid expansion in
the productive capacity of our businesses, creating jobs for workseekers,
while also growing the revenue base that makes it possible to have an
expanded envelope of public services to citizens.

Over the past decade we have invested in meeting basic needs, expanded
investment in municipal infrastructure and extended social grants to
children and others in need. In the decade ahead, we must invest in
improving the quality of education, housing and health services. These
elements of the social wage contribute over time to skills and productive
opportunities, so that dependence can give way to self-reliance.

Over the past decade we have transformed social policy and service delivery
based on principles of nonracialism and nonsexism. In the years ahead we
must make more rapid progress in building a society founded on solidarity,
in which we give practical expression to our
shared interest in addressing the needs of the most vulnerable.

Thokola themba, amathunzi ayewukela. [Ihlombe.] [Let us rejoice, for we are
almost there. [Applause.]]

We can face the new season of hope with eyes of pride, acting together to
realise a shared vision.

Let me comment briefly on our economic progress over the past decade and
the policy framework for the years ahead. Growth of the South African
economy averaged 3,2% a year over the past four years. We expect a
continued expansion of between 4% and 4,5% over the next three years,
signalling a significant step-change in the pace of economic growth.

At the same time, we have seen consumer price inflation fall to 4,3% for
the year to December 2004, and it is expected to remain comfortably within
the 3% to 6% target range over the period ahead. This is a marked
improvement on the position we were in a decade ago. It is the fruit of
sound macroeconomic performance and monetary management, improved
competitiveness of our economy, structural reform and a fiscal policy
framework designed to underpin sustainable growth and investment.

Real income per person over the past decade has increased by 15%. With
average growth projected at over 4% a year over the period ahead, real per
capita income will rise by at least 30% in the second decade of freedom. We
surely need to target growth of at least this order of magnitude if we are
to see the progress we desire in making hunger history, in facing the
season of hope with pride and vision.

We must also confront the challenge of making our growth pro-poor. Four
aspects of our development policy for the decade ahead are particularly
critical.

Firstly, as we step up the pace of investment in modern transport,
communication, water and energy networks, we need to ensure that we build a
more efficient economic landscape, that we contribute to more balanced
development between suburbs and townships, between urban and rural areas
and between the first and second economies. We need to press more urgently
on the labour-absorbing potential of infrastructure and building
programmes.
Secondly, we also seek to strengthen the links between further education
and training, and workplace requirements. This means we need to modernise
our colleges, bring industry and commerce more actively into the governance
of education and training, and ensure that funds set aside for skills
development are more effectively used.

Thirdly, we must address the barriers to small business development and job
creation that arise from cumbersome municipal planning and approval
procedures, or from overly burdensome administration of the tax laws,
environmental regulations or labour-market controls.

Fourthly, we need to mobilise, with a greater sense of partnership directed
at long-term development, both our capacity to save and the accumulated
capital under the stewardship of our financial institutions and
corporations. Although there is still work to do, I am encouraged by the
progress of and commitments that have emerged from the Financial Sector
Charter process.

I believe we have a shared understanding that will lead to public and
private-sector funding of infrastructure, housing, empowerment and business
development that will rapidly grow over the decade ahead, giving practical
expression, appropriate for our times, to a pledge made 50 years ago that
the national wealth of our country is the heritage of all South Africans.
There are aspects of these economic challenges to which I will return
shortly in dealing with our tax and spending proposals.

More rapid growth makes greater progress in social development possible
and, in turn, well-targeted investments in human capabilities contribute to
rising productivity and sustained growth.

Die afgelope dekade het ons bestendige vooruitgang gemaak om die gedeelte
van besteding aan maatskaplike dienste vir die armste 40% van ons mense te
laat toeneem.

Welsyn en maatskaplike bystand, onderwys, grondhervorming en behuising het
tot sterk herverdeling van bestedingsprogramme ontvou. Die gemiddelde
waarde van dienste, of dan die sogenaamde “social wage” wat na die armste
40% van huishoudings gaan, is tot om en by R956 per maand verhoog.
Bestaansbeveiligheidsprogramme bestaan nou uit 14% van die gekonsolideerde
nie-rente uitgawe, ’n toename vanaf 9,5% sedert vyf jaar gelede.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The past decade we have made steady progress in increasing the social
services part of expenditure to the poorest 40% of our people.

Welfare and social support, education, land reform and housing have
developed into strong redistribution of expenditure programmes. The average
value of services, or the so-called social wage, which goes to the poorest
40% of households, has been increased to about R956 per month. Social
security programmes now constitute 14% of the consolidated non-interest
expenditure, up from 9,5% five years ago.]

What we have said, hon members - and I know that you have heard this
through your earpieces – is that over the past decade we have made steady
progress in raising the proportion of spending on social services that goes
to the poorest 40% of our people. Welfare and social assistance, education,
land restitution and housing have evolved into strongly redistributive
expenditure programmes, bringing the average value of services, or the
social wage, that went to the poorest 40% of households three years ago to
an estimated R956 a month. Social security programmes now account for 14%
of consolidated noninterest expenditure, up from 9,5% just five years ago.

Over the decade ahead there will be other priorities in our social
development strategy. There is, for example, the imperative to provide
every child with education opportunities that meet both the knowledge
requirements and social challenges of the future, and to ensure that a
caring and competently managed health service is available in every
community. There is the complementary challenge of transforming the
desolate landscape of townships and new housing settlements into
sustainable and viable communities, whose riches speak for themselves,
whose streets carry sounds of laughter, whose character reflects our season
of hope.

In this Budget we recognise the need to give greater impetus to investments
in housing, in community infrastructure, in municipal services and in local
economic development, not just as projects of government departments or
municipalities but as constructive partnerships that mobilise local
enterprise, private capital and indigenous creativity.

Then there are the rural development challenges to address. We will
propose allocations to the Department of Land Affairs today that will
enable the land restitution programme to complete its work over the next
three years. [Applause.] We have put in place a comprehensive agricultural
support programme for emerging and resource-poor producers, and the
Minister of Agriculture will introduce this year a new credit scheme for
small-scale farmers. [Applause.]

Social solidarity also encompasses the work of reducing crime and
insecurity, investing resources in more effective policing and a robust
justice system. We have set ourselves daunting targets for reducing the
incidence of serious crime. We are also called upon to play a part in
promoting peace and security elsewhere in Africa.

In all these, and many other dimensions of social development, there is an
unavoidable tension between the magnitude of the challenge and the limits
of our capacity. The Budget is, as always, the practical resolution, we’d
like to believe, of this tension in so far as the period ahead can be
planned and programmed. But its implementation is the real expression of
our social intent, and this relies on the shared efforts and energies of
public servants, workers, businesspeople, citizens, all our people, who
embrace the future with hope and with eyes of pride.

Bagata-mmogo ke maja-mmogo. [People who work together get the same reward.]

Acting together, hon members, we do have the capacity to realise
these objectives.


Equity and redistribution


This social intent also embodies our commitment to building a more just,
more equal society, in which steady progress is made in reducing the gulfs
that divide rich and poor, black and white, men and women, rural and urban.

On some dimensions, there have been notable advances. Real wage
improvements and public expenditure on services have contributed to rising
living standards of many people. A recent research report indicates rapid
growth in the numbers of black households entering middle-income bands,
associated in part with higher demand for skilled and professional labour.

Empowerment targets and transformation initiatives in education, in
employment and in procurement are contributing to better racial and gender
representivity. Corporate restructuring and equity participation schemes
have brought changes to the ownership, management and strategic direction
of many companies.

Yet our income distribution remains highly unequal. We are gaining a deeper
understanding of the role of public policy in shaping the distribution of
income and opportunities. Today sees the release of the results of a study
of the shifts since 1995 in the distribution of government expenditure on
education, health, welfare services and housing.

This research shows that whereas aggregate social spending increased in
real terms by 14% per person between 1995 and 2000, spending on the poorer
40% of households increased by 25% per person – signalling a steady
increase in the redistributive social wage.

Go na le tšhono ya go tokafatsa maemo a ditirelo le tsamaiso e e lolameng
mo mananeong a Puso. [Legofi.] [There is an opportunity to improve the
services and establish the proper administration of government programmes.
[Applause.]]

There is, nonetheless, room for further improvements in the quality and
targeting of services, and the management and effectiveness of government
programmes. So, for example, we have directed attention this year at the
costs and complexity for small businesses of the tax code, because there is
compelling evidence that simplified arrangements can assist significantly
in creating an environment conducive to enterprise development.

Under the leadership of the Ministry of Education, we have developed
proposals for improving the targeting of funding for schools and the
regulations governing school fee exemptions, because this is such an
important vulnerability for poor households.

Mindful of the difficulties many young people find in breaking into the job
market, we have worked with the Ministry of Labour in promoting
learnerships, backed by tax deductions for participating companies, and we
will learn more about options for skills development and work initiatives
from the projects of the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the expansion of Public Works programmes this
year. The National Empowerment Fund receives further funding this year, and
we are certain that it will make a growing contribution to broadening the
reach of business empowerment and transformation. Through government’s
procurement framework, an increasing proportion of contracts are going to
small businesses and to black-owned or women-owned businesses. The Minister
of Trade and Industry has taken the lead in developing both improved
support for small and new businesses, and common codes to guide the design
of empowerment projects.

Two further distributional aspects of public policy receive attention in
today’s Budget. As announced last year, there will be changes to the way in
which travel allowances are taxed, as these deductions have created
unwarranted benefits for higher income earners. There will be a change,
also, in the tax treatment of medical scheme contributions, which will have
the effect of
reducing the cost of medical scheme membership to lower-income families.
[Applause.]

Expanding medical scheme membership and ensuring that our public hospitals
provide an accredited, cost-effective service to both uninsured patients
and medical scheme members are critical hurdles to be overcome before a
more inclusive social health insurance arrangement can be implemented.

Members of this House will appreciate that the measurement of inequality
and the impact of public services on relative disparities in standards of
living is difficult, and needs to be the subject of further work. Several
commentators have suggested that social policy would be assisted by our
adoption of an official poverty measure, as is done in many countries. I
believe this proposal has merit and will seek further advice this year on
the design of a poverty line for South Africa.

Economic outlook

Madam Speaker, let me return briefly to the outlook for the economy, before
detailing this year’s spending plans and tax proposals.

Global economy

Growth in the global economy accelerated to nearly 4% last year - from 2,4%
in 2003. China and developing Asian economies are continuing to
industrialise and deepen their services sectors rapidly, on the strength of
high savings rates, broad skills pools and competitive export sectors.
Growth has also recovered strongly in the United States, but its
sustainability is threatened by huge imbalances in both the fiscal accounts
and the balance of payments.

Economic growth on the African continent has averaged about 4% per year
over the past three years, with encouraging signs of an improved trade
response in several countries to the global expansion. However, the pace of
economic development in Africa remains somewhat tenuous. Far more needs to
be done to attract investment, to intensify education and training, to
deepen financial markets, to open up trade relations and to harmonise
regulatory and legal environments.

We will continue to give support to initiatives of Nepad directed at these
challenges, and we note that the Commission for Africa has given impetus to
the new international response to the trade and finance issues facing our
continent.

These are reforms that cannot take root in a context of war, or
constitutional uncertainty, or, indeed, in environments of political
opportunism. And so all of us, all of Africa, and all who recognise Africa
as part of a shared humanity, owe an immeasurable debt of gratitude to
those who are working tirelessly for peace and overcoming the fractures
that trouble our continent. So we want to say thank you to President Mbeki,
Deputy President Zuma, Minister Lekota, Minister Dlamini-Zuma – in her
absence – and Minister Mufamadi, amongst others, who take on this
responsibility as tirelessly as they do. [Applause.]

Global expansion is expected to continue in 2005, with further moderation
in 2006. High oil prices and the overhang of the US deficits are likely to
hold back growth – and some commentators anticipate an extended slowdown as
a result of international trade and financial imbalances. Although our
economy remains vulnerable to this uncertainty, our trade and financial
links are increasingly
diversified and our growth has a robust domestic impetus – both sources of
strength in an uncertain world.

South Africa has experienced strong growth in commodity exports in 2004,
but has also seen rising imports in response to domestic demand and the
strength of the rand. Expenditure on maritime vessels, new aircraft and, in
the third quarter, oil, added significantly to the import trend in 2004.
This resulted in a
widening of the current account deficit to an estimated 2,3% of GDP, and it
is expected to continue to widen moderately over the next three years.

For this reason, it is important that we should continue to attract foreign
investment and portfolio inflows, providing the external capital required
to finance the shortfall between our export earnings and our import costs.

The cumulative surplus on the financial account was over R60 billion in the
first nine months of 2004, partly attributable to the resurgence of foreign
investment in shares on the Johannesburg Securities Exchange. We have seen
further upgrades in the rating of government’s domestic and external debt,
which also signals foreign capital market confidence in the South African
economy.

Prospects for the domestic economy

Several fundamental strengths lead us to project further upward momentum in
our economic growth performance over the next three years.

Moderation of inflation and the sound and consistent management of monetary
policy by Governor Mboweni and the Reserve Bank have brought interest rates
down to their lowest levels in 24 years. So we say thank you to you,
Governor Mboweni. You don’t have to look that sheepish or coy about this
matter. [Applause.]

Gross fixed capital formation increased by 9% in 2003 and by an estimated
7,5% in 2004, contributing to a broader and deeper platform for growth and
productivity advances in future.

Following several years of decline, South African mining production
expanded by over 4% a year in both 2003 and 2004. The output of gold mines
has continued to decline, but platinum, coal, diamonds and other minerals
are benefiting from a growth in demand and prices on international
commodity markets.

Value added in the construction sector grew by over 6% last year. There is
strong growth in the residential property market. Director-General Kganyago
says that when you walk around the suburbs you get the smell of mortar,
which he says is different from the smell of mortar in Baghdad. I don’t
know why. Further impetus will be given to building and construction growth
by innercity refurbishment, encouraged by our urban renewal tax incentive,
accelerated investment in low-income housing and municipal infrastructure
and several large economic infrastructure projects over the decade ahead.

Official foreign exchange reserves have increased to over US$15 billion,
which is more than four times the current short-term debt level. Reserves
held by the private banking sector have also increased strongly,
contributing to a marked improvement in the nation’s overall balance sheet
and reduced vulnerability to the inherent volatility of international
financial flows.

There are also encouraging signs of progress in broadening participation
and greater resilience of small enterprises across many areas of economic
activity. The official labour force survey suggests that nonagricultural
employment has increased by about 280 000 jobs a year since 2000. Small and
medium-sized contractors are competing increasingly successfully for
government roads and public works projects. Microenterprises offering
cellphone services, catering, accommodation, entertainment, household and
personal services are both a growing feature of the economic landscape and
at least to some extent a bridge to further opportunities and more formal
business formation. The notable growth of 18% in the VAT revenue base this
year is just one indicator of the steady expansion in the numbers of
registered, viable business enterprises.

Taking into account the anticipated global slowdown and the continued
relative strength of the rand, our expectation is that the South African
economy will grow by 4,3% this year and an average of 4,2% over the next
three years. Gross fixed-capital formation growth is projected to average
7% a year, with exports rising by about 4,5% a year. We expect CPIX
inflation to average 4% in 2005, rising to between 5% and 5,5% in 2006 and
2007.

It is pleasing to note that we have revised upward the growth
estimates for 2004 and 2005 tabled before this House in February last year.
Changes in the economic outlook arise partly from changes in the global or
domestic market environment. But at least two critical areas of economic
performance are firmly within the scope of our influence and
responsibility. I refer to the need to accelerate the pace and quality of
infrastructure investment, partly a responsibility of government
departments and partly of our major parastatals, and to the need to address
deficiencies in municipal
planning and service delivery, and in the regulatory and administrative
environment that impede business development and job creation. These were
rightly amongst the urgent priorities articulated by President Mbeki in the
state of the nation address on 11 February.

Budget framework

The fiscal policy considerations and broad outline of a proposed framework
for the 2005 Budget were set out in the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement tabled in October last year. We outlined a
framework for accelerated growth and broad-based development, focused on
five policy priorities: firstly, increasing the rate of growth and
productive investment; secondly, encouraging employment and development of
the second economy; thirdly, social development and mobilising human
resources; fourthly, improving the state’s capacity to promote growth,
broaden development and combat crime; and, fifthly, strengthening
international relations for growth and development.

Due to the strength of the economy and the excellent work of Commissioner
Gordhan and his tax and customs team, we are now projecting to raise
R11 billion more this year than we budgeted for. [Applause.] Our
noninterest spending is R5,2 billion higher than the original estimate,
with the largest adjustments being for social
grants, drought relief and municipal rates and taxes. Our deficit for this
year should come in at 2,3% of GDP, and debt service costs will be 3,5% of
GDP. Members of the House will recall that debt service accounted for 5,6%
of GDP six years ago, and I know that you’ll share my firm intent not to
reverse this progress. [Applause.]

Our budget framework for the next three years sees revenue as a share of
GDP averaging at around 24,2%. We anticipate a deficit of 3,1% of GDP next
year, falling to 2,7% by 2007-08. Total expenditure, excluding interest
costs and a contingency reserve, rises from R363 billion in 2005-06 to
R428 billion by the end of the MTEF period.

These projections allow an additional R74,4 billion to be added to the
baseline allocations of national departments, provinces and municipalities
over the next three years. Consolidated real noninterest expenditure will
grow at 7,5% next year, and an average of 5% over the MTEF period ahead.

In framing these projections, we have been mindful that infrastructure
spending by municipalities and public enterprises is expected to grow
strongly over the years ahead, complemented by rising spending on public
assets through public-private partnerships of various kinds.

Significant projects include the completion of the Port of Ngqura; the Berg
River Water Scheme in the Western Cape and further development of the
Olifants River and Groot Letaba River dam systems in Mpumalanga; the
recommissioning of the Camden, Komati and Grootvlei power plants and the
upgrading of the Matimba plant;
the construction of a hydroelectric pumped storage scheme at Braamhoek and
two coastal gas turbine plants; investment of some R27 billion in
electricity transmission and distribution networks over the next five
years; the building of a demonstration plant by the Pebble Bed Modular
Reactor company; Transnet’s R4,9 billion locomotive and wagon fleet renewal
and modernisation programme;
the upgrading of the Coallink line to Richards Bay and the Sishen-Saldanha
link; a new container terminal for Durban and port capacity expansions in
Cape Town, Richards Bay and Saldanha; and the building of a new
multipurpose Durban-Johannesburg-Pretoria fuel product pipeline.

The contingency reserve and unallocated funds for transport infrastructure
in the MTEF proposals for the next three years allow for additional
allocations to critical infrastructure investment projects in the
Adjustments Budget, where project planning is well advanced and business
plans have been approved.
Thokola themba, amathunzi ayewukela. [Ihlombe.] [Do not lose hope, things
will get better. [Applause.]]

Division of revenue

Nationally collected revenue is divided equitably between national
departments, provinces and local government, as required by the
Constitution. The resulting allocations, and details of various conditional
grants to provinces and municipalities, are set out in the Division of
Revenue Bill tabled before this House today. National departments account
for 37% of the allocations and provinces for almost 58%. Grants to
municipalities total 5% of available resources, growing by 13,3% a year,
which is the fastest growing component of the Budget.

The intended consolidation of social grants administration in a single
national agency, reporting to the Minister of Social Development, results
in a significant change to the Budget framework. Social grants and
associated administrative expenditure are now fully budgeted for in the
national Social Development
Vote, as conditional grants to provinces. These funds will be ring-fenced
and separately managed by provinces, as an interim step towards
establishing the new Social Security Agency.
But the risk is a national risk, so we had better understand the
administration of this in some detail.
In 2005-06, R135 billion will be distributed between provinces in terms of
the equitable share formula, and R75 billion will be allocated as
conditional grants from national departments.

Provinces and municipalities are at the frontline in providing the many
services required by our people. The last decade saw their establishment,
and steady increases in the resources transferred for basic services.

For the decade ahead, the intergovernmental framework will see significant
changes. Firstly, new allocation formulas are being phased in for both the
provincial and local government equitable shares. Secondly, conditional
grants are under review, and will be reformed to reflect more appropriately
their role in giving effect to national policy objectives for concurrent
functions. Thirdly, the Regional Services Council levies will be eliminated
next year. Fourthly, metropolitan and selected urban municipalities will
play an increasing role in the delivery of housing and related services.

The government’s programme of action rightly highlights the importance of
addressing those weaknesses in governance systems or financial
administration that hold back Public Service delivery, both in provincial
departments and municipalities. Our season of hope rests in considerable
degree on the pride and vision with which provincial officials, local
councillors and municipal staff take up this challenge. Acting together, we
do have the capacity to overcome the administrative weaknesses.

Bagata-mmogo ke maja-mmogo. [Legofi.] [People who work together get the
same reward. [Applause.]]

Miskien moet ek dit in Afrikaans sê. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ons sal saamspan om
die wa deur die drif te trek, om ons doelwitte te bereik. [Perhaps I should
say it in Afrikaans. [Interjections.] We will co-operate to get the work
done, to achieve our objectives.]

Medium-term expenditure allocations

2005 Budget priorities

We indicated in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement that significant
additional allocations for social grants would be made in today’s Budget,
that land restitution would be a priority and that community and social
infrastructure investment would be accelerated.

We have already noted the immense contribution of our social grant system
to the income security of the most vulnerable, and in particular to the
support of children under the age of 14. This expansion in the
redistributive thrust of the Budget carries a cost. Of the R74 billion in
additional allocations over the MTEF, a total of 30% is added to the social
grant programmes, bringing aggregate social security spending to
R55,4 billion next year and 12,7%
of consolidated spending in 2007-08.

In addition to providing for rising beneficiary numbers, the MTEF
allocations provide for inflation-related adjustments to social grants.

Ukusuka ngo-April 2005 impesheni yabadala nabakhubazekile izokhushulwa
ngama-R40, ibe ngama-R780 ngenyanga. [Ihlombe.] Imali yesondlo sezintandane
izokukhuphuka ngama-R30, ibengama-R560. Imali yesondlo sabantwana
izokhuphuka nge-R10, ibe ngama-R180. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of IsiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Old age pensions and disability grants will be increased by R40 to R780
per month. [Applause.] The social grants for orphans will be increased by
R30 to R560. The social grant will be increased by R10 to R180.
[Applause.]]

With effect from April this year, the maximum old age, disability and care
dependency grants will rise by R40 to R780 a month, foster care grants will
increase by R30 to R560 and the child support grant goes up by R10 to R180
a month.

The 2005 Budget provides for several other significant spending
adjustments: R2 billion for the new comprehensive housing strategy and
R1,7 billion for municipal and sanitation infrastructure; R6 billion to
complete the land restitution programme; R3 billion for public transport
infrastructure and services; R1 billion for improved buildings and
equipment for further education colleges, and an additional R776 million
for the National Student Financial Aid
Scheme; R6,9 billion to contribute to improved salaries for teachers and
R4,4 billion for pay progression in the SA Police Service; and R1,4 billion
to support our African development agenda, including
peacekeeping operations, institutions of the African Union and the Pan-
African Parliament. [Applause.]

Economic development and investment

Our developmental objectives require a careful balance between direct
income support, improved public services such as education, health and
municipal services, and investing in social infrastructure such as housing,
water, sanitation, roads and public transport. Some of these priorities are
exclusively or mainly the responsibility of government. But in other areas,
such as economic development and investment in productive capacity, we seek
to complement or reinforce private-sector growth and initiative.

We are particularly mindful of the need to improve the alignment between
public infrastructure and investment plans and business development
opportunities.

Increased investment in transport infrastructure and systems accordingly
features strongly in the 2005 Budget proposals. These are shared
responsibilities of national, provincial and local government, and details
of the additional R3 billion to be allocated will be tabled in the
Adjustments Appropriation later this year. Projects related to the
requirements of hosting the 2010 Soccer World Cup will receive early
priority.

Other economic development initiatives for the MTEF period ahead include
the following.

A new Micro Agricultural Finance Scheme is proposed to complement the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme and provide further assistance
to emerging farmers and land reform beneficiaries. An amount of R1 billion
is available for this initiative, of which R600 million is expected to be
allocated over the next three years – the R1 billion is available.
[Applause.]

An amount of R400 million a year is allocated to the Trade and Industry
Vote for the National Empowerment Fund; and R885 million over the next
three years goes to the taxi recapitalisation programme, together with
additional resources on the Transport Vote for improved traffic law
enforcement. [Applause.] We want to ensure that the Minister of Transport
can catch those who speed on the roads in this country. [Interjections.] An
amount of R400 million is proposed on the Communications Vote to contribute
to investment by the SA Broadcasting Corporation in the modernisation of
its equipment and technology. [Applause.]

Social services

As in the past, additional allocations for social service
functions mainly go to provinces. In addition to substantial adjustments to
social grants, this year’s Budget provides for improved salaries for
educators and social workers, a new conditional grant for further education
colleges, funds to enable provinces to fulfil their responsibilities for
primary health services formerly provided by nonmetropolitan
municipalities, and an additional R180 million a year for tertiary health
services.

Recognising the critical role of technical skills in a growing economy,
R1 billion will be invested over the next three years in improved
facilities, equipment and support in further education and training
colleges. [Applause.] Through strengthened ties with the skills development
programme, sector education and training
authorities and employers, colleges have to take their rightful place at
the forefront of industrial progress and technology change.

Additional allocations go to the Arts and Culture Vote for management of
the Robben Island Museum as a World Heritage Site and for hosting the 29th
session of the World Heritage Committee this year. [Applause.]

In addition to supplementary resources for the National Student Financial
Aid Scheme, which assisted about 100 000 students in 2004, the national
Department of Education receives funding for an education management
information system to integrate the flow of information from schools and
colleges. We’d like to believe that this will enable government more
speedily to know what is happening in every school, that the school is
built, that the textbooks have been delivered, that there is water,
electricity, sports facilities. [Applause.] We need a management system to
tell us this.

The Department of Labour receives additional allocations for an integrated
call centre and improved inspectorate services. Its oversight of the
national skills development strategy remains a central priority, as the
flow of funds to sectoral education and training authorities and the
National Skills Fund will amount to
about R5 billion in 2005-06, rising to R6 billion by the third year of the
MTEF.
Housing and community development

Let me turn to the challenge of building houses, security and comfort for
all.

Mr President, hon members, we cannot, in good conscience, build dormitory
suburbs characterised by neglect, settlements that have no sports
facilities, entertainment, business opportunities, social or policing
infrastructure. [Applause.]

If Sophiatown, in the midst of its destruction 50 years ago, could give
birth to the rhythms of kwela, the patha-patha jive, the musical genius of
Miriam Makeba and Kippie Moeketsi’s Shantytown Sextet, and the talents of
Todd Matshikiza, Can Themba and Walter Nhlapo – how much more will be
possible as the shadows come to life in District Six, Marabastad and Cato
Manor … [Applause.] … and as the new spirit of U-Carmen eKhayelithsa
emerges in Botshabelo, Mitchells Plain, Motherwell and Chatsworth?

Let me just tell members about getting the CDs. These are prerelease CDs,
Mr President. The release of the movie will take place in a few weeks’
time, but the wonderful people at the company Dimpho Di Kopane were
prepared to move heaven and earth to ensure that the first in the country
to get the CDs were the members of Parliament. [Applause.]
Now, of course, to get people to behave like this …

An HON MEMBER: Must we declare it?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Yes, you’ll have to declare it. [Laughter.] To get
these good people to respond to this appeal, I had to make a pledge for all
of the members here. I had to pledge that we would all listen to the CD to
remind us of this season of hope. And I had to pledge that despite having
the CD, we wouldn’t not go to the movie and wouldn’t not buy the CD on its
release. We will continue to support the arts in South Africa. [Applause.]
So I do hope that hon members will be as honourable as their title suggests
and will live out that commitment. [Laughter.]

On the strength of a new Plan for the Development of Sustainable Human
Settlements, the period ahead will see a shift of direction and greater
impetus given to investments in housing and the development of residential
communities.

The central aim is to replace or upgrade all informal settlements, which
currently house some 1,4 million households, by 2014. [Applause.] You know
I need to applaud that as well. I’m just a housing activist on long-term
deployment to government. [Applause.] In this practical way, we seek to
give further expression to the vision President Mbeki has reminded us of:
that South Africa belongs to all who live in it.

Municipal allocations, through which free basic services and investment in
infrastructure for low-income communities are supported, increase by a
total of R5,4 billion over the MTEF baseline amounts.

Justice, crime prevention and security

Within the justice, crime prevention and security cluster, additional
allocations are made to the Safety and Security Vote to continue the
expansion of police numbers and improve remuneration, to Correctional
Services to increase the capacity of prisons and establish a seven-day
working week, and to Justice and Constitutional Development to improve
court administration and continue to modernise information systems and
strengthen court security. [Applause.]

Government plans to increase the number of police officers from 139 000 in
2003 to 165 850 by 2008. [Applause.] The Department of Justice plans to
appoint 40 new magistrates over the new year, and 1 000 vacancies will be
filled at courts to support prosecutorial services. Over the next three
years, accommodation capacity in Correctional Services facilities will
increase by 12 000 bed spaces.
Governance and administration

Members of this House are well aware of our responsibility to ensure that
we have a capable state, one that is able to give effect to its
administrative duties and responds effectively to meeting the needs of the
poor. We are conscious of many shortcomings in our present system of
administration. Better governance and administration must remain a central
focus of both the executive and our legislatures.

The services rendered by the Department of Home Affairs are critical to
providing citizens with access to basic benefits and other government
services. Additional allocations of R800 million over the MTEF period are
recommended for strengthening the capacity of that department and the
implementation of its transformation strategy. [Applause.] The Independent
Electoral Commission also receives
supplementary funding, primarily for the forthcoming local government
elections.

Other revisions to core administrative functions include: R1,6 billion for
the Public Works Vote to address shortfalls in municipal rates and service
payments on government buildings, to upgrade buildings at land ports of
entry and to address maintenance backlogs at government buildings.
[Applause.] I thought Ministers would applaud, because we really need those
maintenance upgrades.

There is also the replacement of the preliminary allocations on the
Statistics SA Vote for a census in 2006, with allocations for a new
community survey and improvements in the quality of various economic and
social statistical series; and an additional R250 million for Parliament’s
MTEF, to improve both internal governance and services to committees.
[Applause.]

Madam Speaker, it seems as though the members of this House are not too
keen on a larger budget for Parliament. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

International relations, peace and security

Lastly, let me refer to the contribution of the fiscus to our
international relations, peace and security commitments. The 2005 Budget
will again reflect our rising contribution to a season of hope for the
African continent, and to putting the concerns of the poor on the agenda of
world opinion.

Additional allocations amounting to R350 million over the MTEF period are
proposed for the Foreign Affairs Vote, contributing to the costs of hosting
the Pan-African Parliament, expanding representation in Africa and
elsewhere, contributing to the African Union’s peacekeeping programme and
modernising the department’s information systems.
On the Defence Vote, further amounts of R300 million a year are allocated
for peace-support operations in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Burundi
and the Sudan. Now, don’t grow this too much, Minister Lekota.

Tax proposals

I turn now to our tax proposals. We have enjoyed the benefit in the past
year of strong revenue growth associated with economic recovery, and for
the period ahead we can again provide moderate tax relief while continuing
to promote certainty, consistency, fairness and a broad-based tax
structure. The revenue requirement for the fiscal year that ends on 31
March 2006 is R370 billion, or 9,5% more than the revised estimate of last
year, which was R338 billion.

Tax measures are again prominent in “Tips for Trevor”. Nobathembu Dwenga
suggests that it is time to abolish the secondary tax on companies.
[Laughter.] Marianne Visser proposes that public servants should be exempt
from paying personal income tax. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Warren Smith
writes again that the tax on retirement savings should be abolished.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Unfortunately, we cannot do all of these things. But I am pleased to be
able to advise Ms Sarah Uys, who has written for the past two years on the
question of income tax on pensions, that we are deeply mindful of the
difficulties of elderly people who often care for several other family
members, and of widows trying to make ends meet without becoming a burden
on their children. Further relief to pensioners is part of this year’s tax
package.

Personal income tax relief

The proposed revisions to individual income tax rates and brackets for the
2006 tax year provide relief of R6,8 billion for individuals and
households. This represents compensation for the effects of inflation and
real tax relief in all income groups, with about 62% of the total relief
going to those earning below R200 000 a year. Personal income tax relief
also benefits many self-
employed individuals and microenterprises, providing a further stimulus to
small business development.

The income tax threshold, below which no tax is payable, is raised from
R32 222 to R35 000 a year. [Applause.] For taxpayers, like Prof Kader
Asmal, over the age of 65, the threshold increases
from R50 000 to R60 000.

In addition, the interest income exemption for individuals is raised from
R11 000 to R15 000, and for those over 65 from R16 000 to R22 000. These
adjustments will cost about R310 million, and serve in part to encourage
savings further.
Tax treatment of health care funding

A reform of the tax treatment of medical scheme membership and health care
costs is also proposed. The present allowance for two thirds of a medical
scheme contribution to be paid tax-free will be replaced by a capped tax
deduction. This will have the effect of limiting the tax loss associated
with more expensive medical scheme options, while increasing its monetary
benefit to lower-income taxpayers, thereby enabling more people to afford
medical aid.

The change will also remove the present disparity between employed and self-
employed individuals. Other adjustments to the deductibility of medical
expenses will accompany this reform. For administrative reasons, and to
allow employers and employees to adapt their remuneration arrangements, the
changes will take effect in 2006 and will only lead to a revenue loss in
subsequent years.

Motor vehicle allowances

As indicated at the time of the 2004 Budget, a revised approach to the
calculation of deemed business travel expenses against a motor vehicle
allowance will be introduced this year. The change will lower the tax
benefit associated with deemed motor vehicle use calculations, particularly
where the vehicle value exceeds R360 000. The broad approach is that if you
would like to buy a vehicle costing R5 million, you’re entitled to it but
don’t ask taxpayers to subsidise your choice.

From 1 March 2006, the monthly taxable value of the use of a company car is
to be increased from the current 1,8% to 2,5%. These changes will yield an
additional R1,5 billion a year, but only once the assessments for the
fiscal year ending on 31 March 2006 are finalised in the course of next
year. Taxpayers are advised to anticipate higher final payments on
assessments next year.

Transfer duty

Taking into account the steep rise in property prices over the past two
years, it is proposed that the transfer duty exemption threshold should be
raised from R150 000 to R190 000, together with an increase in the upper
threshold from R320 000 to R330 000. The duty payable on a property of
R330 000 or more will fall by R2 300, making houses slightly more
affordable. The total revenue loss is estimated to be something in the
order of R450 million.

Empowering small business

Both the National Treasury and Sars have focused closely over the past year
on aspects of the tax law and its administration that inhibit small
business development. We are now able to initiate a series of programmes
aimed at making life easier for small businesses, some of which will be
implemented immediately and others over the next three years. Following the
call of the President in this house two weeks ago, three broad reforms are
proposed.

Firstly, tax relief of R1,4 billion is targeted at small business companies
to make resources available for growth and investment. This includes the
extension of relief to a broader range of service companies, and raising
the turnover limit for eligibility from R5 million to R6 million. In
addition, the graduated rate structure will be adapted as follows:
qualifying small companies will pay no tax on the first R35 000 of taxable
income, 10% on income in the range R35 000 to R250 000, and 29% thereafter.
Small businesses will also be eligible for a simplified 50:30:20
depreciation write-off rate for nonmanufacturing assets, while
manufacturing assets will continue to qualify for 100% write-off.

Secondly, additional relief of R367 million will form part of the
streamlining of ongoing filing obligations. This will involve halving the
number of VAT payments small businesses make in a year and exempting them
from the skills development levy. [Applause.]

Thirdly, a package of administrative interventions by Sars will be
implemented to assist small businesses on the ground with their tax and –
in an innovative step – their broader business management. Sars will
provide community tax helpers, help desks, extended hours and accounting
packages, free of charge. [Applause.]

Company tax

The special tax allowances for strategic industrial projects introduced
four years ago will lapse in July this year. Since its announcement, a more
favourable depreciation regime for manufacturing assets has been introduced
and a more direct programme of government investment in critical
infrastructure is under way.

The revenue laws this year will also contain measures to facilitate company
restructurings, deal with undesirable tax avoidance arrangements in the
film industry, and assist public-benefit organisations that rely in part on
income from business activities.

Taking into account the overall improvement in our effective rate of tax on
companies achieved through base-broadening measures and more effective tax
administration, the company tax rate will be reduced from 30% to 29% for
the year ahead. [Applause.] This results in a revenue loss of R2 billion.

Removal of transaction taxes on debit entries

Members of the House will share our concern that access to banking services
should be kept affordable and efficient. This is largely a matter for the
banking sector to address and we welcome the progress made in making low-
cost bank services available over the past year. We understand that some
550 000 Mzanzi accounts have already been registered. But government must
also play its part, and so we propose to remove the stamp duty on debit
entries and instalment credit agreements with effect from 1 March 2005, as
these fall
disproportionately on lower-income groups and are administratively
inefficient. [Applause.] This will cost R350 million a year.

Excise duties

Let me turn then to excise duties, which I shan’t call by the other name. I
want to apologise to Mr Baqwa, who is so concerned as “we cannot live
without entertainment”, because the Minister increases the price of beer
and brandy. So, I apologise to Mr Baqwa for this.

This year’s changes in excise duties on alcoholic beverages are as follows:
Tax on beer is raised by 11 cents per 750 ml bottle or 5 cents per 340 ml
can. Tax on fortified wine rises by 23 cents per 750 ml bottle and on
natural wine by 80 cents a bottle ... [Interjections.] … sorry, 18 cents a
bottle. [Laughter.] The hon Van der Merwe nearly fell out of his chair.
[Laughter.] Ciders and alcoholic fruit beverages go up by 5 cents per
340 ml can. Duties on spirits are increased by R1,47 per 750 ml bottle.
[Interjections.] And, on the pleading of a former colleague, we have not
increased the levies or the excises on sorghum beer. [Laughter.]

Duties on tobacco products are increased by between 7% and 15%,
maintaining the present 52% total tax burden. A packet of 20 cigarettes
will cost 52 cents more. [Applause.] Because of my friendship with the
Governor, I won’t tell you by how much I’ve increased excises on cigars.
[Laughter.] The increases in alcohol and tobacco products will raise an
additional R1,3 billion in revenue.

In keeping with these health-related fiscal measures, we propose also to
abolish excise duties on sun protection products, at a cost of R10 million
a year.

The Air Passenger Departure levies will be increased by 9% this year, to
R60 for travel to SACU countries and R120 for international departures to
other destinations.

Fuel levies

The general fuel levy on petrol and diesel will be raised by 5 cents a
litre on Wednesday, 6 April, broadly in line with inflation. This increase
will raise an additional R950 million. At the same time, the diesel refund
concession for primary producers will be raised.

With effect from January 2006, when the octane structure of petrol sold in
South Africa will be changed, a supplementary levy on 95 octane unleaded
petrol in inland areas will be imposed for demand management reasons. Don’t
ask me; ask Minister Mlambo-Ngcuka about this.

The Road Accident Fund levy will again increase by 5 cents a litre, to
permit further progress to be made in clearing claims backlogs and
stabilising the financial position of the fund.

Proposed use of exchange control amnesty proceeds

Members of the House will recall that in 2003 we announced an exchange
control amnesty and accompanying tax measures to allow past transgressors
of exchange controls to declare their assets and regularise their financial
positions. More than 43 000 applications have been received and total
assets disclosed are estimated at R65 billion.

On the strength of the amnesty levy proceeds and the permanent increase in
the income tax base associated with foreign asset disclosures, we propose
to set aside R3 billion over the next three years for investment in
community infrastructure. We are going to take this money and put it into
those places where people in poor communities can meet, where they can
commune – places like halls and sports facilities and all of the other
facilities that poor communities need. [Applause.] This is because we must
focus our energy on improving the quality of life in new housing areas,
upgraded informal settlements and old townships.

This development challenge - that we may demonstrate visibly that South
Africa belongs to all who live in it - has to be a shared project of
national and provincial government, municipalities, community organisations
and the private sector. We must seek
to build partnerships that mobilise our most creative energies in
constructing recreational and sports facilities, health and education
services, administrative infrastructure, business opportunities and
community resource centres.

Bagata-mmogo ke maja-mmogo. [Legofi.] [People who work together get the
same reward. [Applause.]]

And so, with eyes of pride and vision, acting together, we can embrace the
season of hope ahead. I better say this slowly, Deputy President: “Thokola
themba!” [Don’t despair!] I’m going to do it again, and let’s see how many
join in: “Thokola themba!” [Don’t despair!] [Interjections.] “Siyabonga”.
[Thank you.] [Laughter.]
I need to table before this House a number of documents: the speech that I
have delivered now, the Estimates of National Revenue, the taxation
proposals in respect of income tax, the Division of Revenue Bill, the
Budget Review, the Appropriation Bill and the Estimates of National
Expenditure.

Let me conclude by returning to the words of former President Mandela who,
in his recent appeal to world leaders to make poverty history, said:

      Do not look the other way; do not hesitate. Recognise that the world
      is hungry for action, not words. Act with courage and vision.

In preparing this Budget, we were privileged to have had the very close
hand of President Mbeki and his resolute commitment to our programme of
action. “Enkosi kakhulu”. [Thank you very much.] [Applause.] I would like
to express appreciation also to Deputy President Zuma, to my Cabinet
colleagues, and especially to members of the Ministers’ Committee on the
Budget for their support and sharing this responsibility. [Applause.]

Deputy Minister Jabu Moleketi brought a fresh and welcome perspective to
our deliberations. He comes with vast experience, as somebody said last
night: “Ten years MEC for finance, Gauteng, undefeated as a champion.”
[Applause.]
We have also had the privilege of working with nine new provincial
executive council members responsible for finance. They are all sitting
over there. They have distinct challenges to face, and I am profoundly
grateful for their expertise and energy, and for the
commitment and enthusiasm with which they have joined the finance team.
[Interjections.] Somebody says you must please stand. We want to see you.
[Applause.] Will you stand? [Applause.] There they go. [Applause.]

We continue to enjoy valued support from many others:

- Governor Tito Mboweni and the staff of the Reserve Bank ... [Applause.]
Stand. The President said you must please stand, Tito. [Applause.]
Governor, the President says you must please stand. He wants to see you.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

- Statistician-General Pali Lehohla, his staff and members of the
Statistics Council ... [Applause.]

- Dr Renosi Mokate and members of the Financial and Fiscal Commission …
[Applause.]

- Convenors and representatives of the business, labour and community
constituencies of Nedlac and, of course, its head, Herbert Mkhize
...[Applause.]

- The hon Nhlanhla Nene and the hon Buti Mkhaliphi, co-chairs of the Joint
Budget Committee ... [Applause.]

- The hon Tutu Ralane, who chairs the Select Committee on Finance,
and the hon Rob Davies, chair of the Portfolio Committee on Finance.
[Applause.]

I introduced Lesetja Kganyago, the Director-General of the National
Treasury, to the House at this time last year. I am pleased to report that
his leadership and dress sense continue to be inspirational. [Laughter.]
[Applause.] Pravin Gordhan remains a pillar of strength, and we are deeply
indebted to him and the staff of the Revenue Service, the National Treasury
and the Ministry of Finance. [Applause.] I also, once again, want to thank
my family sitting in the gallery. [Applause.]

Members of the House, fellow South Africans, “Our country, as a united
nation”, as President Mbeki has asserted, “has never in its entire history
enjoyed such a confluence of encouraging possibilities ... sparing neither
effort nor strength, we can and shall build a South Africa that truly
belongs to all who live in it,
united in our diversity!” Thank you very much for your patience in
listening to me today. [Applause.]

The Bill, together with the introductory speech and papers tabled, referred
to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and report, and to
the Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its mandate.

The House adjourned at 15:21.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Appropriation Bill [W 7 - 2005] (National Assembly - sec
              77)

         (ii)    Division of Revenue Bill [B 8 - 2005] (National Assembly -
              sec 76)

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly for consideration and report and to the
         Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its mandate, as
         well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 23 February 2005.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Fast-tracking of Bills


     (1)    The Joint Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 23
         February 2005 took a decision, in accordance with Joint Rule
         216(2), that the Division of Revenue Bill [B 8 - 2005] (National
         Assembly - sec 76) be fast-tracked, where necessary dispensing
         with any relevant House Rule or Joint Rule and shortening any
         period within which any step in the legislative process relating
         to the Bill must be completed, including the submission of the
         translated version of the bill as introduced before the debate in
         the National Assembly takes place. This process must be completed
         in order for the Bill to be enacted and for the Act to be
         published in the Government Gazette by 31 March 2005.

         In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in both
         Houses for ratification.

3.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 22 February 2005:


         (i)     Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16B - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (1)    The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance - 23 February 2005
         [RP 9-2005].

     (2)    Estimate of National Revenue for 2005 [RP 7-2005].

     (3)    Taxation Proposals in respect of Income Tax.

     (4)    Budget Review 2005 [RP 8-2005], including:


         (a)     Taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise duties
              [tabled at 14: 00 ]; and

         (b)     "Annexure E: Memorandum to accompany the Division of
              Revenue Bill", tabled in terms of section 10(5) of the
              Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
              1997).


     (5)    Estimate of National Expenditure 2005 [RP 6-2005], which
         includes:


         1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Main Estimates,
              2005-2006;

         2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates, 2005-
              2006;

         3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2005-2006;

         4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2005-
              2006;

         5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local Government",
              Main Estimates, 2005-2006;

         6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2005-
              2006;

         7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Government Communications and
              Information System", Main Estimates, 2005-2006;

         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "National Treasury", Main Estimates,
              2005-2006;

         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Enterprises", Main Estimates,
              2005-2006;

         10.     Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service and
              Administration", Main Estimates, 2005-2006;

         11.     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Public Service Commission",
              Main Estimates, 2005-2006;

         12.     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "South African Management
              Development Institute", Main Estimates, 2005-2006;

         13.     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
              Estimates, 2005-2006;

         14.     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Arts and Culture", Main
              Estimates, 2005-2006;

         15.     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Education", Main Estimates,
              2005-2006;

         16.     Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2005-
              2006;

         17.     Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2005-
              2006;

         18.     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Social Development", Main
              Estimates, 2005-2006;

         19.     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Sport and Recreation South
              Africa", Main Estimates, 2005-2006;

         20.     Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Correctional Services", Main
              Estimates, 2005-2006;

         21.     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2005-
              2006;

         22.     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Independent Complaints
              Directorate", Main Estimates, 2005-2006;

         23.     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Justice and Constitutional
              Development", Main Estimates, 2005-2006;

         24.     Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Safety and Security", Main
              Estimates, 2005-2006;

         25.     Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,
              2005-2006;

         26.     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Communications", Main
              Estimates, 2005-2006;

         27.     Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism", Main Estimates, 2005-2006;

         28.     Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2005-
              2006;

         29.     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2005-2006;

         30.     Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Minerals and Energy", Main
              Estimates, 2005-2006;

         31.     Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology", Main
              Estimates, 2005-2006;

         32.     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main
              Estimates, 2005-2006;

         33.     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Main Estimates,
              2005-2006;.

         34.     Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
              Main Estimates, 2005-2006.

National Assembly

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


   (1)     Report on the writing off of the Department of Water Affairs and
         Forestry's portion of the Land Bank instalment for 2000, 2001,
         2002, 2003 and 2004 made on behalf of Kalahari East Water User
         Association.

     (2)    Report on the writing off of State loan granted to Injimbali
         Irrigation Board.

     (3)    Report on the writing off of the balance of R 1 million owed by
         Great Fish River Water User Association.



